It is debated whether slowing human population growth and intense urbanization may result in a slowdown of deforestation and an acceleration of natural forest regeneration. In a fragmented landscape the structure and composition of developing secondary forests will strongly depend on the local species pool. Thus, the understanding how organisms cope with biotic and abiotic challenges outside pristine habitats is pivotal. Structurally dependent, vascular epiphytes are an important biotic component of tropical forests. In human-modified tropical landscapes potential hosts are often still present. We aimed to assess if human-modified landscapes offer a refuge habitat in which epiphytes can form metacommunities that are ultimately viable. Eight years after an initial assessment we recensused the epiphytes in pasture trees in western Panama along a strong rainfall gradient. We document a threefold abundance increase (ca. 20,000 vs. > 60,000 individuals) and an increase in species-richness (66 vs. 86 mostly drought-tolerant species). This large net increase suggests a highly dynamic system. Although absolute abundances changed dramatically, the relative contribution of major taxonomic groups to overall diversity and abundance changed little. Neither rainfall nor tree growth had a significant effect on relative annual community growth rates. At the plot level (=metacommunities), abundance increase was mostly due to the species already present in the first census, at the tree level (=communities) the contribution of new and old species was comparable. The documented long-term trend in epiphyte metacommunities in a human-modified landscape suggests that a diverse set of species sustains viable metacommunities and is likely to provide structural diversity to developing secondary forest.
Bacterial community structure was studied in humus and mineral soils of evergreen broad-leaved forests in Ailaoshan and Xishuangbanna, representing subtropical and tropical ecosystems, respectively, in south-west China using sequence analysis and terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (T-RFLP) analysis of 16S rRNA genes. Clone sequences affiliated to Acidobacteria were retrieved as the predominant bacterial phylum in both forest soils, followed by those affiliated to members of the Proteobacteria, Planctomycete and Verrucomicrobia. Despite higher floristic richness at the Xishuangbanna forest than at the Ailaoshan forest, soil at Xishuangbanna harbored a distinctly high relative abundance of Acidobacteria-affiliated sequences (80% of the total clones), which led to a lower overall bacterial diversity than at Ailaoshan. Bacterial communities in humus and mineral soils of the two forests appeared to be well differentiated, based on 16S rRNA gene phylogeny, and correlations were found between the bacterial T-RFLP community patterns and the organic carbon and nutrient contents of the soil samples. The data reveal that Acidobacteria dominate soil bacterial communities in the evergreen broad-leaved forests studied here and suggest that bacterial diversity may be influenced by soil carbon and nutrient levels, but is not related to floristic richness along the climatic gradient from subtropical to tropical forests in south-west China. © 2006 Federation of European Microbiological Societies.
Silviculture in natural tropical forests can be defined as the objective guidance of the forest ecosystem to sustainably meet the needs of society (based on Lamprecht 1993). It is a component, not a synonym, of sustainable forest management. In this chapter, I will set out a vision of natural tropical forest silviculture (from here on, SNTF) in relation to two factors: first, the considerable volume of scientific information generated on natural tropical forests during the 20 years since the publication of Lamprecht’s review, and second, the challenges of the twenty-first century and the new frameworks within which society expects SNTF to be carried out. These frameworks include those that are directly relevant, such as the principles and criteria of the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC). But the conservation and sustainable use of all ecosystems in a framework centered around the needs of people have also been conceptualized in major advances like that of the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MEA 2005). Additionally, by the end of 2015, governments led by the United Nations will have set out their Sustainable Development Goals and, under the auspices of the UNFCCC, will finalize the successor to the Kyoto Protocol in the continuing efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and the consequent climate change. All these international processes can be thought of as key elements of the UNEP-led Green Economy Initiative, which seeks a low-carbon, resource efficient, and socially inclusive path for economic development; in all of them, SNTF can play a potentially important role; and all of them may influence the ways in which SNTF can be implemented. © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016.
The Enrichment Plantation of Akure Forest Reserve is one of the forests currently experiencing a17-year-long post-disturbance following deforestation and fragmentation in the country. To better understand the contribution of enrichment planting on forest regeneration and restoration, the Enrichment Plantation after 17 years of post-disturbance was examined. We studied the recruitment drive of aboveground and underbrush stands of an Enrichment plantation in a tropical forest. We assess the trees diversity, species compositions, species richness, and growth forms of the vegetations. A total of 3 (50 m × 50 m) plots were sampled with a total of 47 aboveground tree species and 45 underbrush stands from Enrichment plantation were identified. The result shows an increase in the diversity and an even distribution of the species of the aboveground forest trees, compared to the underbrush stands. Conversely, the aboveground forest trees have lower species richness as compared to the level of underbrush stands. The sapling density was significantly higher than the aboveground tree of the forest (one-way ANOVA: P < 0.05 and P = 0.000). The mean ± standard deviation of 2.41 ± 1.55 aboveground tree species was extremely low to what was obtained of tree sapling (17.55 ± 8.06) in the forest structure. It was also observed that the aboveground forest trees and underbrush stands are somewhat similar in species compositions, which implies that sapling recruitment is a key determinant of the tree species composition of the forest. It is then concluded that the method adopted for restoration encouraged species diversity in this successional forest among the aboveground trees species and underbrush. © 2021, Society for Plant Research.
Background: Tropical forests are repositories of much of the world’s biodiversity and are critical for mitigation of climate change. Yet, the drivers of forest dynamics are poorly understood. This is in large part due to the lack of long-term data on forest change and changes in drivers. Methodology: We quantify changes in tree abundance, diversity, and stand structure along transects first enumerated in 1978 and resampled 2019 in Kibale National Park, Uganda. We tested five predictions. First, based on the purported role of seed dispersal and herbivory and our quantification of changes in the abundance of frugivores and herbivores, we tested two predictions of how faunal change could have influenced forest composition. Second, based on an evaluation of life history strategies, we tested two predictions concerning how the forest could have changed following disturbance that happened prior to written history. Finally, based on a 50-year climate record, we evaluate the possible influence of climate change on forest dynamics. Results: More trees were present on the assessed transects in 2019 (508) than in 1978 (436), species richness remained similar, but diversity declined as the number of dominant species increased. Rainfall increased by only 3 mm over the 50 years but this had not significant effect on forest changes measured here. Annual average monthly maximum temperature increased significantly by 1.05 °C over 50 years. The abundance of frugivorous and folivorous primates and elephants increased over the 50 years of monitoring. Neither the prediction that an increase in abundance of seed dispersing frugivores increases the abundance of their preferred fruiting tree species, nor that as an increase in folivore abundance causes a decline in their preferred species were supported. As predicted, light-demanding species decreased in abundance while shade-tolerant species increased as expected from Kibale being disturbed prior to historical records. Finally, while temperature increased over the 50 years, we found no means to predict a priori how individual species would respond. Conclusions: Our study revealed subtle changes in the tree community over 40 years, sizable increases in primate numbers, a substantial increase in the elephant population and an increase in local temperature. Yet, a clear picture of what set of interactions impact the change in the tree community remains elusive. Our data on tree life-history strategies and frugivore/herbivore foraging preferences suggest that trees species are under opposing pressures. © 2021, The Author(s).
Limiting global warming to 2 °C requires urgent action on land-based mitigation. This study evaluates the biogeochemical and biogeophysical implications of two alternative land-based mitigation scenarios that aim to achieve the same radiative forcing. One scenario is primarily driven by bioenergy expansion (SSP226Lu-BIOCROP), while the other involves re/afforestation (SSP126Lu-REFOREST). We find that overall, SSP126Lu-REFOREST is a more efficient strategy for removing CO2 from the atmosphere by 2100, resulting in a net carbon sink of 242 ~ 483 PgC with smaller uncertainties compared to SSP226Lu-BIOCROP, which exhibits a wider range of −78 ~ 621 PgC. However, SSP126Lu-REFOREST leads to a relatively warmer planetary climate than SSP226Lu-BIOCROP, and this relative warming can be intensified in certain re/afforested regions where local climates are not favorable for tree growth. Despite the cooling effect on a global scale, SSP226Lu-BIOCROP reshuffles regional warming hotspots, amplifying summer temperatures in vulnerable tropical regions such as Central Africa and Southeast Asia. Our findings highlight the need for strategic land use planning to identify suitable regions for re/afforestation and bioenergy expansion, thereby improving the likelihood of achieving the intended climate mitigation outcomes. Copyright © 2024 the Author(s).
The diversity of plants in tropical forests makes dietary studies of frugivores difficult. This paper provides a botanical inventory of a tropical seasonal forest community in Khao Yai National Park, Thailand. The forest is valuable from a conservation perspective because it is one of the last remaining intact forests in northeastern Thailand, and is an important refuge for many animal and plant species. A 4-ha inventory plot measuring 200 x 200 m was established and all plants greater than or equal to 10 cm in diameter at breast height (dbh) were measured and permanently labeled. We found 1610 stems belonging to 105 species, 76 genera and 35 families, with a combined basal area of 142.5 m(2). The community was dominated by species of Lauraceae, Cornaceae, Euphorbiaceae, Meliaceae, and Elaeocarpaceae. About one-third of the plant species ( 40 spp.) identified in this study were vulnerable to extinction because they were mostly dispersed by large frugivores, which were intolerant of human impact. If they disappear, these forests may become dominated by plant species that are dispersed by abiotic means and species with small-seeded fruits.
1. Despite their exceptional biodiversity and carbon stocks, more than 80% of tropical forests are disturbed. However, a lot of interrogations remain around the ability of vegetation attributes in tropical forests to recover from the various anthropogenic disturbances coexisting in many tropical landscapes. While these different disturbances are usually studied separately, this work provides, for the first time, a common modelling framework of vegetation attribute recovery in differently disturbed forests. 2. We develop an original Bayesian hierarchical model of recovery trajectories, considering disturbed forests in a common framework, through a disturbance intensity gradient. As a case study, we test our modelling approach on data from two long-term experiments, Tirimbina (Costa Rica) and Paracou (French Guiana), where forest permanent sample plots have been set up following selective logging (63.25 ha), agriculture (4 ha), and clearcutting+fire (6.25 ha). 3. We build a modelling framework that stands out by: (i) its interpretability, with model parameters having a clear ecological meaning; (ii) its robustness, allowing to compare parameter values amongst ecological systems to ensure that predictions are ecologically sound; (iii) its versatility to consider disturbance intensity through post-disturbance changes in a structural variable, either as input data, or as a transformed parameter without requiring pre-disturbance monitoring; (iv) its flexibility to explicitly consider, and test, the effects on forest recovery of various disturbance types, along an intensity gradient, in a single integrative model. 4. First conclusions drawn from our common framework underline the strongest above-ground biomass and diversity recovery rate offered by selective logging, compared to agriculture and clearcutting+fire, as well as the strong effect of disturbance intensity on taxonomic composition recovery. 5. Considering disturbed forests in a common framework might help managers to know which disturbance types need to be firmly avoided, which intensity range makes human activities sustainable in forested environments, and where inexpensive natural regeneration should be favoured over active restoration, such as tree planting. Testing this framework with various monitoring tools to estimate disturbance intensity and model vegetation attribute recovery, i.e., with forest monitoring or remote sensing data, will be the next step to make it widely applicable. © 2023
Tropical peat swamp forests (TPSFs) are found mainly in Southeast Asia and especially Indonesia. A total of 61% were lost between 1990 and 2015 and 6% remained in a pristine condition by 2015. Tropical peat swamps store vast amounts of carbon in their peat, but peat degradation, through drainage and fire, leads to high greenhouse gas emissions. This is gaining much international attention and, with it, policy initiatives and funding for restoration from local to landscape scales are being promoted. Unfortunately, although there is a now strong desire and need for TPSF restoration, methods are lacking. Ecological understanding is still at an early stage, and, even more so, in its applied use. There is an imbalance between the activities of TPSF restoration and sound ecological application. Furthermore, while many activities are underway and knowledge is being gained, these techniques are yet to be published. This article has been written to provide a common-sense, practical guide to tropical peatland forest restoration which summarizes what we know to date, while acknowledging the gaps in our understanding. Topics covered include species selection, land assessment, land selection, and appropriate nursery, transplanting, and monitoring methods. The authors make no apologies that in places this reads like a manual as, given the importance of tropical peatland recovery and the recent attention and funding opportunities available, it is essential we now provide techniques to restoration practitioners working on the ground, and a basic common-sense approach must be the starting point. © 2016 Society for Ecological Restoration
The Western Ghats in India is one of the 25 global hotspots of biodiversity, and it is the hotspot with the highest human density. This study considers variations in the regional fire regime that are related to vegetation type and past human disturbances in a landscape. Using a combination of remote sensing data and GIS techniques, burnt areas were delineated in three different vegetation types and various metrics of fire size were estimated. Belt transects were enumerated to assess the vegetation characteristics and fire effects in the landscape. Temporal trends suggest increasingly short fire-return intervals in the landscape. In the tropical dry deciduous forest, the mean fire-return interval is 6 years, in the tropical dry thorn forest mean fire-return interval is 10 years, and in the tropical moist deciduous forest mean fire-return interval is 20 years. Tropical dry deciduous forests burned more frequently and had the largest number of fires in any given year as well as the single largest fire (9900 ha). Seventy percent, 56%, and 30% of the tropical moist deciduous forests, tropical dry thorn forests, and tropical dry deciduous forests, respectively have not burned during the 7-year period of study. The model of fire-return interval as a function of distance from park boundary explained 63% of the spatial variation of fire-return interval in the landscape. Forest fires had significant impacts on species diversity and regeneration in the tropical dry deciduous forests. Species diversity declined by 50% and 60% in the moderate and high frequency classes, respectively compared to the low fire frequency class. Sapling density declined by ca. 30% in both moderate and high frequency classes compared to low frequency class. In tropical moist deciduous ecosystems, there were substantial declines in species diversity, tree density, seedling and sapling densities in burned forests compared to the unburned forests. In contrast forest fires in tropical dry thorn forests had a marginal positive effect on ecosystem diversity, structure, and regeneration.
REDD+ holds potential for mitigating emissions from tropical forest loss by providing financial incentives for carbon stored in forests, but its economic viability is under scrutiny. The primary narrative raised in the literature is that REDD+ will be of limited utility for reducing forest carbon loss in Southeast Asia, while the level of finance committed falls short of profits from alternative land-use activities in the region, including large-scale timber and oil palm operations. Here we assess the financial costs and carbon benefits of various REDD+ strategies deployed in the region. We find the cost of reducing emissions ranges from $9 to $75 per tonne of avoided carbon emissions. The strategies focused on reducing forest degradation and promoting forest regrowth are the most cost-effective ways of reducing emissions and used in over 60% of REDD+ projects. By comparing the financial costs and carbon benefits of a broader range of strategies than previously assessed, we highlight the variation between different strategies and draw attention to opportunities where REDD+ can achieve maximum carbon benefits cost-effectively. These findings have broad policy implications for Southeast Asia. Until carbon finance escalates, emissions reductions can be maximized from reforestation, reduced-impact logging and investing in improved management of protected areas. Targeting cost-efficient opportunities for REDD+ is important to improve the efficiency of national REDD+ policy, which in-turn fosters greater financial and political support for the scheme. © 2016 IOP Publishing Ltd.
Forests in the Philippines, and many other developing countries in the tropics, have been extensively cleared over recent decades. There have been increasing efforts to reforest these cleared lands to achieve both socio-economic and environmental objectives. To date, planted forests have been dominated by monocultures. There has however been increasing calls to use mixtures of species, although there is limited evidence to support mixed-species plantations being a better or win-win approach to reforestation. To address this, we compared the tree growth, forest structure, and tree species diversity performance of monoculture and mixed-species tree plantations across 168 sites (251 survey plots) on Leyte Island, the Philippines. Our results indicate that mixtures of fast-growing exotics species had better growth performance compared to monocultures of fast-growing exotics species, and also better tree species diversity performance at both the plot and landscape scale. Our results suggest that mixtures of exotic or native species can provide benefits over monoculture plantations. Mixtures of productive exotic species are most suited to situations where the production function of the forest is most important, while mixtures of native species are most suited to situations where the biodiversity function of the forest is most important. © 2020 Taylor & Francis.
Competition with invasive grasses is one of the most important drivers of tree planting failures, especially in tropical forests. A widely disseminated weeding approach has been glyphosate spraying, the most used herbicide globally in forestry and ecosystem restoration. However, glyphosate use in restoration is highly controversial and requires further studies to elucidate its effects on restoration processes and the environment. We evaluated the use of glyphosate in riparian forest restoration and its impacts on tree planting costs, weed control efficiency, planted seedling performance, herbaceous and woody species regeneration, soil bacteria, and environmental contamination, using mowing treatments as a reference and based on a controlled experiment established in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. Glyphosate spraying reduced by one-half and one-third the accumulated aboveground biomass of, respectively, weeds in general and of the invasive grass Urochloa decumbens compared to mowing treatments, and it reduced the cost by half. The performance of planted tree seedlings was markedly favored by glyphosate spraying compared to mowing treatments, as expressed by improved seedling height (similar to twice higher), crown area (similar to 5x higher), and basal area (similar to 5x higher); the regeneration of both native woody and ruderal herbaceous plants were also enhanced. Neither glyphosate nor its metabolite Aminomethylphosphonic acid (AMPA) residues were detected in either water runoff or soil samples, but they were found at relatively high concentrations in the runoff sediments (from 1.32 to 24.75 mg/kg for glyphosate and from 1.75 to 76.13 mg/kg for AMPA). Soil bacteria communities differed before and after glyphosate spraying in comparison to mowing plots (without glyphosate). Glyphosate spraying was far more cost effective than mowing for controlling U. decumbens and greatly improved the performance of planted tree seedlings and natural regeneration, while not leaving residues in soil and water. However, the changes in the structure of bacterial communities and high concentration of glyphosate and AMPA residues in runoff sediments highlight the need for caution when using this herbicide in riparian buffers. We present alternatives for reducing glyphosate use and minimizing its risks in tree planting initiatives.
In recent decades the rate and geographic extent of land-use and land-cover change has increased throughout the world's humid tropical forests. The pan-tropical geography of forest change is a challenge to assess, and improved estimates of the human footprint in the tropics are critical to understanding potential changes in biodiversity. We combined recently published and new satellite observations, along with images from Google Earth and a literature review, to estimate the contemporary global extent of deforestation, selective logging, and secondary regrowth in humid tropical forests. Roughly 1.4% of the biome was deforested between 2000 and 2005. As of 2005, about half of the humid tropical forest biome contained 50% or less tree cover. Although not directly comparable to deforestation, geographic estimates of selective logging indicate that at least 20% of the humid tropical forest biome was undergoing some level of timber harvesting between 2000 and 2005. Forest recovery estimates are even less certain, but a compilation of available reports suggests that at least 1.2% of the humid tropical forest biome was in some stage of long-term secondary regrowth in 2000. Nearly 70% of the regrowth reports indicate forest regeneration in hilly, upland, and mountainous environments considered marginal for large-scale agriculture and ranching. Our estimates of the human footprint are conservative because they do not resolve very small-scale deforestation, low-intensity logging, and unreported secondary regrowth, nor do they incorporate other impacts on tropical forest ecosystems, such as fire and hunting. Our results highlight the enormous geographic extent of forest change throughout the humid tropics and the considerable limitations of the science and technology available for such a synthesis. © 2009 Society for Conservation Biology.
Key message: Forest fragmentation leads to a micro-environmental condition that favors the proliferation of liana, which infest trees, compete with them, and reduce their performance. To report the state of the art of the main actions to manage this structural component of tropical forests, we surveyed the control strategies in the literature in the last 71 years, highlighting research goals, tree-climber interactions, management, restoration, and conservation. Dataset access is at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6678112. Associated metadata are available at https://metadata-afs.nancy.inra.fr/geonetwork/srv/fre/catalog.search#/metadata/712ff481-dfa2-4ddb-b4fa-fcbd7c517842 Context: Lianas (woody vines) are considered structural parasites of tropical trees because they start their development as terrestrial seedlings but need to reach a tree canopy for higher light availability. The tree-liana coexistence usually can damage tree species, thus removing lianas has been suggested as an alternative to reinforce forest regeneration. Aims: The dataset compilation begun during the first author doctoral work and a first dataset on neotropical lianas was published (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4050477) in 2020. The present dataset (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6678112) presents an update of the 2020 dataset with additional amend (published articles from 2018 to 2021) and enhanced metadata descriptions. Our aim is providing an updated database extracted from scientific literature compiling information related to the effect of lianas on tree and forest structure and diversity, and to contribute to improve decision making on forest restoration and management. Methods: We made a systematic literature review on lianas in the Neotropical region (native or restored) from 1950 to 2021. First, we selected studies on liana management and described each paper according to the following topics: vegetation status, positive (P), and negative (N) effects of lianas on each species, the species in focus, and the suggested management strategy. Results: Almost 83% of the studies pointed out tree-climber interactions as negative to trees. Cutting was the management strategy adopted in 92% of the studies. Controlled burning, enrichment, and selective cutting were adopted in only one paper. Rainy and seasonal forests were the vegetation types with more studied sites (20 and 17 respectively). Only one study suggested enhancing forest diversity through direct seeding of lianas. Four studies evaluated the impact of lianas on forest diversity and forest fauna. Conclusion: The data collected showed the different impacts of liana management on the diversity and structure of tropical forests. It can endorse environmental control and management practices and evaluate the consequences of these techniques in recovering forests or improving timber production. © 2022, The Author(s).
Certifying ecologically acceptable forest management requires monitoring forest conditions and the environmental impacts of management activities. Through adaptive management, assessments that reveal excessive environmental impacts require revision of the management plan so that the ecological functions and attributes of forest ecosystems are maintained within acceptable limits. But how are these acceptable limits determined? And how can 'normal' or 'natural' conditions be defined when these are temporally or spatially variable. To determine the desired biological state of a forest indicator baseline values, together with some measure of variability under natural conditions, are needed. A useful Ecological Criteria and Indicator set should, therefore, provide objective standards for evaluation, and these standards should account for spatial and temporal variation in indicator states as well as resilience to anthropogenic disturbance. A framework is presented, within which the standards for assessing ecologically sustainable forest management might be defined. The published literature is drawn upon to determine the responses of selected indicators to natural and anthropogenic disturbances. Using these values we can begin to predict expected ecological conditions of a sustainably managed forest given information on forest type, disturbance intensity and time since disturbance.
Tropical cloud forests are under severe distress, as deforestation leads to forest fragmentation and degradation. This represents a severe threat to small-ranged, forest-dependent species, as they are at risk of losing habitat and connectivity between populations. These detrimental effects are aggravated by upslope range shifts caused by climate change, as further habitat loss is expected. To mitigate these threats, the preservation of habitat and connectivity becomes necessary. Here, we present a novel framework for identifying future key areas offering highquality habitat and connectivity. The framework combines data on the composition of forests, their configuration in the landscape, as well as dispersal abilities and altitudinal range for several focal species. Importantly, the framework integrates projections of future range shifts. Thus, it prioritizes a network of areas with high-conservation value robust to climate change. We applied the framework to the cloud forest in Ecuador, using two endemic bird species to identify areas for mitigating the adverse effects of climate change. Our approach allows targeting reforestation measures effectively to areas of high-conservation value. The framework presented here can be applied to different ecosystems and geographical locations, and therefore contribute to making informed decisions about the implementation of robust conservation measures. © 2017 Université Laval.
Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) projects aim to contribute to climate change mitigation by protecting and enhancing carbon stocks in tropical forests, but there have been no systematic global evaluations of their impact. We used a new data set for tropical humid forests and a standardized evaluation approach (based on pixel matching) to quantify the performance of a representative sample of 40 voluntary REDD+ projects in 9 countries certified under the Verified Carbon Standard (VCS). In the first 5 years of implementation, deforestation within project areas was reduced by 47% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 24–68) compared with matched counterfactual pixels, and degradation rates were 58% lower (95% CI: 49–63). Reductions were small in absolute terms but greater in sites located in high-deforestation settings and did not appear to be substantially undermined by leakage activities in forested areas within 10 km of project boundaries. At the 26th Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the international community renewed its commitment to tackling tropical deforestation as a nature-based solution to climate change. Our results indicate that incentivizing forest conservation through voluntary site-based projects can slow tropical deforestation and highlight the particular importance of prioritizing financing for areas at greater risk of deforestation. © 2022 The Authors. Conservation Biology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Society for Conservation Biology.
Tropical rainforests store enormous amounts of carbon, the protection of which represents a vital component of efforts to mitigate global climate change. Currently, tropical forest conservation, science, policies, and climate mitigation actions focus predominantly on reducing carbon emissions from deforestation alone. However, every year vast areas of the humid tropics are disturbed by selective logging, understory fires, and habitat fragmentation. There is an urgent need to understand the effect of such disturbances on carbon stocks, and how stocks in disturbed forests compare to those found in undisturbed primary forests as well as in regenerating secondary forests. Here, we present the results of the largest field study to date on the impacts of human disturbances on above and belowground carbon stocks in tropical forests. Live vegetation, the largest carbon pool, was extremely sensitive to disturbance: forests that experienced both selective logging and understory fires stored, on average, 40% less aboveground carbon than undisturbed forests and were structurally similar to secondary forests. Edge effects also played an important role in explaining variability in aboveground carbon stocks of disturbed forests. Results indicate a potential rapid recovery of the dead wood and litter carbon pools, while soil stocks (0-30 cm) appeared to be resistant to the effects of logging and fire. Carbon loss and subsequent emissions due to human disturbances remain largely unaccounted for in greenhouse gas inventories, but by comparing our estimates of depleted carbon stocks in disturbed forests with Brazilian government assessments of the total forest area annually disturbed in the Amazon, we show that these emissions could represent up to 40% of the carbon loss from deforestation in the region. We conclude that conservation programs aiming to ensure the long-term permanence of forest carbon stocks, such as REDD+, will remain limited in their success unless they effectively avoid degradation as well as deforestation. © 2014 The Authors.
Application of island biogeography theory to prediction of species extinctions resulting from habitat loss is based on the assumption that the transformed landscape matrix is completely inhospitable to the taxa considered, despite evidence demonstrating the nontrivial influence of matrix on populations within habitat remnants. The island biogeography paradigm therefore needs refining to account for specific responses of taxa to the area of habitat " islands" and to the quality of the surrounding matrix. We incorporated matrix effects into island theory by partitioning the slope (z value) of species-area relationships into two components: γ, a constant, and σ, a measure of taxon-specific responses to each component of a heterogeneous matrix. We used our matrix-calibrated model to predict extinction and endangerment of bird species resulting from land-use change in 20 biodiversity hotspots and compared these predictions with observed numbers of extinct and threatened bird species. We repeated this analysis with the conventional species-area model and the countryside species-area model, considering alternative z values of 0.35 (island) or 0.22 (continental). We evaluated the relative strength of support for each of the five candidate models with Akaike's information criterion (AIC). The matrix-calibrated model had the highest AIC weight (wi = 89.21%), which means the weight of evidence in support of this model was the optimal model given the set of candidate models and the data. In addition to being a valuable heuristic tool for assessing extinction risk, our matrix-calibrated model also allows quantitative assessment of biodiversity benefits (and trade-offs) of land-management options in human-dominated landscapes. Given that processes of secondary regeneration have become more widespread across tropical regions and are predicted to increase, our matrix-calibrated model will be increasingly appropriate for practical conservation in tropical landscapes. ©2010 Society for Conservation Biology.
Land tenure and tenure security are among the most important factors determining the viability and success of Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) initiatives. The premise of the present paper is that territorial conflicts lead to forest loss and compromise the successful implementation of REDD+. Within this context, the main objectives of this paper are to (i) document, relying on participatory methods, the extent to which land conflicts drive deforestation and (ii) reflect on the legal context of REDD+ examining if, from an Indigenous perspective, it offers tools to resolve such conflicts. We used the Upper Bayano Watershed in eastern Panama as a case study of complex land tenure dynamics, and their effects on forest conservation in the context of REDD+. Combining a range of participatory methods including participatory mapping and forest carbon stock assessment, we estimated the consequences of land invasions on forest carbon stocks. Our analysis shows that invasions of Indigenous territories amounted to 27.6% of the total deforestation for the period of 2001-2014. The situation is of paramount concern in the Embera territory of Maje A where 95.4% of total deforestation was caused by colonist invaders. Using and validating the maps made freely available by the Global Forest Change initiative of the University of Maryland, we then developed a reference level for the watershed and carried out a back of the envelop estimation of likely REDD+ revenue, showing its potential to bring much needed income to Indigenous communities striving to protect their forest estate. Our analysis of current legislation in Panama highlights confusion and important legal voids and emphasizes the strong links between land tenure, carbon ownership, and territorial invasions. The options and shortcoming of implementing REDD+ in Indigenous territories is discussed in the conclusion taking our legal review into account.
Dry tropical forests are unique, biodiverse ecosystems threatened by human develop-ment, especially deforestation for agricultural land use. Deforestation reduces carbon sequestration in landscapes and, in turn, pollutes nearby waterways. Agroforestry prac-tices, like silvopastoralism, can mitigate these impacts by integrating trees into working landscapes, but their effect on stream water quality has not been studied. We assessed the stream condition on five silvopastoral farms in Panama’s Azuero Peninsula by utiliz-ing aquatic macroinvertebrates as indicators. We collected aquatic macroinvertebrates and calculated the percent EPT, Diptera, and Odonata. Using ArcGIS, we measured distance to live fence, riparian connectivity, and forest patch size. We also measured tree carbon stored in the riparian area and throughout each farm. We analyzed the relationships between landscape or habitat variables and water quality scores using single linear regressions in R Studio. Percent EPT, Odonata, and diversity were positively predicted by riparian tree carbon, while percent Diptera was negatively predicted by riparian tree carbon. Our results highlight the importance of expanding agroforestry in this region and suggest that increasing tree cover in agricultural landscapes may be beneficial to stream condition, but additional research is needed. © Julia M. Portmann et al.
Performance-based payments are widely seen as a promising tool for Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation (REDD+) in tropical forests. Despite great advances in international REDD+ negotiations, there is a lack of consensus around the development of business-as-usual (BAU) reference scenarios or baselines to derive and quantify net carbon emission reductions. In this paper, we explore a novel approach for developing baselines (point forecasts) using exponential smoothing. Further, we introduce the concept of probabilistic BAU scenario ranges developed using this approach. We compare predictive performance with the linear trend and historical averages approaches conventionally used in policy proposals and REDD+ pilots.We empirically test the relative performance of all three approaches by forecasting BAU baselines and scenario ranges in 36 sites (consisting of 20 countries and 8 Amazonian states with and 8 countries without REDD+ schemes ). Based on two predictive performance measures (the root mean squared error and mean absolute percentage error), we find that exponential smoothing outperforms the linear trend and historical average models at predicting forest cover changes. In addition, we show how prediction intervals based on a desired confidence level generated through exponential smoothing can be used in novel ways to determine likely baseline scenario ranges. In this way it is possible to quantify the degree of variability and uncertainty in datasets. Importantly, this also provides a statistical measure of confidence to determine if REDD+ interventions have been effective.By generating robust probabilistic baseline scenarios, exponential smoothing models can facilitate the effectiveness of REDD+ payments, support a more efficient allocation of scarce conservation resources, and improve our understanding of effective forest conservation investments, also beyond REDD+. © 2015 The Authors.
This study provides monitoring and spatial analysis of forest fragmentation based on high-resolution remote sensing, in order to give a framework for assessing residual biodiversity in the Guiglo-Taï region. Massive deforestation has taken place, mainly in the last 20 years, 79% of unprotected forests have been eliminated on the 100 × 100 km study area. Deforestation is also beginning to encroach on protected areas. Forest fragments are mainly found close to the deforestation front. In areas which were first deforested, forest fragments are very scarce and are restricted to less productive soils; they are often severely degraded. Young secondary forests develop on abandoned fields, but primary forest regeneration seems unlikely in light of the distance from seed sources and the increase in population pressure. Conservation initiatives in this zone of high biodiversity should focus on protected areas, taking into account short and long term benefits for the local population.
Biodiversity monitoring and understanding ecological processes on a global scale is a major challenge for biodiversity conservation. Field assessments commonly used to assess patterns of biodiversity and habitat condition are costly, challenging, and restricted to small spatial scales. As ecosystems face increasing anthropogenic pressures, it is important that we find ways to assess patterns of biodiversity more efficiently. Remote sensing has the potential to support understanding of landscape-level ecological processes. In this study, we considered cacao agroforests at different stages of secondary succession, and primary forest in the Northern Range of Trinidad, West Indies. We assessed changes in tree biodiversity over succession using both field data, and data derived from remote sensing. We then evaluated the strengths and limitations of each method, exploring the potential for expanding field data by using remote sensing techniques to investigate landscape-level patterns of forest condition and regeneration. Remote sensing and field data provided different insights into tree species compositional changes, and patterns of alpha-and beta-diversity. The results highlight the potential of remote sensing for detecting patterns of compositional change in forests, and for expanding on field data in order to better understand landscape-level patterns of forest diversity. © 2021 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Deforestation and forest degradation of tropical forests are major global concerns due to their ecological, social, and economic roles. In the wake of climate change and its diverse global effects, fragmentation and degradation of tropical forests have jeopardized their ability to support livelihoods and regenerate climate regulating services. Concerted efforts by local, national, and international players, which are primarily scientific, technological, or economic, have borne minimal results in safeguarding these forests from destruction, necessitating a more integrated and inclusive approach. The Rio Earth Summit (1992) brought together world leaders to set targets and priorities on the global sustainability agenda and laid a strong foundation for international policy cooperation in the future. This study employed a systematic review of articles published between 1992 and 2020 to establish how various policy mechanisms have been developed and evolved to bridge forests and climate change discourse in tropical forests while highlighting their strengths and weaknesses. The initial search of peer-reviewed publications and gray literature yielded 2622 records, which were subjected to inclusion and exclusion criteria based on The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta Analyses guidelines, resulting in a final list of 65 records for in-depth qualitative analysis. The study establishes that the mechanisms in place have contributed mainly to more coordination and incentives to manage climate risks, primarily through tropical forests conservation. However, hurdles such as inadequate participation and involvement of the local and indigenous people, insufficient national and local policy frameworks and bureaucracies around emissions monitoring, measuring, reporting, and verification processes continue to slow tropical forest conservation. Thus, there is a need for more integrated, multilevel, and diverse stakeholder engagement to achieve the set global targets effectively.
ARELLANO G, CALA V, FUENTES A, CAYOLA L, JØRGENSEN PM & MACÍA MJ. 2016. A standard protocol for woody plant inventories and soil characterisation using temporary 0.1-ha plots in tropical forests. The use of both uniform woody plant inventories and laboratory soil analysis methods facilitates data sharing and improves the understanding of large-scale biological patterns in tropical forests. Temporary small 0.1-ha plots, fast and cheap to install, are increasingly employed in the tropics. This study presents a standard protocol for woody plant inventories and soil characterisation using 0.1-ha plots. The protocol gives specific recommendations on the size and shape of a 0.1-ha plot, taxa to be included in the inventories, minimum stem diameter cut-offs, evaluation of multiple stems and height estimation. In addition, we present a number of recommendations on soil sampling and analysis, whose standarisation is much required in tropical forest research. We suggest to measure Al and nutrients simultaneously after Mehlich-3 extraction, followed by inductively coupled plasma spectrometry, and to measure C and N through total combustion. The pH, texture and bulk density can be measured with standard manual methods. The study also includes guidelines to create and maintain a standardised database and metadata. All the proposed recommendations are compatible with those already employed in the standardised establishment of large plots. Each recommendation represents a reasonable trade-off between investment and data quality and is oriented to obtain low-cost standardised baseline data, useful to a broad range of studies. © Forest Research Institute Malaysia.
Tropical forests undergoing restoration can present high biomass accumulation rates, especially in the first 20 years. However, native species reforestations often present a bias toward fast growth, low wood density, and small maximum adult size species, contrasting with most mature forest species. Since tree species adult size and wood density are key traits that influence biomass accumulation, these induce uncertainty regarding carbon uptake capabilities of restoration projects in the long term. We compared the density of individuals (DI), basal area (BA), aboveground biomass (AGB), and weighted average wood density (WDW) in 13–14-year-old restoration sites and in mature seasonal Atlantic Forest fragments. We also assessed the contribution of pioneer and non-pioneer and planted and non-planted species on these variables at restoration sites. Furthermore, we investigated the DI and WDW for saplings and seedlings, in order to foresee changes in forest structure that may result from natural recruitment of dense-wood mature species. The BA and WDW at restoration sites were similar to forest fragments, except for large trees (DBH ≥50 cm). Restoration sites recovered AGB to the level of forest fragments only for the smaller size class (DBH 5–19.9 cm). Planted pioneer and non-pioneer species accumulated the greatest AGB (93%), BA (94%), and DI (90%) at restoration sites. The DI of non-planted non-pioneer species with higher WDW increased among saplings and seedlings at restoration sites. The presence of species with a larger adult size and higher WD may indicate long-term increase in biomass accumulation at restoration sites. © 2022 Society for Ecological Restoration.
With rapid deforestation and forest degradation ongoing in tropical regions, the maintenance of biodiversity and high biomass/carbon stocks can bring additional benefits to the sustainable management of natural forests along with sustainable timber production. However, the measures for improving the maintenance of biodiversity and high biomass are not well evaluated. For this study, we established vegetation plots in the Anap Sustainable Development Unit (ASDU) in Bintulu, Sarawak, including the Anap-Muput Forest Management Unit (AMFMU), in order to investigate the distribution of above-ground biomass and tree species diversity. Using a Landsat image, we mapped the distribution of above-ground biomass all over the ASDU as of 2009. This distribution of above-ground biomass inside the AMFMU was not well correlated with the time that had elapsed since the last cycle of logging. The topography of the area may in fact be a more important factor. In total, 986 tree species were recorded in 70 plots (covering 8.3 ha in total). The species richness was not obviously different between recently harvested forests and primary forests, demonstrating that it is not severely affected by logging activity. As the above-ground biomass and tree species richness cannot be predicted by the years after harvesting alone, adaptive management with continuous monitoring is necessary to maintain the benefits of sustainable forest management. © 2020, Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
Ecological restoration has been increasingly considering biotic interactions. Different restoration strategies usually rely on different composition and abundance of plants with potential impact on the establishment of plant–pollinator interactions. We evaluated the restoration of plant–pollinator interaction networks in young restoration areas in the South Atlantic rainforest, Brazil. We assessed the relative contribution of two restoration strategies (natural regeneration vs. reforestation), geographic distance, plant composition, pollinator composition, abundance of flowers and insects, and plant–pollinator temporal overlap, that is, phenological coupling, to predict the establishment of pairwise interactions. We expected that restoration strategies would indirectly affect the patterns (identity and frequency) of pairwise interactions due to their influence on the processes driving interactions. We sampled monthly pollinators and the plants they visited on six reforestation sites and six natural regeneration sites during 20 months. We surveyed flower abundance in summer. We analyzed the relative contribution of each factor to predict the identity and frequency of pairwise interactions using structural equation modeling. Contrary to expectations, the restoration strategy did not predict interactions, probably because the sites under restoration were surrounded by natural and conserved landscapes. Since we found no effect of restoration strategies on plant composition, abundance, and phenological coupling, the restoration strategy did not predict interactions. Phenological coupling explained more than half of the interaction patterns, representing the best predictor of interactions followed by abundance and plant composition. Therefore, these predictors should be considered to select plant species in restoration projects that encompass interactions and pollination services. © 2021 Society for Ecological Restoration.
The exploitation of non-timber forest products has been proposed as a sustainable way to exploit tropical forests, but such an opportunity remains to be proved. Here, we examine the impact of intensive acai palm (Euterpe oleracea) management on the seed rain and soil seed bank in an estuarine forest landscape with a long history of forest management by locals in the Amazon region. Seed rain (100 80 cm(2) collectors) and soil seed bank (100 30 cm(2) samples) were monitored through a year across 20 forest stands, covering a gradient of acai stem density (50-3575 acai stems per ha). Seed rain and bank were dominated by acai seeds (85.5%-85.8%) and by excluding them, seed rain and bank were low density and species poor, capturing a tiny subset from the local (17.91%-19.40%) and landscape woody flora (11.82%-14.55%). Moreover, autochthonous and vertebrated-dispersed predominated as well as those from tree species considered useful by locals. Overall, acai stem density positively affected acai seed abundance in the seed rain and negatively affected seed pools in the bank in relation to abundance of seeds and vertebrated dispersed, while adult tree species richness and density and accessibility to forest stands were associated with more diversified seed pools. Thereby, forest stands are exposed to different levels of acai management (high vs. low intensity) supported taxonomically distinct seed pools. Our results suggest that acai intensification disturbs seed rain and soil seed bank with potential impacts on forest regeneration and the forest integrity standards required to consider acai fruit production as sustainable according to current legislation.
Demand for tropical forest restoration has grown rapidly as the potential role of recovering secondary forests in sequestering carbon and enhancing biodiversity has been recognised. Active forest management is often prescribed to accelerate natural regeneration, but evidence for the efficacy of interventions is scarce for tropical forests. In this study we examine the hypothesis that the selective removal of abundant pioneers in the understory of recovering selectively logged forests can improve the composition of forest stands and accelerate succession. Four selective thinning treatments of increasing intensity were implemented in 8.75 ha compartments and replicated six times. Within each compartment, three monitoring plots were established and measured immediately after thinning and one year later to assess implementation of thinning treatments, growth and survival of stems, and changes in stand composition. Canopy openness was measured using hemispherical photography. Thinning treatments substantially reduced the abundance of pioneers, but there was only a slight increase in canopy openness (3.7–4.3%) relative to the control (1.8%) 8 months after implementation. Canopy openness increased dramatically across all treatments in the follow year due to the 2015–16 El Niño event and increased more in thinning treatments. Large (>10 cm dbh) and small (2–10 cm dbh) late-successional stems showed enhanced growth only in the low intensity thinning treatment, whereas the growth of small pioneer stems increased across the thinning intensity gradient. The cost of implementing thinning treatments was $US80 per ha or approximately 10% of the cost of planting treatments in the same forest. Our findings suggest that selective thinning of understory pioneer stems is a practical option for manipulating stand composition and potentially accelerating natural regeneration. Continued monitoring of the experiment should reveal the long-term impact and cost-effectiveness of treatments. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Reforestation is promoted to address the dual global climate and biodiversity crises. This is particularly relevant for carbon-rich, biodiverse tropical peatlands, for which active reforestation typically involves two post-germination stages: nursery rearing of seedlings, then outplanting. Yet, linkages between these stages and cumulative seedling performance are rarely quantified during tropical peatland reforestation. By monitoring tree seedling survival and growth, we investigate factors influencing seedling performance (species identity, seedling source, treatments, and climate), whether nursery performance predicts outplanting performance, and calculate cumulative survival (nursery plus outplanting) in Sebangau National Park, Indonesian Borneo. Standardized survival at 2 years was higher in the nursery (mean 67% across 40 species) than outplanting (44% across 24 species). For nursery and outplanting, species identity was the main source of variation in survival and height growth. Seedling source, treatments, site condition, and precipitation had no significant impact on survival but did influence growth in some cases. Nursery survival did not predict outplanting survival, but nursery height did predict outplanting height. Across species, around a quarter of seedlings survived from nursery to outplanting over 4 years. Cumulative survival represents a more realistic basis for assessing the genetic and other resource costs of tropical peatland reforestation. Our two-phase approach identified outplanting as the greater bottleneck to cumulative seedling survivability. We argue that the nursery stage may be used to harden seedlings for degraded peatland conditions by selecting more relevant treatments (e.g. flooding) and screening for resilience to common disturbances (e.g. fire) to enhance outplanted, and thus cumulative, seedling survival. © 2023 The Authors. Restoration Ecology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Society for Ecological Restoration.
Tropical montane cloud forest is a priority ecosystem for restoration due to the diversity and ecosystem services it provides and because it is under severe threat. Forest restoration can be achieved by active interventions and/or natural regeneration (passive restoration). However, there has been little comparison of the effectiveness of active versus passive restoration strategies and even fewer studies have monitored the long-term success of forest restoration practices. We assessed the effectiveness of active (mixed plantation with native species) and passive (areas adjacent and non-adjacent to mature cloud forest) restoration strategies implemented in pastures with 21 years of exclosure, and compared these to a mature cloud forest (reference system), in eastern Mexico. In the mature forest and in the areas represented by each restoration strategy, ∼15 plots (200 m2) were established in order to assess forest structure, tree diversity and soil properties as indicators of restoration success. Active restoration proved more effective than passive restoration at recovering forest structure (e.g. higher basal area, tree density and height). Adult tree diversity was similar across all restoration sites and the mature forest, while composition differed greatly between the mature forest and each of the restoration sites, from which the characteristic mature cloud forest tree species were mostly absent. The restoration sites presented very low tree seedling density (0.39 individuals/m2) relative to the mature forest (1.68 seedlings/m2), probably due to the higher cover of climbers, ferns, grasses and shrubs found in the understory of the restoration sites (∼78%), compared to that of the mature forest (8%). In all of the restoration sites, soil pH was higher, and carbon content in both the soil and litter was lower, than in the mature forest. This denotes a slow recovery of soil properties after use of the land as cattle pasture. In general, the passive restoration site non-adjacent to the forest presented the lowest recovery (lower canopy cover, composition similarity and seedling density), indicating the importance of proximity to seed sources. Our results highlight the need, in both actively and passively restored areas, for management practices such as enrichment planting, in order to assist tree seedling recruitment of key species and recovery of forest attributes. Active and passive restoration strategies could be implemented as complementary strategies for the restoration of cloud forest landscapes. © 2018 Elsevier B.V.
National forest inventories (NFIs) have a long history, although their current major features date only to the early years of the twentieth century. Recent issues such as concern over the effects of acid deposition, biodiversity, forest sustainability, increased demand for forest data, international reporting requirements and climate change have led to the expansion of NFIs to include more variables, greater diversity in sampling protocols and a generally more holistic approach. This review focuses on six selected topics: (1) a brief historical review; (2) a summary of common structural features of NFIs; (3) a brief review of international reporting requirements using NFI data with an emphasis on approaches to harmonized estimation; (4) an overview of inventory estimation methods that can be enhanced with remotely sensed data; (5) an overview of nearest neighbors prediction and estimation techniques; and (6) a brief overview of several emerging issues including carbon inventories in developing countries and use of lidar data. Although general inventory principles will remain unchanged, sampling designs, plot configurations and measurement protocols will require modification before they can be applied in countries with tropical forests. Technological advances, particularly in the use of remotely sensed data, including lidar data, have led to greater inventory efficiencies, better maps and accurate estimation for small areas. © 2010 Taylor & Francis.
Increasing demands for livelihood resources in tropical rural areas have led to progressive clearing of biodiverse natural forests. Restoration of abandoned farmlands could counter this process. However, as aims and modes of restoration differ in their ecological and socio-economic value, the assessment of achievable ecosystem functions and benefits requires holistic investigation. Here we combine the results from multidisciplinary research for a unique assessment based on a normalization of 23 ecological, economic and social indicators for four restoration options in the tropical Andes of Ecuador. A comparison of the outcomes among afforestation with native alder or exotic pine, pasture restoration with either low-input or intense management and the abandoned status quo shows that both variants of afforestation and intense pasture use improve the ecological value, but low-input pasture does not. Economic indicators favour either afforestation or intense pasturing. Both Mestizo and indigenous Saraguro settlers are more inclined to opt for afforestation. © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
Despite the availability of a wide range of tools, measuring and explaining changes in land cover and land use in tropical regions can be extremely challenging. Kerala, India, is a biodiversity hotspot with a high population density and a long history of complex agricultural land-use patterns. Some reports suggest that agriculture in Kerala, which historically is rice paddy-wetland and agroforestry-based, is on the decline. However, the evidence is often anecdotal, especially with regards to smallholding homegarden agriculture. In this study we employ mixed methods, including remote sensing, quantitative household surveys, and semi-structured interviews, to unravel the complex land-cover and land-use changes occurring in Kerala. Results indicate that, from a land-cover change perspective, agroforests are in dynamic equilibrium with other land covers, being cleared for roads and new buildings, but offset by the expansion of younger, less diverse agroforests into paddy wetlands. Yet beneath the canopy, agroforests are undergoing rapid land-use change not discernible using remote sensing. These changes include a reported decrease in the cultivation of 80% of Kerala's primary crop species during 2003–2013, alongside a dramatic decline in chickens (from 12.5 to 2.6 per homestead on average) and cows (from 1.7 to 0.8). Over this period, no crop increased in cultivation. According to farmers, the primary drivers of this shift were declining profitability of agriculture in Kerala, labour shortages, unreliable weather, unfamiliar pests and diseases, and government policy. Despite the undeniable move away from agricultural activity in homegardens, we conclude that these ecologically and culturally important systems are not disappearing, but rather evolving to meet the needs of a less agricultural Kerala. Our research highlights the value of using mixed methods for characterizing land-use and land-cover histories in tropical regions. © 2017 Elsevier B.V.
In Liberia emphases have been placed on reducing deforestation and increasing food security through the transition of smallholder farmers from shifting cultivation to permanent agricultural systems, including tree cropping and agroforestry systems. A structured survey instrument was administered to 80 households in Bong and Lofa counties, Liberia to assess the socio-cultural feasibility of increasing tree cropping and agroforestry practices among smallholder farmers. The survey investigated household use, perceptions and impediments towards tree cropping and agroforestry and livelihood impacts of these practices, including income diversification and food security. Income was the driving motivation for tree cropping, and insecure land tenure was the most significant impediment. Tree cropping households tended to be male-headed, and differed in age distribution. Households that practiced tree cropping had improved income diversification, and those which used agroforestry practices experienced enhanced food security. Respondent perceptions regarding competition between tree crops and herbaceous crops often prevented incorporation of agroforestry practices. Nearly all households practiced shifting cultivation, independent of whether or not they cultivated trees. This suggests that a transition away from shifting cultivation to agroforestry systems will require greater efforts to address socio-political factors, including cultural perceptions and traditions, land tenure, gender, and household demographics.
Large-scale deforestation in the tropics, triggered by logging and subsequent agricultural monoculture has a significant adverse impact on biodiversity due to habitat degradation. Here, we measured the diversity of butterfly species in three agricultural landscapes, agroforestry orchards, oil palm, and rubber tree plantations. Butterfly species were counted at 127 sampling points over the course of a year using the point count method. We found that agroforestry orchards supported a greater number of butterfly species (74 species) compared to rubber tree (61 species) and oil palm plantations (54 species) which were dominated by generalist (73%) followed by forest specialists (27%). We found no significant difference of butterfly species composition between agroforestry orchards and rubber tree plantation, with both habitats associated with more butterfly species compared to oil palm plantations. This indicates butterflies were able to persist better in certain agricultural landscapes. GLMMs suggested that tree height, undergrowth coverage and height, and elevation determined butterfly diversity. Butterfly species richness was also influenced by season and landscape-level variables such as proximity to forest, mean NDVI, and habitat. Understanding the factors that contributed to butterfly species richness in an agroecosystem, stakeholders should consider management practices to improve biodiversity conservation such as ground vegetation management and retaining adjacent forest areas to enhance butterfly species richness. Furthermore, our findings suggest that agroforestry system should be considered to enhance biodiversity in agricultural landscapes. © 2023, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature.
Although an increasing number of studies have shown that diverse, multi-strata agroforestry systems can contribute to the conservation of tropical biodiversity, there is still debate about how the biodiversity within agroforestry systems compares to that of intact forest and alternative land uses. In order to assess the relative importance of agroforestry systems for biodiversity conservation, we characterized bat and bird assemblages occurring in forests, two types of agroforestry systems (cacao and banana) and plantain monocultures in the indigenous reserves of Talamanca, Costa Rica. A total of 2,678 bats of 45 species were captured, and 3,056 birds of 224 species were observed. Agroforestry systems maintained bat assemblages that were as (or more) species-rich, abundant and diverse as forests, had the same basic suite of dominant species, but contained more nectarivorous bats than forests. Agroforestry systems also contained bird assemblages that were as abundant, species-rich and diverse as forests; however the species composition of these assemblages was highly modified, with fewer forest dependent species, more open area species and different dominant species. The plantain monocultures had highly modified and depauperate assemblages of both birds and bats. Across land uses, bird diversity and species richness were more closely correlated with the structural and floristic characteristics than were bats, suggesting potential taxon-specific responses to different land uses. Our results indicate that diverse cacao and banana agroforestry systems contribute to conservation efforts by serving as habitats to high numbers of bird and bat species, including some, but not all, forest-dependent species and species of known conservation concern. However, because the animal assemblages in agroforestry systems differ from those in forests, the maintenance of forests within the agricultural landscape is critical for conserving intact assemblages at the landscape level. © 2007 Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
Although plant invasions are often regarded as a significant threat to global biodiversity, current understanding of the vulnerability of tropical forests to invasion or the factors that lead to alien species becoming invasive in the tropics remains limited. Here, we synthesise available information on plant invasions in protected areas for the most ecologically important montane forests of East Africa. We undertake a hierarchical analysis to explore patterns across the entire mountain chain with those within an individual mountain block down to a single nature reserve. A common feature of the occurrence of alien trees in the Eastern Arc Mountains is the overwhelming importance of propagule pressure in the representation of species found colonising forests. The patterns observed emphasise the need for scientifically sound advice regarding not only the potential impact of an alien species on native biodiversity but also an assessment of which mitigation strategies might be most appropriate and highlights the research, control and social challenges of managing invasive agroforestry trees in the tropics. © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013.
Deforestation and forest degradation are having profound negative impacts on social-ecological systems in the emerging economies across the tropics. Consequently, interest in restoring and rehabilitating degraded forests has been growing. This paper explores current issues related to addressing forest degradation in the Lancang-Mekong Region (LMR) of Southeast Asia through a review of the use of criteria and indicators for forest degradation and rehabilitation. Forest degradation must be understood in the context of its underlying drivers, which are numerous and complex. Understanding these underlying drivers of degradation requires diagnosing the entwined political, social, economic, and environmental systems that affect forests. Landscapes are the relevant scales to diagnose and intervene for improved forests. Interventions to restore or rehabilitate forests should be process-driven, focused on the underlying social, ecological and political processes that degrade landscapes. Interventions should also include negotiation among all actors influencing and competing for natural resource claims in forest landscapes. Criteria and indicators for forest landscape restoration should therefore help to improve the governance of forest landscapes. Criteria and indicators provide measures of the biophysical outcomes of degradation, in addition to processes, but these should be adapted to changing contexts and emerging challenges, and should rectify any pre-existing flawed change-logic. Restoration activities should synthesize, integrate, and build upon the rich history of pre-existing restoration guidelines, but should be adaptable in order to be applied effectively in the contexts of local landscapes. This project is facilitating a dialogue around the use of criteria and indicators to help solve the degradation challenge in the LMR. We will trial the use of the criteria and indicators generated through this research in the LMR to learn what works and what doesn't. This will provide an opportunity to build consensus around the ways in which restoration investments made by governments, civil society, and the private sector can influence sustainability.
As reforestation and restoration processes gain momentum across the world native tree species are being established for production, conservation and restoration purposes in agricultural landscapes. One such tree with promise is dinde [Maclura tinctoria (L.) D. Don ex Steud]; a multi-purpose, Neotropical tree species that is being widely introduced on to farms of the coffee axis region in the Latin American Andes. No formal studies have been made that examine its potential for reforestation. In this study we aim to measure and define the relationships between age, bole size (dbh), tree height, and crown size of planted dinde trees for the development of spacing guidelines at time of planting and for thinning. We also sought to identify whether tree growth is influenced by various measures of soil fertility. We studied these relationships on dinde trees planted at twelve farms in the central Andean foothills of Colombia. Our results are the first to show dinde has comparable growth to other native and exotic trees used for reforestation in Latin America. Strong relationships exist for tree age and diameter at breast height (DBH) with crown size and height. Based on these relationships we developed spacing and thinning guidelines for timber production in plantation and silvo-pastoral circumstances. Soils were generally fertile but varied between farms. Growth varied with soil primarily related to pH and calcium, and secondly to soil nitrogen and organic matter. Our results provide preliminary information for the forester and/or the farmer on expected growth and size relationships for given ages in relation to soil fertility for planted trees. As more trees are planted on a wider array of soils and providing a greater diversity of ages further studies are necessary for refining guidelines.
Assessing the overall biological diversity of tropical rain forests is a seemingly insurmountable task for ecologists. Therefore, researchers frequently sample selected taxa that they believe reflect general biodiversity patterns. Usually, these studies focus on the congruence of a diversity (the number of species found per sampling unit) between taxa rather than on β diversity (turnover of species assemblages between sampling units). Such approaches ignore the potential role of habitat heterogeneity that, depending on the taxonomic group considered, can greatly enhance β diversity at local and landscape scales. We compared a and ß diversity of four plant groups (trees, lianas, terrestrial herbs, epiphytic liverworts) and eight animal groups (birds, butterflies, lower canopy ants, lower canopy beetles, dung beetles, bees, wasps, and the parasitoids of the latter two) at 15 sites in Sulawesi, Indonesia, that represented natural rain forest and three types of cacao agroforests differing in management intensity. In total, we recorded 863 species. Patterns of species richness per study site varied strongly between taxonomic groups. Only 13-17% of the variance in species richness of one taxonomie group could be predicted from the species richness of another, and on average 12-18% of the variance of β diversity of a given group was predicted by that in other groups, although some taxon pairs had higher values (up to 76% for wasps and their parasitoids). The degree of congruence of patterns of a diversity was not influenced by sampling completeness, whereas the indicator value for β diversity improved when using a similarity index that accounts for incomplete sampling. The indication potential of a diversity for β diversity and vice versa was limited within taxa (7-20%) and virtually nil between them (0-4%). We conclude that different taxa can have largely independent patterns of a diversity and that patterns of β diversity can be more congruent. Thus, conservation plans on a landscape scale need to put more emphasis on the high heterogeneity of agroforests and the overarching role of β diversity shaping overall diversity patterns. © 2009 by the Ecological Society of America.
Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi play a crucial role in promoting plant growth, enhancing plant stress resistance, and sustaining a healthy ecosystem. However, little is known about the mycorrhizal status of teak plantations. Here, we evaluated how the AM fungal communities of rhizosphere soils and roots respond to different stand ages of teak: 22, 35, 45, and 55-year-old from the adjacent native grassland (CK). A high-throughput sequencing method was used to compare the differences in soil and root AM fungal community structures. In combination with soil parameters, mechanisms driving the AM fungal community were revealed by redundancy analysis and the Mantel test. Additionally, spore density and colonization rates were analyzed. With increasing stand age, the AM fungal colonization rates and spore density increased linearly. Catalase activity and ammonium nitrogen content also increased, and soil organic carbon, total phosphorous, acid phosphatase activity, available potassium, and available phosphorus first increased and then decreased. Stand age significantly changed the structure of the AM fungal community but had no significant impact on the diversity of the AM fungal community. However, the diversity of the AM fungal community in soils was statistically higher than that in the roots. In total, nine and seven AM fungal genera were detected in the soil and root samples, respectively. The majority of sequences in soils and roots belonged to Glomus. Age-induced changes in soil properties could largely explain the alterations in the structure of the AM fungal community along a chronosequence, which included total potassium, carbon-nitrogen ratio, ammonium nitrogen, catalase, and acid phosphatase levels in soils and catalase, acid phosphatase, pH, and total potassium levels in roots. Soil nutrient availability and enzyme activity were the main driving factors regulating the shift in the AM fungal community structure along a chronosequence of the teak plantations.
Field fertilization can promote early growth and survival of planted trees on degraded pastures and agricultural lands where low soil fertility and high herbaceous competition inhibit regeneration success. Controlled-release fertilizers (CRF) may improve the effectiveness of fertilization relative to that of immediately available fertilizers (IAF) because CRF gradually release nutrients directly to the root zone, thereby limiting nutrient losses. Despite past research in boreal and temperate landscapes, few studies have tested the efficacy of similar applications in tropical systems where year-round high temperatures can increase release rates of CRF and intensity of competing vegetation. On two contrasting sites on the Island of Hawaii, USA, we evaluated early growth and survival responses of koa (Acacia koa Gray), a fast-growing legume, using ten treatments: a control, four IAF formulations, and five rates of polymer-coated CRF (15N-9P-12K; 15-75 g). At Pahala, a productive site, we detected no significant growth, survival, or foliar nitrogen (N) or phosphorous (P) responses to the fertilizer treatments. At Volcano, a rockier and cooler site on younger soil, height increased by 36-49% for the highest performing CRF and IAF relative to the control; diameter likewise increased by 55-92%. Growth responses appeared to be a result of P fertilization rather than N. The highest performing IAF had a reduced survival rate relative to the lowest CRF (46% vs. 83%). Although total nutrient application rates were much lower for CRF, our results suggest that on tropical restoration sites, CRF may promote seedling performance at least equally to that of IAF. There is a need to more carefully evaluate the effects of site-specific interactions that may determine field fertilizer responses, across a range of genera and functional groups. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Forest soils serve as the greatest sink of terrestrial carbon (C) and have a significant impact on worldwide or regional C cycling. By reducing emissions and enhancing the C storage in forests, the environmental monitoring function of a forest ecosystem may be ensured. The study focused on measuring the densities of major nutrients in soil to gain insight into the C and nitrogen dynamics of the Himalayan sub-tropical forest ecosystem of India besides supplementing the information about the C storage potential of these forest soils. The study examined the physico-chemical properties and nutrient densities across three altitudinal ranges viz., 600–800 m (A1), 800–1000 m (A2) and 1000–1200 m (A3) and two aspects, i.e. Northern (N) and Southern (S) in a randomized complete block design and data collection was done from 24 main sample plots (3 altitudinal ranges × 2 aspects × 4 replications). The soil pH, electrical conductivity, and bulk density observed a decreasing pattern with an increase in altitude, whereas a reverse trend was observed in soil organic C (SOC), total nitrogen and available phosphorus. The SOC and total nitrogen densities ranged from 20.08 to 48.35 Mg ha−1 and 2.56 to 4.01 Mg ha−1, respectively in an increasing trend from A1 to A3. The northern aspect exhibited significantly higher SOC and nitrogen densities than the southern aspects. The C storage potential of forest soils followed the order A1 < A2 < A3 with significantly higher potential (nearly 1.5 times) compared to those on the southern aspect. There was a consistently significant increase in the C:N ratio (CNR) with a maximum value (10.51) at A3 and minimum value (8.37) at A1, however the effect of aspect remained insignificant. This research underscores the importance of considering altitude and aspect when planning forest restoration efforts, as these factors have a substantial influence on soil properties, C storage potential and CNR. Understanding the significance of CNR is critical, as it serves as a key indicator of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from forest soils. Ultimately, these findings empower policymakers and conservationists to make informed decisions that can contribute to the sustainable management of Himalayan forests and the global fight against climate change. © 2024, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
The concept of “naturalness” can be associated with conservation status, resilience, and biodiversity. Its most common definition relates to the degree to which a resource is similar to its original state. Hence, we developed a naturalness assessment method for the Brazilian Araucaria forest. We used data collected within 145 systematically distributed plots over an area of ~56 000 km2. We selected five indicators to compose a unified naturalness index: (i) evidence of human activities inside the forest stand; (ii) abundance of naturalness-indicator species; (iii) standard deviation of diameter at breast height (Sdbh); (iv) species diversity of the understory–natural regeneration layer; and (v) forest stand landscape metrics. We then calculated the Euclidean distance between the vector generated from the indicators of an ordinary forest stand and the vector generated from a theoretical reference forest (TRF) with maximum naturalness. The reduced Sdbh reflected the stands’ diminished structural diversity as result of historical logging and other ongoing human activities. Most stands presented average naturalness compared with the TRF. Besides the lack of data on undisturbed forests to thoroughly evaluate the naturalness index, evidence suggested that it summarized relevant forest attributes to the extent that protected areas presented greater naturalness than nonprotected areas. © 2020, Canadian Science Publishing. All rights reserved.
Background: Hyptis suaveolens (L.) Poit., native to the American tropics, is a pantropical annual plant and a major invasive species throughout India. It was anticipated that the availability of sunlight, coupled with its superior reproductive potential, persistent propagule bank, and dispersal ability, could lead to an increase in the growth and spread of this invader, thus potentially impeding herbaceous growth and diversity in non-native areas. Clarifying its ecological fitness and competitive performance will be useful to manage the spread of H. suaveolens in natural ecosystems that are facing a wide range of anthropogenic pressures. Methods: The present study is a three-tier experiment. In the first tier, a field study was conducted to assess the patterns of H. suaveolens abundance and herbaceous species diversity in response to light availability (sun, 842–1072 µmol m–2 s−1 and shade 253–341 µmol m–2 s−1) in the tropical dry deciduous ecosystems in the Vindhyan highlands, India. Furthermore, the impact of H. suaveolens abundance on the resident native and non-native species abundance and diversity was also studied. In the second tier, a randomized common garden experiment was conducted to understand the trait fitness of H. suaveolens in sun (940 µmol m–2 s−1) and shade (300 µmol m–2 s−1) conditions. In the third tier, a plant growth chamber experiment with high-light (940 µmol m–2 s−1) and low-light (300 µmol m–2 s−1) treatments was done to learn how H. suaveolens partitions its biomass between aboveground and belowground plant parts. Results: The field study indicated that the sunlit areas had a higher abundance of H. suaveolens and a lower diversity of resident herbaceous species than the shaded areas. The common garden experiment showed that sun-dwelling H. suaveolens individuals performed better in germinative, vegetative, eco-physiological, and reproductive traits than the shade-dwelling individuals. The growth chamber experiment exhibited that plants grown in high-light environment had greater seed germination, seedling recruitment, and aboveground biomass than those grown in low-light environment, whereas plants grown in low-light environment exhibited a higher root mass ratio than the high-light individuals. These results suggest that H. suaveolens individuals mask the understory vegetation owing to higher seedling recruitment, relative growth rate, photosynthetic performance, resource acquisition-allocation, and reproductive output in response to high-light conditions. Conclusions: The study concludes that light significantly controls the invasive population dynamics of H. suaveolens in dry deciduous forests. In high-light areas, H. suaveolens populations dominate the forest understory with suboptimal shade tolerance. In shade environment, H. suaveolens maintains a persistent soil seed bank along with ‘Oskar individuals’ that become active in response to high-light availability. The modus operandi is a ‘sit and wait’ strategy. The current study provides insights on prioritizing areas for H. suaveolens management that will potentially reduce the risk of biological invasions on the native species diversity of tropical regions. © The Author(s) 2024.
As part of a larger study evaluating several silvicultural techniques for restoring tropical moist forests on abandoned agricultural lands in southeastern Brazil, direct seeding with five early-successional Atlantic forest species was tested at three degraded sites, characterized by different soil types and land-use histories, within the Environmental Protection Area at Botucatu, SP. The species used in this study were Chorisia speciosa, Croton floribundus, Enterolobium contorstisiliquum, Mimosa scabrella, and Schizolobium parahyba. Scarified seeds of each of these species were sown in prepared seed spots in replicated, 0.25 ha mixed-species plots at an initial espacement of 1 m×1 m at each site. Of the five species planted, only two, Enterolobium and Schizolobium, showed good seed germination, seedling survival, and early growth rates, averaging 4.1-4.6 cm stem diameter and 1.5-1.7 m height growth during the first 2 years after sowing. These two species constituted 88-100% of the total stand density, which ranged from 1050 to 1790 stems ha-1 at 2 years. Despite the poor performance of the other species tested, we observed that the natural regeneration of native forest species originating from remnant forests in the general vicinity of our study sites was significantly greater within the direct-seeded plots than in unplanted control plots that were protected from fire and other disturbances.
Tropical deforestation has emerged as one of the most important conservation challenges of our time, both because of the high species diversity and rates of endemism of tropical forests, and because of the rapid rate at which this process is proceeding. Recent studies indicate that areas of low-intensity agroforestry have similar levels of vertebrate diversity as some primary habitats, leading some researchers and conservationists to conclude that this type of commodity production could contribute to the conservation of biodiversity. We compared the composition of bird, mammal and herpetofaunal communities in primary forest, secondary forest, and pasture-and within the allspice productive systems that have replaced pasture. We found that mammal species richness was higher in primary forest than all other habitats; however for resident and migrant birds, amphibians and reptiles, species richness was similar between primary forest and the other habitats. Despite similarities in overall numbers of species, there were numerous species that were encountered only in primary habitats. We conclude that the cultivation of allspice in a mixed productive system can offset some of the losses to biodiversity; however it should be complemented by the establishment and maintenance of protected areas to accommodate populations of primary forest specialists that are unable to persist in altered habitats. © 2006 Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
Forest dynamic models predict the current and future states of ecosystems and are a nexus between physiological processes and empirical data, forest plot inventories and remote-sensing information. The problem of biodiversity representation in these models has long been an impediment to a detailed understanding of ecosystem processes. This challenge is amplified in species-rich and high-carbon tropical forests. Here we describe an individual-based and spatially explicit forest growth simulator, TROLL, that integrates recent advances in plant physiology. Processes (carbon assimilation, allocation, reproduction, and mortality) are linked to species-specific functional traits, and the model was parameterized for an Amazonian tropical rainforest. We simulated a forest regeneration experiment from bare soil, and we validated it against observations at our sites. Simulated forest regeneration compared well with observations for stem densities, gross primary productivity, aboveground biomass, and floristic composition. After 500 years of regrowth, the simulated forest displayed structural characteristics similar to observations (e.g., leaf area index and trunk diameter distribution). We then assessed the model's sensitivity to a number of key model parameters: light extinction coefficient and carbon quantum yield, and to a lesser extent mortality rate, and carbon allocation, all influenced ecosystem features. To illustrate the potential of the approach, we tested whether variation in species richness and composition influenced ecosystem properties. Overall, species richness had a positive effect on ecosystem processes, but this effect was controlled by the identity of species rather by richness per se. Also, functional trait community means had a stronger effect than functional diversity on ecosystem processes. TROLL should be applicable to many tropical forests sites, and data requirement is tailored to ongoing trait collection efforts. Such a model should foster the dialogue between ecology and the vegetation modeling community, help improve the predictive power of models, and eventually better inform policy choices. © 2017 by the Ecological Society of America
Forest degradation is broadly defined as a reduction in the capacity of a forest to produce ecosystem services such as carbon storage and wood products as a result of anthropogenic and environmental changes. The main causes of degradation include unsustainable logging, agriculture, invasive species, fire, fuelwood gathering, and livestock grazing. Forest degradation is widespread and has become an important consideration in global policy processes that deal with biodiversity, climate change, and forest management. There is, however, no generally recognized way to identify a degraded forest because perceptions of forest degradation vary depending on the cause, the particular goods or services of interest, and the temporal and spatial scales considered. Here, we suggest that there are types of forest degradation that produce a continuum of decline in provision of ecosystem services, from those in primary forests through various forms of managed forests to deforestation. Forest degradation must be measured against a desired baseline condition, and the types of degradation can be represented using five criteria that relate to the drivers of degradation, loss of ecosystem services and sustainable management, including: productivity, biodiversity, unusual disturbances, protective functions, and carbon storage. These criteria are not meant to be equivalent and some might be considered more important than others, depending on the local forest management objectives. We propose a minimum subset of seven indicators for the five criteria that should be assessed to determine forest degradation under a sustainable ecosystem management regime. The indicators can be remotely sensed (although improving calibration requires ground work) and aggregated from stand to management unit or landscape levels and ultimately to sub-national and national scales.
Forest restoration is a strategy to reverse forest loss and degradation. We overviewed deforestation in the period 1975-2018 in the Brazilian Amazon and the projects, techniques, and scientific publications conducted to recover forest in the area by 2019. We used GIS to assess forest loss and a systematic data collection gathered from 12 universities, five major environmental agencies, and an ad-hoc bibliographic survey that rendered information from 405 restoration projects and 152 published studies. The Brazilian Amazon has undergone an accelerated deforestation in the last 43 years, resulting in 20% (788,353 km(2)) of its territory deforested by 2018. Deforestation rate was 27,033 km(2) yr(-1) between 1975 and 1987 and 14,542 km(2) yr(-1) between 1988 and 2018 (1.97% yr(-1) of forest loss between 1975 and 2018). In 2018, 41 Amazonian municipalities were classified as priority areas for monitoring and control deforestation and 21 additional municipalities were deemed as areas with controlled deforestation. Our survey identified 405 projects of forest restoration in 191 municipalities between 1950 and 2017. The majority (229) of these projects used seedling planting as the main forest restoration technique. Forest restoration projects based upon agroforestry systems (144), assisted natural regeneration (27), and natural regeneration (5) were also identified. Despite a considerable number of projects and publications, the region still lacks scientific studies that reinforce the choice of best practices for forest restoration, and the information currently available is not enough to quantify what has already been recovered or the potential area to be restored.
Habitat destruction and land use change are major causes of biodiversity erosion on Earth, especially in tropical regions. Monitoring studies or even surveys of species and community diversity in changing landscapes or disturbed areas require an assessment of the land cover changes over time. Here, we present a method combining remote sensing and structural equation models (SEM) to describe and analyse landscape dynamics. We focus on the mount Oku as an example, which is a mountain area located in north-west Cameroon. This site hosts the largest remaining tract of Central African cloud forest, a biodiversity hotspot threatened by contemporary land-use changes. Our aim is to characterize land cover changes over the last three decades and to quantify and elucidate the causes of deforestation and forest fragmentation. For this purpose, we integrate several Landsat satellite images taken between 1978 and 2007 in a Geographic Information System (GIS), and compare changes in land-use types. We assess forest fragmentation over this period by comparing the number, the area and the perimeter of forest fragments, and derive a forest fragmentation index. Finally, we quantify the respective effects of natural (altitude, slope) and human (human density, distance to villages) factors on deforestation using SEM. We evidence two periods in the dynamics of the cloud forest cover: a period of intense deforestation (1978-2001), followed by a period of re-afforestation (2001-2007). The forest cover lost 62.1% of its area (12,060 ha) between 1978 and 2001, corresponding to an averaged deforestation rate of 579 ha.yr-1. Deforested areas were mainly converted into crop lands (+75.6% between 1978 and 1988), under the pressure of an increasing human density, which was multiplied by 20 between 1921 and 2005 and doubled during the last 18 years. After 2001, the forest cover stabilized with the appearance of numerous small fragments of secondary forest, reflecting the success of the local biodiversity protection programs. Despite this recent progression of the forest cover, the proportion of ancient forest has continuously decreased from 1978 to 2007, indicating that deforestation is still ongoing. In 2007, the forest cover was a mosaic composed of 66% of recent secondary forests (i.e. forests appeared after 1978) and only 34% of ancient forests (i.e. present before 1978). Between 1978 and 2007, the number of forest fragments increased from 2627 to 5183, their average area decreased from 7.4 to 1.8 ha, and perimeter from 912 to 446 m, and the forest fragmentation index increased by 285.7%. Deforestation started from lower altitudes (<2300 m, before 1988) and progressed towards higher altitudes (2100-2900 m) between 1988 and 2001. SEM showed that altitude and slope had a significant negative effect on human density, explaining why the deforestation has been low on steep slopes and/or at higher altitudes. Our study reveals that the last fragments of the primary cloud forest of mount Oku could be definitively lost in the next decades. As tropical primary forests are irreplaceable ecosystems that host numerous endemic species, we recommend (1) to urgently protect the last remnants of ancient forest for their biological value; clear-cuts, grazing in forest interior and fires should be excluded from these areas, and (2) to extend secondary forests around ancient forest fragments so that they can act as a protective buffer and be managed as community forests and used for hunting and logging activities. Copyright © 2012 Société botanique de France.
The change in the tropical forests could be clearly linked to the expansion of the human population and economies. An understanding of the anthropogenic forcing plays an important role in analyzing the impacts of climate change and the fate of tropical forests in the present and future scenario. In the present study, we analyze the impact of natural and anthropogenic factors in forest dynamics in Katerniaghat wildlife sanctuary situated along. the Indo-Nepal border in Uttar Pradesh state, India. The study site is under tremendous pressure due to anthropogenic factors from surrounding areas since last three decades. The vegetation cover of the sanctuary primarily comprised of Shorea robusta forests, Tectona grandis plantation, and mixed deciduous forest; while the land cover comprised of agriculture, barren land, and water bodies. The classification accuracy was 83.5%, 91.5%, and 95.2% with MSS, IKONOS, and Quickbird datasets, respectively. Shorea robusta forests showed an increase of 16 km(2); while Tectona grandis increased by 63.01 km(2) during 1975-2010. The spatial heterogeneity in these tropical vegetation classes surrounded by the human dominated agricultural lands could not be addressed using Landsat MSS data due to coarse spatial resolution; whereas the IKONOS and Quickbird satellite datasets proved to advantageous, thus being able to precisely address the variations within the vegetation classes as well as in the land cover classes and along the edge areas. Massive deforestation during 1970s along the adjoining international boundary with Nepal has led to destruction of the wildlife corridor and has exposed the wildlife sanctuary to interference like grazing and poaching. Higher rates of forest dynamics during the 25-year period indicate the vulnerability of the ecosystem to the natural and anthropogenic disturbances in the proximity of the sanctuary.
Land cover patterns in sub-Saharan Africa are rapidly changing. This study aims to quantify the land cover change and to identify its major determinants by using the Drivers, Pressures, State, Impact, Responses (DPSIR) framework in the Ethiopian Gozamin District over a period of 32 years (1986 to 2018). Satellite images of Landsat 5 (1986), Landsat 7 (2003), and Sentinel-2 (2018) and a supervised image classification methodology were used to assess the dynamics of land cover change. Land cover maps of the three dates, focus group discussions (FGDs), interviews, and farmers' lived experiences through a household survey were applied to identify the factors for changes based on the DPSIR framework. Results of the investigations revealed that during the last three decades the study area has undergone an extensive land cover change, primarily a shift from cropland and grassland into forests and built-up areas. Thus, quantitative land cover change detection between 1986 and 2018 revealed that cropland, grassland, and bare areas declined by 10.53%, 5.7%, and 2.49%. Forest, built-up, shrub/scattered vegetation, and water bodies expanded by 13.47%, 4.02%, 0.98%, and 0.25%. Household surveys and focus group discussions (FGDs) identified the population growth, the rural land tenure system, the overuse of land, the climate change, and the scarcity of grazing land as drivers of these land cover changes. Major impacts were rural to urban migration, population size change, scarcity of land, and decline in land productivity. The outputs from this study could be used to assure sustainability in resource utilization, proper land use planning, and proper decision-making by the concerned government authorities.
Previous research has shown that ancient Maya 'forest gardens'-tree-dominated home gardens containing a diversity of tree species used for daily household needs-still resonate in the species composition of the modern forest. Centuries of positive interspecies interactions may enhance the reproductive and survival success of garden species selected and encouraged by experienced Maya forest gardeners. We hypothesized that such interaction may result in aggregated spatial patterns between 32 pre-selected, commonly utilized forest garden species. In this paper, we developed a novel randomization (Monte Carlo) method designed to measure and test if the spatial relationships among pairs of Maya 'forest garden' trees species differ between areas that experienced high and low ancient settlement density in northwestern Belize. A total of 28 high ancient settlement density and 27 low ancient settlement density plots containing a total of 2772 and 3134 trees, respectively, were used for this study. The analysis revealed that 58 pairs of forest garden species tended to 'cluster' together significantly more often in the high settlement density areas than would be expected in a random distribution. In low settlement density plots, only 12 pairs of species exhibited a significant clustered spatial relationship. The effect was not species specific, suggesting that some synergistic relationships, mediated by third-party agents such as dispersers, may occur at the community level. The impacts of ancient human land use, echoing across centuries of dispersal, colonization, disturbance, and biotic and abiotic interactions, can have important implications for understanding the current biodiversity patterns and processes. Abstract in Spanish is available at © 2010 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2010 by The Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation.
Planting of native trees has been adopted in many tropical regions worldwide as a central forest restoration method, but little is known concerning the role that these planted species play in catalyzing forest regeneration beneath their canopies. We investigated the role of animal-dispersed tree species in catalyzing the regeneration of woody species in the understory of restoration plantings. We assessed both the density and richness of tree seedlings within plots located beneath the canopy of both animal-dispersed and abiotic-dispersed tree species planted in three riparian forest restoration sites with ages of five, six and eight years. The proportion of animal-dispersed tree seedlings increased with plantation age. The richness of animal-dispersed tree seedlings was higher beneath animal-dispersed trees in the eight-year-old planting. The density of animal-dispersed tree seedlings was higher under animal-dispersed trees when sites were analyzed altogether. The top three species in regeneration density beneath the canopy were animal-dispersed trees, and from the top ten, seven were animal-dispersed species. We suggest that animal-dispersed pioneer trees which facilitate natural regeneration and promote a high density and richness of woody species beneath their canopies should be considered as "framework" species for tropical forest restoration. © 2015 Associação Brasileira de Ciência Ecológica e Conservação.
Land-use change remains the main threat to tropical forests and their dependent fauna and flora, and degradation of existing forest remnants will further accelerate species loss. Forest degradation may result directly from human forest use or through spatial effects of land-use change. Understanding the drivers of forest degradation and its effects on biodiversity is pivotal for formulating impactful forest management and monitoring protocols, but such knowledge is lacking for many biodiversity hotspots, such as the Taita Hills in southeast Kenya. Here we first quantify effects of social factors (human activity and presence) at plot and landscape level, forest management (gazetted vs. non-gazetted) and spatial factors (fragment size and distance to forest edge) on the vegetation structure of indigenous Taita forest fragments. Next, we quantify effects of degraded vegetation structure on arthropod abundance and diversity. We show that human presence and activity at both the plot and landscape level explain variation in vegetation structure. We particularly provide evidence that despite a national ban on cutting of indigenous trees, poaching of pole-sized trees for subsistence use may be simplifying vegetation structure, with the strongest effects in edge-dominated, small forest fragments. Furthermore, we found support for a positive effect of vegetation structure on arthropod abundance, although the effect of daily maximum temperature and yearly variation was more pronounced. Maintenance of multi-layered forest vegetation in addition to reforestation maybe a key to conservation of the endangered and endemic fauna of the Taita Hills. © 2023, The Author(s).
The Amazon is one of the most important tropical forests in the world, providing important goods and services to society. However, these forests are threatened by land use change. Deforestation and forest degradation are the two drivers that significantly contribute to both carbon emissions to the atmosphere and loss of biodiversity. Although there are alternatives to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, there is still little research on methods for assessing and monitoring the relationship between these processes and biodiversity (REDD+), as well as the impacts generated by the socioecological system on the stability and recovery of ecosystem services. With this review, we aimed at (i) describing the relationship between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning; (ii) analyzing the possible synergistic impacts of biophysical and anthropogenic predictors of deforestation; and, consequently, (iii) proposing the integrated implementation of REDD+ strategies in the Amazon basin. To increase REDD+ efficiency in the Amazon, it is essential to simultaneously evaluate the socioecological and biophysical predictors that directly affect the current and future demands for ecosystem goods and services. Accordingly, it is important to estimate the magnitude of multifactorial effects of deforestation predictors for the integration of REDD+ actions. Such estimations should be made through the rehabilitation of degraded lands with successional and permanent agroforestry systems, as well as with the application of different restoration methods. © 2017, Universidad Austral de Chile. All rights reserved.
The açaí palm Euterpe oleracea Mart. in the Amazon river delta has seen rapid expansion to meet increased demand for its fruit. This has been achieved by transforming lowland forest habitats (floodplains) into simplified agroforests and intensive plantation in upland areas. As açaí palm makes an important contribution to the economy and food security of local communities, identifying management approaches that support biodiversity and ecosystem processes that underpin fruit production on açaí farms is essential. We compared flower-visitor communities and açaí fruit production in floodplain forests and upland plantations, across gradients of local management intensity (i.e. açaí density per ha) and surrounding forest cover. The relative contribution of biotic pollination and degree of pollen limitation were assessed using insect exclusion and hand-pollination experiments. We found that açaí flower visitors are highly diverse (c. 200 distinct taxa) and had variable responses to disturbance. Bee visitation was higher in floodplains and positively related to surrounding forest cover, but other flower visitors, including specialised curculionid beetles, were unresponsive to changes in surrounding forest cover. However, intensive management practices (i.e. high açaí palm densities) in floodplains and uplands had contrasting effects on flower-visitor communities, with flower-visitor richness being lower on intensively managed floodplain farms and ant densities being higher on intensive upland farms. Pollination experiments revealed açaí palm to be highly dependent on biotic pollination. Fruit set in open-pollinated inflorescences was positively related to flower-visitor richness and specialised curculionid beetle visitation, whereas the presence of ants on inflorescences had a negative effect. Synthesis and applications. Our study shows that pollinators are essential for açaí fruit production, but that intensive farming practices have eroded the relationship between surrounding forest cover and ecosystem function in floodplains (i.e. conversion of native forest into simplified agroforests) and increased the frequency of antagonistic interactions in uplands (e.g. high ant densities). These findings underline the value of extensive management practices, such as the maintenance of other tree species within farms and adjacent unmanaged forest patches, to ensure the long-term sustainability of açaí fruit production in the Amazon river delta. © 2018 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology © 2018 British Ecological Society
Anthropogenic disturbances, such as forest conversion, have a profound impact on species distributions and biodiversity in tropical forests. This study aimed to determine the diversity and distribution of bark and ambrosia beetles (Curculionidae: Scolytinae and Platypodinae) across three forest types: Primary Forest (PF), Disturbed Forest (DF), and Rubber Plantation (RP) in southern Sabah, Malaysia. We analyzed biweekly data obtained from ethanol-baited traps over three years, from April 2017 to May 2020, which included 7257 individuals from 154 species. The dominant species remained the same across all forest types. However, species composition was highly stochastic and unpredictable between forest types. The abundance and number of species were highest in RP but lowest in DF. Indigenous forest use in DF mostly for fuel likely reduced the resources for the beetles. Open canopy structure in RP probably increased the number of flying beetles. Although adjacent to PF, RP displayed a distinct species composition predominantly associated with rubber trees. These findings underscore the anthropogenic impact on beetle assemblages due to forest use and emphasize the need for sustainable forest management practices to prevent biodiversity loss and maintain ecosystem stability. © 2025 by the authors.
Key message: This study provides a mechanistic basis of the tolerance to light and water stress in two tropical tree species of the Malvaceae used for the reforestation in the tropics.G. ulmifoliais moresensitive to high irradiance thanC. speciosa. Thus,C. speciosais more appropriate for the reforestation of degraded areas with potential excess light or water deficit.; Abstract: Reforestation programs in tropics are necessary to mitigate the impacts of climate change, the preservation of biodiversity and for recovery of degraded areas. However, little is known about the abiotic stress tolerance of the major tropical tree species used in reforestation. This study was aimed at evaluating antioxidant defenses and photoprotective pigments against excess light and water deficit in Guazuma ulmifolia Lam. and Ceiba speciosa (A.St.-Hil) Ravenna. Plantlets of 6-month-old were exposed to progressive water deficit by withholding water under high and low irradiance growth conditions and then re-irrigated. G. ulmifolia leaves under high irradiance showed increased photo-oxidative damage, as indicated by a decreased Fv/Fm ratio and 5−12-fold increases in MDA levels, which correlated with a 14-fold increase in SOD activity, a 90 % decrease in POD activity and a 3−4-fold increases in hydrogen peroxide levels. Water deficit combined with high irradiance caused stronger chronic photoinhibition, indicating a synergistic effect that cannot be counterbalanced by antioxidant or photo-protective mechanisms. In contrast, to avoid photo-oxidative damage, C. speciosa enhanced SOD activity, maintained POD and CAT activities, and increased xanthophyll cycle pool size and DPS and β-carotene accumulation. These results indicate that G. ulmifolia is more sensitive to high irradiance than C. speciosa at early stages of development. Thus, C. speciosa is more appropriate for the reforestation of degraded areas with potential excess light or water deficit. In conclusion, this study provides a mechanistic basis of the tolerance abiotic stress in two tropical trees, thereby contributing for management strategies in reforestation projects. © 2014, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Sinaloa is among the states of Mexico harboring the highest deforestation rates. Reforestation programs have been put up in south Sinaloa with species chosen for their high seedling rates, structural importance or strong restoration value. However, species criteria such as level of endemism as well as rarity appear to be underestimated. Eight sampling sites were randomly selected and a botanical survey was carried out at least every month from 2015 to 2017. In order to rank species over conservation stakes, a Floristic Originality Index method was elaborated using species level of endemism, rarity and conservation status. The floristic inventory enabled the identification of a set of 250 species with the Fabaceae being the most represented family with 51 species. Using the Floristic Originality Index, a subset of 51 species was selected as priority for conservation along with 23 other species all displaying characteristics of “framework” species. Features of reproduction and types of ideal soil conditions for reforestation are presented for each species. The method developed to determine floristic originality has proven a set of most vulnerable and rare species to select “priority” and “framework” tree species able to restore forests structure and biodiversity as well as ecosystem functions. This evaluation is made from a conservation biology point of view and appears to be well adapted for studies at a local scale. © Francisco Amador-Cruz et al.
In production forests in the moist tropics, trees are selected for felling or retention primarily by species and size. Tree regeneration requirements and forest stand responses to harvesting are often ignored, and consequently, the regeneration of the residual forest is not ensured. We developed and tested an alternative approach to tree selection, where seed trees were retained as a proportion of harvestable trees, with the proportion defined as a function of species' ecological attributes and local abundance (100 ha), in contrast to the conventional approach which retained 10% of harvestable trees, uniformly across commercial species at the compartmental scale (1000 ha). The study was conducted in Democracia Project, a forest management operation in Amazonas, Brazil. The conventional approach failed to retain any seed trees at the 100 ha block scale for 7 of 37 commercial species, whereas the alternative approach retained a minimum number of seed trees per 100 ha block for all commercial species. The conventional approach resulted in the retention of relatively high proportions of potential seed trees for common species (e.g., 22% for Eperua oleifera and 36% for Maquira sclerophila) that are shade bearers and recruit readily at the site; alternately, for species with constraints to regeneration, it retained relatively low proportions (e.g., 2% for Dinizia excelsa and Hymenolobium nitidum). The alternative approach effectively retained lower proportions of common species (e.g., 10% for E. oleifera and 13% for M. sclerophila) and relatively high proportions of species with regeneration constraints (e.g., 20% for D. excelsa and 16% for H. nitidum). Our study demonstrates that it is feasible to implement at an operational scale, species-specific retention rules that take into account local abundance when inventory data are digitised and spatially explicit. Monitoring regeneration in the residual stands over time will provide the evidence to assess the ecological benefits of the adoption of our alternative approach. © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Tropical forest productivity is sustained by the cycling of nutrients through decomposing organic matter. Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi play a key role in the nutrition of tropical trees, yet there has been little experimental investigation into the role of AM fungi in nutrient cycling via decomposing organic material in tropical forests. We evaluated the responses of AM fungi in a long-term leaf litter addition and removal experiment in a tropical forest in Panama. We described AM fungal communities using 454-pyrosequencing, quantified the proportion of root length colonised by AM fungi using microscopy, and estimated AM fungal biomass using a lipid biomarker. AM fungal community composition was altered by litter removal but not litter addition. Root colonisation was substantially greater in the superficial organic layer compared with the mineral soil. Overall colonisation was lower in the litter removal treatment, which lacked an organic layer. There was no effect of litter manipulation on the concentration of the AM fungal lipid biomarker in the mineral soil. We hypothesise that reductions in organic matter brought about by litter removal may lead to AM fungi obtaining nutrients from recalcitrant organic or mineral sources in the soil, besides increasing fungal competition for progressively limited resources. © 2017 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2017 New Phytologist Trust
We evaluated the effects of different land-use systems on the ability of dung beetles to control the population of detritus-feeding flies. We tested the hypotheses that intensification of land use will reduce dung beetles richness, abundance and biomass and, consequently, their dung burial ability, affecting the interaction between dung beetles and flies and reducing its effectiveness as a natural biological control. In the Brazilian Amazon we sampled dung beetles, fly larvae and adults; and recorded the rate of dung removal by dung beetles across a gradient of land-use intensity from primary forest, secondary forest, agroforestry, agriculture to pasture. Our results provide evidence that land-use intensification results in a reduction of the richness, abundance and biomass of dung beetles, and this in turn results in lower rates of dung removal in the most simplified systems. We found no significant differences in the abundance of fly larvae between the different systems of land use. However, the number of adult flies differed significantly between land-use systems, presenting higher abundance in those sites with greater intensity of use (pasture and agriculture) and a lower abundance of adult flies in forested systems (primary and secondary forests, and agroforestry). Information-theoretic model selection based on AICc revealed strong support for the influence of land-use systems, dung removal rates and dung beetle abundance, biomass and richness on adult dung-fly abundance. Our results also reveal that dung beetles are not solely responsible for fly control and that other factors linked to land use are influencing the populations of these detritus-feeding insects.
Litterfall plays an important role in nutrient cycling and maintenance of soil fertility in terrestrial ecosystems. We gauged the effects of anthropogenic impacts on the production, decomposition and seasonality of litterfall in primary and secondary forests within a tropical landscape of the Brazilian Amazon. We hypothesized that leaf litter quantity and quality would differ in line with forest disturbance and that these changes would translate into dissimilar decomposition rates. If proved, these processes could be used as surrogates for indentifying the ecological status of forest habitats. The obtained results have shown that, in the study area litterfall is reduced and litter decomposition is braked in disturbed habitats when compared with primary and recovered secondary forests. Also, within similar climatic conditions, the litter production and decomposition rates begin to stabilize in mature secondary forests. Our results represent a useful contribution to understand the dynamics of the litterfall and litter decomposition processes in the neotropics. Both processes were correlated and sensitive to disturbance gradients and should used as forest recovery indicators in ecological monitoring and ecological restoration studies. © 2018 Elsevier B.V.
The Atlantic Forest (AF), an endangered biodiversity hotspot, requires vigilant monitoring of recent ecological restoration efforts. Taking advantage of Land Use Land Cover maps' capability to track changes in landscapes, this study investigates their potential in monitoring restoration sites in the AF. We used a large-scale dataset (6,796 polygons - totalling 164 km2) encompassing restoration polygons to validate the secondary forest maps of two internationally recognized LULC maps - MAPBIOMAS and JRC Tropical Moist Forest - in ecological restoration sites. Results reveal both maps usually failed in classifying restoration sites as forested lands. Additionally, mapping methodology and sensor spatial resolution limitations excluded half of the dataset's polygons, highlighting vulnerabilities of small-scale projects reliant on Landsat-like data. Addressing these challenges necessitates enhanced monitoring methods, involving the integration of higher-resolution data and the adoption of active remote sensing. These measures are crucial for advancing the precision of ecological restoration monitoring in tropical forests. © 2024 IEEE.
Biased and subjective choices of metrics to be used in ecological studies could lead researchers to reach misleading conclusions regarding patterns of biodiversity response to human disturbances. Nevertheless, little attention has been given to the choices of variables in the majority of studies published to date. Here, we used the literature concerning land use change effects on dung beetles to assess the extent to which variables commonly employed in ecological studies correspond to those deemed to be most important by researchers of the same studies. Specifically, we examined both biodiversity (response) and environmental (explanatory) metrics from a comprehensive literature review and compared their use with their relative importance, according to a survey of the authors of the studies. Our results highlight marked disparities between researchers opinion expressed in our survey and their choice of variables in published papers. We suggest that these disparities are due to the high costs of sampling and processing some variables, logistical constraints and different perceptions of importance amongst researchers. We highlight the importance of these issues for our understanding of the biodiversity consequences of land use change, and highlight some recommendations for alleviating this issue. (C) 2017 Gesellschaft fur Okologie. Published by Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
Arthropods are the most diverse and abundant group of animals found in tropical lowland forests, and in light of ongoing global change phenomena, it is essential to better understand their responses to anthropogenic disturbances. Here we present a review of arthropod responses to forest deforestation and fragmentation based on studies conducted at the Biological Dynamics of Forest Fragments Project (BDFFP), located in central Amazonia. These studies involved a wide range of arthropod groups. All but one of the studies evaluated changes in total species number or species density in relation to fragment size, (i.e. area effects), and one-third also evaluated edge effects. Our review indicates that almost every arthropod group studied showed some kind of response to reduction in forest area, including altered abundances, species richness or composition in comparisons of different-sized fragments, fragmented and non-fragmented areas, or comparisons of forest edges and forest interiors. These responses tended to be idiosyncratic, with some groups showing predicted declines in abundance or diversity in the fragments while others show no response or even increases. However, some of the observed effects on arthropods, or on the ecological processes in which they are involved, were transient. The most likely explanation for this was the rapid development of secondary growth around fragments, which greatly increased the connectivity between fragments and the remaining forest. Although the BDFFP has provided many insights regarding the effects of forest fragmentation on arthropod assemblages, many diverse groups, such as canopy arthropods, have received scant attention. For those that have been studied, much remains to be learned regarding the long-term dynamics of these assemblages and how landscape context influences local biodiversity. The BDFFP remains an exceptional site in which to investigate how the ecological interactions in which arthropods are engaged are altered in fragmented landscapes. © 2012 Sociedade Brasileira de Zoologia.
Artificial roosts have been proposed as a tool for augmenting bat populations and catalyzing tropical forest regeneration. In the best case scenario, roosts would attract seed-carrying bats (Family Phyllostomidae) into degraded pastures and form nucleating patches of native vegetation. We tested this scenario by monitoring 48 artificial roosts in pastures and adjacent forest fragments in southern Costa Rica over 2. years. Half of the pasture roosts were exposed to direct sunlight and half were affixed to 4-m living stakes of Erythrina poeppigiana (Walp.) O.F. Cook that provided shade. After 2. years, 94% of roosts in forest and 40% of roosts in pasture had been used by bats at least once - primarily for nocturnal feeding. Maximum daily temperature inside of roosts was the best microclimatic predictor of bat visitation. We identified at least five species of bats that visited roosts, including two frugivores (Carollia and Glossophaga spp.). Bat-mediated seed dispersal increased with the number of frugivorous bat detections at roosts, but seedling recruitment did not increase with either bat detections or seed abundance over a 2-year period. Given that bats rarely used roosts in pastures, and bat visitation did not increase seedling recruitment, our data suggest that artificial bat roosts did not accelerate forest regeneration in abandoned, premontane pastures in southern Costa Rica. This method could be refined by investigating alternative roost designs, barriers to seedling recruitment below roosts, improvement of roost microclimatic conditions in pastures, and ability of bats to detect roosts in different habitats. © 2013 Elsevier Ltd.
Summary: Currently, tropical forests are transformed into pasture and agricultural areas at an unprecedented rate, yet converted areas are often abandoned by farmers because depleting soil fertility renders unprofitable any agricultural land use. Natural succession of abandoned land could counter the loss of biodiversity, but the rate of natural reforestation is slow. Neotropical frugivorous bats facilitate natural succession because they seem to tolerate habitat disturbance when dispersing seeds of pioneer plants. Under naturally dark conditions, bats produce a copious seed rain even in deforested habitats and connect distant forest fragments. Yet, artificial light at night may compromise bat-mediated seed dispersal if bats avoid lit areas. This may delay or jeopardize natural forest succession in fragmented tropical landscapes. We asked whether the foraging behaviour of Sowell's short-tailed bats Carollia sowelli, a specialist on infructescences of pepper plants (Piperaceae), is negatively affected by artificial light at night. First, in a dual choice experiment with captive bats, we demonstrate that food was less often explored and consumed in the dimly illuminated than in the dark compartment, indicating that artificial light alters the foraging behaviour of fruit-eating bats. Secondly, using observations in free-ranging bats, we found that infructescences were less likely to be harvested when plants were illuminated by a street lamp than under natural darkness. Synthesis and applications. Natural succession of deforested areas and connectivity of remaining forest patches may suffer due to artificial light at night through a reduction in nocturnal seed disperser activity in lit areas. This could have negative impacts on biodiversity and consequent effects on land erosion, particularly in developing countries of the tropics where light pollution increases rapidly with growing economies and human populations. Mitigation requires that the use of artificial light should be limited in space, time and intensity to the minimum necessary. The effectiveness of 'darkness corridors' to enhance fragment connectivity and to reduce species loss should be evaluated. Policy-makers of tropical countries should become aware of the potential detrimental effects of artificial lighting on wildlife and ecosystem functioning. © 2014 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology © 2014 British Ecological Society.
There is an increasing urgency to implement large-scale ecosystem restoration to mitigate the biodiversity and climate crises. These efforts must be scaled up to counteract the widespread degradation of the world's forests, although restoration costs can often limit their application. Thus, there is a pressing need to identify cost-effective approaches that catalyze landscape-scale ecological recovery. Here, we highlight seven assisted restoration innovations with demonstrated local-scale results that, once upscaled, hold promise to rapidly regenerate forests. We comprehensively assessed how each approach facilitated forest, woodland, and/or mangrove recovery across 143 studies. Our results reveal techniques with a marked ability to catalyze vegetation recovery compared to "business-as-usual"approaches. However, the context-dependent costbenefit ratio and feasibility of applying particular approaches requires careful consideration. Our assessment emphasizes that we already have many of the tools necessary to drive the terrestrial restoration movement forward. It is time to implement and assess their efficacy at scale.
Tropical dry forests, with their distinct and economically important diversity, are acknowledged conservation priorities because of alarming rates of forest conversion. Whilst it is realised that terrestrial conservation requires an understanding of landscape level patterns of diversity, forests are rarely assessed accordingly. Here we demonstrate that, in the case of the seasonally dry tropical forests of the Pacific watershed of Mesoamerica, landscape level assessment of woody diversity can inform decision making relevant to both between-landscape and within-landscape prioritisation. We report floristic surveys of dry forest landscapes in Oaxaca, Mexico and southern Honduras. It is noted that these forests are floristically similar to other seasonally dry tropical forests in the neotropics. By calculation of Genetic Heat Indices, a relative measure of the concentration of restricted range species in a sample, we determine that the conservation of the tree diversity of the coastal lowlands of Oaxaca should be prioritised over that of southern Honduras. The current conservation status of forested areas in Oaxaca is briefly described. We suggest that the greater degree of anthropogenic disturbance in southern Honduras may explain the relative lack of restricted range species there. We argue that some forest fallows can act as analogues of mature forest and therefore landscape elements other than mature forest need to be included in forest conservation assessments. We conclude that diversity sampling of any forest type should not be limited to mature forests, but extended to other elements of forested landscapes. © 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Development of effective, long-term plans to conserve and manage biodiversity requires an understanding of the distribution, diversity, and abundance of species in both protected and unprotected areas. More than ever, due to extensive fragmentation and other anthropogenic effects, forest fragments in unprotected areas must serve a dual function: providing a sustainable source of timber and nontimber products and providing essential intact forest habitat for biodiversity conservation within the landscape matrix. According to the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) [1], sustainable forest management is a land use with similar goals to those that focus on biodiversity conservation principles. However, factors such as the initial structure of the forest and the scale and intensity of the logging operations [2], not to mention the short-and long-term effects of postharvesting [3], are important when forest management and biodiversity conservation goals converge. Therefore, monitoring of natural forest areas subject to forest management (selective logging) is necessary in order to assess forest recovery processes after disturbance. © 2008 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
Forest utilization makes a significant economic contribution to the livelihoods of rural households, especially those living in developing countries. This study was conducted to determine the absolute and relative forest income and measure the distributional impact of forest income on economic inequalities among rural households in the Rubi-Tele Hunting Domain (RTHD), Democratic Republic of the Congo (DR Congo). Household socioeconomic data and other qualitative informations were collected using structured household-level surveys, focus group discussions, and key informant interviews. The study used descriptive statistical analysis, Gini coefficient, and Lorenz curve computation. Additionally, the non-parametric alternative Kruskal-Wallis Test was also used. Findings revealed that 89.76% of the households' sample were involved in forest-based activities. The annual average income from these forest-based activities was estimated at CDF 1,219,951.58 (USD 659.08) per household, contributing 32.46% to total annual household income. Other income sources share constituted 37.09%, 10.04%, 8.30%, 7.63%, 2.41%, and 2.08% from crop, livestock keeping, business activities, fishing, and non-forest environmental activities, paid employment, and other income sources, respectively. There was a significant difference between annual household income in terms of income sources (p < 0.5). Forest income constituted the second most crucial income portfolio after crop income. Bushmeat income share was higher than other forest products income share. However, the proportion of households involved in firewood extraction was substantial (80.70%). Gini coefficient and Lorenz curve analysis proved that forest income helped reduce economic inequality among the sampled households by 11%. Therefore, reducing access to forest would significantly impact rural households' welfare and could increase income disparities. The present study provides valuable information for developing sustainable forest management policies and strategies to maintain and enhance the economic benefit of forest use without damaging biodiversity conservation.
Land use zoning has been proposed as an instrument to steer sustainable land use and reduce deforestation. Its effectiveness is a growing concern among researchers and decision makers. Nowadays, the dry forests of the Argentine Chaco are a global hotspot of deforestation, where a zoning policy has been established through the enactment of a National Forest Law. The law imposed on the provinces the obligation to define land use zones in their native forests. Ten years after the enforcement of the National Forest Law, we assessed the effectiveness of the zoning policy of Santiago del Estero, one of Argentina's provinces with higher deforestation rates. For this, we combined the provincial forest zoning with the extent of forest cover and a plot level land transformation geodatabase. The deforested area halved during the five-year period after the enactment of the law, decreasing from 910 10(3) ha in 2003-2008 (i.e. before the law) to 450 10(3) ha in 2009-2014. Most of this forest cover loss (257 10(3) ha) occurred in areas classified under categories where deforestation was forbidden. After the enactment of the Law, annual deforestation rates decreased mostly in areas that allowed deforestation, slightly decreased in areas where deforestation was forbidden and increased in areas where a certain level of deforestation was allowed, although above that level. Despite the reductions in deforestation rates, our results suggest that the zoning policy in Santiago del Estero was not effective enough, since deforestation occurred in forbidden areas and generally surpassed the level of deforestation permitted. Alternative coercive mechanisms (e.g. more severe penalties for offenders) and greater efforts to detect illegal clearings are needed to enhance the effectiveness of the Forest Law.
The deterioration of soil and water resources resulting from tropical rainforest (TR) conversion to monoculture plantations (e.g., rubber monoculture; RM) could be restrained and restored through intercropping. However, the response of soil properties and forest water conservation function to forest conversion, i.e., the conversion of RM to rubber rainforest (RR: derived from the invasion of wild native plants in abandoned RM), is still unclear. We involved four forests types, TR, RM, rubber-tea agroforestry (RTA), and RR, as transitional steps of forest conversion through a space-for-time substitution approach to examine the dynamic of soil physical, hydrological and chemical properties during the forest conversion (from TR to RM, RM to RTA, RTA to RR, and retransformation into TR). The results show that SOC, TN, TP, and TK decreased in the order of TR > RR > RTA > RM, which was followed by the trend of soil hydrological and physical properties among these forest types. The interrelation between soil physical and chemical properties was mediated by water flow behaviours. High macroporosity and related low Ks in TR favoured the occurrence of water flow behaviours. Water flow behaviours not only influenced the distribution of soil chemical elements but also played a crucial role in forming appropriate conditions for nutrient turnover. The co-occurrence of preferential and matrix flow was more prevalent in the rainy season than dry season due to the higher frequency and higher amount of rainwater. The preferential flow promoted the soil water flow in the water flow paths and enhanced water storage in the soil pores. In short, the soil properties and soil water supply decreased in the following order: TR > RR > RTA > RM, suggesting that the severe soil degradation that occurred after TR conversion to RM can be restored back to the extent of TR after a period of succession. The results provided new insights for understanding the forest water conservation function and soil properties in response to forest conversion and highlighted that the RR appeared as a transitional stage during the course of forest restoration from RM to TR under low rubber demand. These findings improve the current knowledge of the relationship among soil physical, hydrological and chemical properties in the rubber-growing humid tropical region of Southeast Asia. © 2023 The Author(s)
Worldwide, land use change is largely promoting intense biodiversity loss in many ecosystems, and Mexico is no exception to this. The information on how such changes have affected community structure, composition, and different components of plant biodiversity in Mexican tropical montane forests is scarce. This study aimed to assess how land use changes have affected: ecological diversity, taxonomic distinctness, and functional diversity, in Mexican montane cloud forests. We measured species composition and abundance in 10 × 10 m plots placed in different land use/land cover types, with increasing disturbance levels: preserved forest, regeneration forest, transition forest, coffee plantation, and pastureland. We quantified plant ecological diversity through Hill’s true diversity values, taxonomic diversity with the taxonomic distinctness index, and functional diversity through functional richness and Rao’s functional diversity index. We found that species composition varied with land use change. Furthermore, ecological diversity, taxonomic distinctness and functional diversity were lower in the disturbed sites (coffee plantations and pastureland) than in the more conserved forests. Soil type, rockiness, elevation, and disturbance intensity were major factors influencing plant communities’ different dimensions of diversity. Analyzing different components of biodiversity was a useful approach to understand current and possible future responses of tropical montane forests to changes in land use. Our results highlight the relevance of conserving and restoring these forests. Long-term conservation actions would need stopping intensive and extensive logging, reducing forest transformation, and promoting habitat heterogeneity that hosts different levels of diversity. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2024.
Epiphytes, air plants that are structurally dependent on trees, are a keystone group in tropical forests; they support the food and habitat needs of animals and influence water and nutrient cycles. They reach peak diversity in humid montane forests. Climate predictions for Central American mountains include increased temperatures, altered precipitation seasonality, and increased cloud base heights, all of which may challenge epiphytes. Although remaining montane forests are highly fragmented, many tropical agricultural systems include trees that host epiphytes, allowing epiphyte communities to persist even in landscapes with lower forest connectivity. I used structural equations models to test the relative effects of climate, land use, tree characteristics, and biotic interactions on vascular epiphyte diversity with data from 31 shade coffee farms and 2 protected forests in northern Nicaragua. I also tested substrate preferences of common species with randomization tests. Tree size, tree diversity, and climate all affected epiphyte richness, but the effect of climate was almost entirely mediated by bryophyte cover. Bryophytes showed strong sensitivity to mean annual temperature and insolation. Many ferns and some orchids were positively associated with bryophyte mats, whereas bromeliads tended to establish among lichen or on bare bark. The tight relationships between bryophytes and climate and between bryophytes and vascular epiphytes indicated that relatively small climate changes could result in rapid, cascading losses of montane epiphyte communities. Currently, shade coffee farms can support high bryophyte cover and diverse vascular epiphyte assemblages when larger, older trees are present. Agroforests serve as valuable reservoirs for epiphyte biodiversity and may be important early-warning systems as the climate changes. © 2020 Society for Conservation Biology
Increasing anthropogenic pressure leads to loss of habitat through deforestation and degradation in tropical forests. While deforestation can be monitored relatively easily, forest management practices are often subtle processes, that are difficult to capture with for example satellite monitoring. Conventional measurements are well established and can be useful for management decisions, but it is believed that Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS) has a role in quantitative monitoring and continuous improvement of methods. In this study we used a combination of TLS and conventional forest inventory measures to estimate forest structural parameters in four different forest types in a tropical montane cloud forest in Kafa, Ethiopia. Here, the four forest types (intact forest, coffee forest, silvopasture, and plantations) are a result of specific management practices (e.g. clearance of understory in coffee forest), and not different forest communities or tree types. Both conventional and TLS derived parameters confirmed our assumptions that intact forest had the highest biomass, silvopasture had the largest canopy gaps, and plantations had the lowest canopy openness. Contrary to our expectations, coffee forest had higher canopy openness and similar biomass as silvopasture, indicating a significant loss of forest structure. The 3D vegetation structure (PAVD - Plant area vegetation density) was different between the forest types with the highest PAVD in intact forest and plantation canopy. Silvopasture was characterised by a low canopy but high understorey PAVD, indicating regeneration of the vegetation and infrequent fuelwood collection and/or non-intensive grazing. Coffee forest canopy had low PAVD, indicating that many trees had been removed, despite coffee needing canopy shade. These findings may advocate for more tangible criteria such as canopy openness thresholds in sustainable coffee certification schemes. TLS as tool for monitoring forest structure in plots with different forest types shows potential as it can capture the 3D position of the vegetation volume and open spaces at all heights in the forest. To quantify changes in different forest types, consistent monitoring of 3D structure is needed and here TB is an add-on or an alternative to conventional forest structure monitoring. However, for the tropics, TLS-based automated segmentation of trees to derive DBH and biomass is not widely operational yet, nor is species richness determination in forest monitoring. Integration of data sources is needed to fully understand forest structural diversity and implications of forest management practices on different forest types.
Secondary forests constitute a growing portion of forested areas worldwide. They might have a substantial role for the conservation of biodiversity in tropical areas, but there is little information on their potential to support forest species and the recovery of faunal communities. We studied two forest frogs (Eleutherodactylus diastema and E. fitzingeri) in an area of Costa Rica composed of a mosaic of primary forest, young secondary forest and pasture, and we compared the density of calling males in areas with different forest alteration. Autoregressive models were used to compensate for potentially undesired effects of spatial autocorrelation and pseudoreplication. Both species were most abundant in riparian, primary forest. However, E. fitzingeri was also abundant in riparian secondary forests, and its density far from the river was similar in primary and secondary forest, suggesting that river proximity can influence the recovery of secondary forest for amphibians. Conversely, the density of E. diastema was similar in secondary forest and pasture, stressing interspecific differences for recovery rate. These frogs have a keystone role in nutrient cycling and food webs, and their prompt recovery might represent an important step for the functional recovery of forests. Nevertheless, the strong interspecific differences stress the complexity of these processes.
The necessity to restore rainforest habitats degraded by anthropogenic fires is widely recognized, however, research on restoration approaches has mainly centred on the recovery of forest structural complexity. There is insufficient evidence on the efficacy of restoration methods in the recovery of the faunal diversity and features linked to key ecosystem functions. We assessed the taxonomic diversity and functional trait structure of bird assemblages in undisturbed primary forest and fire-affected habitats undergoing natural regeneration, as well as areas of assisted natural regeneration, in Nyungwe National Park, Rwanda. We compiled bird occurrence data from point-count sampling, and obtained morphological traits for all species in our assemblages using measurements taken from wild birds and museum specimens. We found marked differences in species composition between primary forest habitats and regenerating forest, with similarity increasing over time since perturbation. Taxonomic diversity was higher in primary forest, and similar between the two restoration approaches. Functional diversity was lower in assisted naturally regenerated habitats, although separate analyses within dietary guilds revealed no differences across habitats. Among desired restoration outcomes, tree species diversity was the leading positive driver of avian species diversity, fern coverage exerted negative effects, while canopy cover had a positive but weak influence. Our findings underscore the importance of preventing anthropogenic fires in tropical rainforest since their impacts on ecological processes are not easily reversed, as shown by the lack of improvement in avian diversity metrics under assisted naturally regeneration in relation to natural regeneration. We stress the need to document both floral and faunal recovery in order to aid informed decision-making on restoration methods. © 2020 Elsevier B.V.
The rich vegetation areas with a variety of biodiversity are designated under categories of protected areas. Protected areas on Earth are the biomes where the elements of nature function together and maintain the life cycle. These protected areas include forest cover, rivers, waterbodies, mangroves, etc. which are the origin of ecology and biodiversity and provide natural resources utilized for human needs. Maintaining protected area is an essential aspect of managing the forest covers and a key strategy for combating the negative effects of biodiversity loss and fragmentation. The research aims to assess the vegetation health in the protected areas with NDVI using remote sensing. The paper also explores the factors for vegetation degradation and related habitat areas. The decline in vegetation quality, related species variety, and effect on their habitat areas are checked with NDVI results. The protected areas are subjected to various anthropogenic pressures, including grazing, forest fire, and wood harvesting. The paper highlights the need for effective management strategies to mitigate the identified challenges and ensure the long-term conservation and sustainability of the protected areas. This will ensure more habitat availability, healthy vegetation, genetic exchange between species populations, and a reduction in human-wildlife conflict. The findings of this paper can inform the development of more effective management strategies to protect and conserve these valuable ecosystems. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Società Italiana di Fotogrammetria e Topografia (SIFET) 2023.
Browsing of forest frontiers by cattle in sub-tropical landscapes is detrimental to ecosystem health, but essential to smallholder livelihoods. We described a silvopastoral landscape, searching for browsed plants to assess how much of the forest is actually used for this end, and also searching for potential new useful species for silvopastoral purposes. The first objective was accomplished through a floristic description, making observations of individuals with browsing marks. Information from interviews, bromatological analyses and vegetative propagation tests further complemented this information to achieve the second objective. We classified the results using Fuzzy Inference Systems (FISs). A great variety of nutritious browsed plants was found, distributed across various types of vegetation, growth habits and taxonomic groups: forest frontiers already are like silvopastoral systems. Various plants like Acalypha leptopoda, Montanoa tomentosa and Verbesina perymenioides are interesting prospects for further intensification of silvopastoral systems. © 2019 Elsevier Ltd
The introduction of the Joint Forest Management (JFM) programme in India as a part of community forestry initiatives from the late 1980s was an internationally recognised successful effort in forest restoration. Its achievements were most pronounced in the Sal (Shorea robusta)-dominated tropical dry deciduous forests of eastern and south-eastern states of India. However, these forests, and consequently the marginal people dependent on them for their livelihood, have increasingly faced multidimensional challenges in the past 15 years in the context of sustainable forest management. An overall assessment of the management scenario for these community forests and formulation of some guidelines towards better management was carried out on the basis of intensive case studies in the Nayagram Forest Range of West Bengal, India. Socio-economic as well as ecological aspects of sustainable forestry were analysed on the basis of criteria and indicators of community-oriented forestry. Functioning of a forest protection community as a cohesive group was found to be the major determinant in achieving sustainability in forest management. Maintenance of such institutional sustainability is recommended for better conservation of these highly stressed forest lands. © 2012 Copyright Taylor and Francis Group, LLC.
Coffee agroforestry has become a nature-based solution for controlling climate change impacts while, providing access to sustainable forest utilization for rural farmers, especially for the governance of social forestry policies in Indonesia. Ecosystem services established in coffee agroforestry provide high-carbon stocks that can reduce greenhouse gas emissions to the atmosphere. Statistical and spatial information on carbon stocks in coffee agroforestry in the Sumatran tropical forest region, especially above ground carbon (AGC), is still very limited. Therefore, this study aims to assess the available carbon stocks in Gayo coffee agroforestry in Mumuger Social Forestry Area, Central Aceh Regency, with the help of combining multi-source data (Landsat-Sentinel-NICFI imagery) and involving machine learning algorithms in estimation modelling. The agroforestry carbon stock distributed in the study area has 72.31 ± 48.46 Mg C ha-1, which is dominated by the Leucaena-coffee agroforestry combination. There are 13 species at the overstory level that contribute carbon stock values up to 198 Mg C ha-1. Based on modelling tests of carbon stock estimation using 37 predictors, the two best machine-learning algorithms were RF and SVM, with R2 reaching 0.83 and 0.85. Carbon stock quantification information and remote sensing machine learning approaches play a strategic role in studying the impacts of agroforestry systems and as a policy evaluation in social forestry governance that can contribute to climate change mitigation. © 2025
Introduction: Anthropogenic disturbances resulting from extensive mining activities in tropical regions pose significant threats to native land use, leading to deforestation, biodiversity loss, climate change impacts, environmental degradation, health risks, landscape fragmentation, compromised ecological security, and societal wellbeing. Monitoring Land Use and Land Cover Change (LULCC) becomes imperative for evaluating the extent and nature of land degradation in mined areas.Methods: This study examined and compared land cover change patterns across three coalmined sites: Sohagpur (Site-I), Jamuna & Kotma (Site-II), Bishrampur (Site-III) in Central India over 3 decades using Landsat satellite imagery from 1994, 2007, and 2022. The Maximum Likelihood (ML) algorithm, within a supervised classification framework, was applied to discern mining impacts on decadal land use shifts.Results and discussion: The analysis revealed that 7.32%-17.61% of forest cover, 5.0%-10% of water bodies, and 3%-5% of agricultural lands were lost due to mining activities, with Site three and Site two experiencing greater losses compared to Site 1. Overall, native land cover diminished by 35% between 1994 and 2022. Indices including Soil Index, Climate Index, Terrain Index, Land Utilization Index, and Vegetation Index were derived to assess land degradation patterns. These indices were integrated using a weighted index model in ArcGIS to generate the Land Degradation Vulnerability Index (LDVI). Vulnerability notably escalated with mining expansion, particularly pronounced at Site 3 (Bishrampur) and lower at Site 1 (Sohagpur). The "extremely vulnerable" class encompassed a substantial area (25%-40%), while the "low vulnerable" class was less than 5% across all sites. This study's comprehensive analysis aids policymakers, planners, and managers in prioritizing targeted interventions and implementing sustainable land management 175 practices for ecorestoration, aligning with the goal of Zero Net Land Degradation 176 (ZNLD) in coal-mined landscapes.
The present article provides a multifaceted critical research review on environmental issues intimately related with the socio-economy of North East India (NE), a part of Indo-Burma hotspot. Further, the article addresses the issue of sustainable development of NE India through diverse ecological practices inextricably linked with traditional ecological knowledge (TEK). The biodiversity of NE India comprises endemic floral diversity, particularly medicinal plants of importance to pharmaceutical industry, and unique faunal diversity. Nevertheless, it is very unfortunate that this great land of biodiversity is least explored taxonomically as well as biotechnologically, probably due to geographical and political constraints. Different anthropogenic and socio-economic factors have perturbed the pristine ecology of this region, leading to environmental degradation. Also, the practice of unregulated shifting cultivation (jhooming), bamboo flowering, biological invasions and anthropogenic perturbations to biodiversity exacerbate the gloomy situation. Instead of a plethora of policies, the TEK of NE people may be integrated with modern scientific knowledge in order to conserve the environment which is the strong pillar for socio-economic sector here. The aforesaid approach can be practiced in NE India through the broad implementation and extension of agroforestry practices. Further, case studies on Apatanis, ethnomedicinal plants use by indigenous tribal groups and sacred forests are particularly relevant in the context of conservation of environmental health in totality while addressing the socioeconomic impact as well. In context with the prevailing scenarios in this region, we developed an eco-sustainable model for natural resource management through agroforestry practices in order to uplift the social as well as environmental framework.
Assessment of soil organic carbon (SOC) stock and soil quality for informed forest management is hindered by inadequate data across different forest stand types and management regimes. Therefore, this study was conducted to assess SOC stock and soil quality in two forest stand types, i.e., Shorea robusta (Sal) forest and Terai mixed hardwood (TMH) forest, and selected forest management regimes (leasehold forest, community forest, government-managed forest, and forest area under protected area) in Terai region of Nepal. Stratified random sampling method was adopted for soil sample collection across terai region following Forest Resource Assessment, Nepal. Altogether, 62 composite soil samples from 30 cm depth were taken from the entire Terai region which included these two forest stand types and four management regimes. Different physical (soil texture and bulk density) and chemical (pH, SOC (%), total nitrogen, available phosphorus, and available potassium) properties were analyzed to calculate SOC stock and soil quality. Our result found no significant differences in SOC stock among two forest stand types (p>0.05). Unexpectedly, leasehold forest had significantly (p<0.05) higher SOC stock than other forest management regimes. In terms of soil quality, among two forest stand types, Sal forest (0.50) was found to be superior compared with TMH forest (0.46). Similarly, community forest had superior soil quality (0.50) than government-managed forest (0.47), protected area (0.47), and leasehold forest (0.45). A longitudinal study approach is recommended to observe changes in soil properties over time due to climate change and human activities, offering valuable insights into their dynamics.
Construction of a hydropower project on the Kihansi river in Southern Tanzania will substantially alter the river's flow. On the basis of both qualitative and quantitative botanical surveys, forest in the Kihansi gorge below the dam site was found to be mostly typical species and endemic-rich Eastern Arc forest. An unusual forest type, dominated almost entirely by Filicium decipiens was also present. Eastern Arc forests are of both global and national importance for biodiversity conservation, and measures to mitigate impact of the dam on the forest are suggested. Further environmental monitoring is recommended in order to evaluate the choice of mitigation measures.
Human impacts on natural tropical forests in Central Africa are to a large extent linked to shifting cultivation and fuelwood extraction in peri-urban areas. This is especially true around the city of Kinshasa in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), which is why research was conducted in 2010 by the Makala Project in the city's fuelwood supply basin. The aims were to adapt and test Assisted Natural Regeneration (ANR), improve slash-andburn crop systems and contribute to the enrichment of forest fallows. Prior to slashing and burning, useful trees were selected for protection. Then, during cropping, the germination and multiplication of stump shoots and root suckers from existing local forest species were promoted by selective weeding, thinning, and pruning. Monitoring of the test areas found low survival rates for old trees conserved before the land was slashed and burned, due to the difficulty of controlling the fires. This means that the technique can only be used for the edges of plots, by gradually enriching hedgerows. In contrast, stumps shoots and root suckers from natural forest species protected by ANR during agricultural weeding grew rapidly inside the plots, thus rapidly establishing woody fallows without the need for costly inputs or heavy labour. In 2014, three and a half years after slashing and burning, biodiversity and biomass in these fallows is greater than in non-ANR fallows. Better charcoal and crop productivity and a slower rate of forest transition into savannah are expected. However, social acceptance, a critical factor in the large-scale dissemination of this innovation, must be investigated in the light of potential developments in traditional and modern land tenure rights.
Forest transitions (FT) have been observed in many developed countries and more recently in the developing world. However, our knowledge of FT from tropical regions is mostly derived from case studies from within a particular country, making it difficult to generalize findings across larger regions. Here we overcome these difficulties by conducting a recent (2001-2010) satellite-based analysis of trends in forest cover across Central America, stratified by biomes, which we related to socioeconomic variables associated with human development. Results show a net decrease of woody vegetation resulting from 12,201 km(2) of deforestation of moist forests and 6,825 km(2) of regrowth of conifer and dry forests. The Human Development Index was the socioeconomic variable best associated with forest cover change. The least-developed countries, Nicaragua and Guatemala, experienced both rapid deforestation of moist forests and significant recovery of conifer and dry forests. In contrast, the most developed countries, Panama and Costa Rica, had net woody vegetation gain and a more stable forest cover configuration. These results imply a good agreement with FT predictions of forest change in relation to socioeconomic development, but strong asymmetry in rates and directions of change largely dependent upon the biome where change is occurring. The FT model should be refined by incorporating ecological and socioeconomic heterogeneity, particularly in multicountry and regional studies. These asymmetric patterns of forest change should be evaluated when developing strategies for conserving biodiversity and environmental services.
Deforestation has led to ecosystem degradation in many tropical regions. Re-establishment of native tree species on degraded land presents challenges due to environmental stressors such as water and nutrient limitations, particularly from weed competition. Ecophysiological studies can help assess responses of native tree species to silvicultural practices and improve our understanding of processes that influence their establishment and growth. Silvicultural treatments borrowed from commercial tree plantations such as greater nutrient applications and complete weed control can improve best silvicultural practices in forest restoration. Two contrasting silvicultural treatments, "traditional" based on common management practices for reforestation of native trees and "intensive" based on commercial plantation silviculture, were evaluated based on tree mortality, biomass, photosynthesis, chlorophyll content, soluble proteins, and nutritional status of 20 native Brazilian species, 2.5years after planting. Intensive silviculture increased tree survival by 20%, showed higher aboveground biomass from 13% to 7-fold and increased photosynthesis of ~20% from 15.8μmolm-2s-1 to 18.7μmolm-2s-1, compared to traditional silviculture. Total soluble proteins were 14% higher with 6.7μgcm-2 in intensive silviculture compared to 5.9μgcm-2 under traditional silviculture. Eighty percent of trees showed greater N content, with a 13% higher average than under traditional silviculture (2.60gm-2 versus 2.92gm-2). Average values of chlorophyll A, B, and total were ~8% higher under intensive silviculture, but not significantly different between treatments. Overall, intensive silviculture provided a positive impact on the restoration plantation. During the initial years of plantation establishment, intensive silviculture methods were effective in leading to significant increases in growth and survival. © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
We performed field tests using mimetic Piper fruits with and without essential oil extracted through hydrodistillation from Piper gaudichaudianum ripe fruits in order to evaluate the role of odor in Carollia perspicillata attraction and capture in mist-nets. During the field tests, 26 C. perspicillata were captured, 21 (80.7%) in nets with the essential oil of P. gaudichaudianum and five (19.3%) in nets without oil. Other bat species, Artibeus spp. (67), which is specialized on fruits of Moraceae, and Sturnira lilium (10), specialized on those of Solanaceae, were also captured, but they exhibited no significant preference for nets with or without oil. We conclude that odor is pre-eminent over visual cues in food location by C. perspicillata in a field situation. Based on the result, we propose the extraction and use of essential oils of chiropterochoric fruits as a useful approach to improve autoecological studies on fruit-eating bats and to promote tropical forest restoration through the attraction of frugivorous bats to degraded areas.
Understanding how soil fertility changes due to environmental conditions and stand-age-dependent forest attributes is important for local-scale forest restoration. We evaluated the effects of stand-age-dependent forest attributes (plant community composition and litter stock) on soil and technosol fertility across two second-growth Atlantic forests (SGF) after the deposition of mining tailings in Mariana, southeastern Brazil. We hypothesized that technosol fertility in the SGF tailings is positively affected by plant community composition variability, stand age, and litter stock. We used total exchangeable bases and organic matter as fertility indicators for technosol and soil, and species composition and litter stock as stand-age-dependent forest attributes. Our results showed significant differences in the stand-age-dependent forest attributes and soil chemical properties between the two forest patches (SGF tailing and SGF non-tailing) evaluated. Thus, there was a marked gradient of litter storage and fertility between soil and technosol that can be important forest recovery indicators for the affected plant communities. Furthermore, according to the tested models, we corroborated the hypothesis that technosol fertility is positively affected by stand age, plant community composition variability, and litter stock, which may contribute considerably to forest recovery on tailings. Our results demonstrate that the fertility predictors analyzed to explain the forest recovery on tailings can also be considered as ecological indicators for assessing forest restoration in areas impacted by mining tailings in Mariana.
Efforts to naturally remove atmospheric CO2 demand that largely intact forests be maintained. Our inter-cultural research initiative tested the hypothesis that Indigenous custody of the land is compatible with the maintenance of intact forests. Here we combined traditional knowledge, phytolith analysis, remote sensing, and tree inventories to study old-growth forests in Panama's Darién. Phytoliths served to elucidate historical vegetation, remote sensing revealed the current and past Indigenous footprints while tree stature and identity characterised the forest. Until now there has been very little to no human impact within these forests and current Indigenous footprint is both small and stable. Large trees accounted for 13% of trees in the plots that we established. For over half of the species, the measured tree height was taller than previously published maximum heights, leading us to conclude that these forests are a truly exceptional ecological refugium. Noting that the local communities are not rewarded for their custody of these exceptional forests we call to revisit the Good Practice Guidance for Land Use Land Use Change and Forestry to include intact forest land. In the context of sub-optimal carbon finance options, we also propose matching as a methodology that could prove additionality of forest conservation initiatives in climate mitigation portfolios. Copyright © 2022 Kunz, Barrios, Dan, Dogirama, Gennaretti, Guillemette, Koller, Madsen, Lana, Ortega, Ortega, Paripari, Piperno, Reich, Simon, Solis, Solis, Valdes, von Oheimb and Potvin.
Most scholars argue that the principle of permanent sovereignty over natural resources (PSNR) has been used by developing countries as a legal basis to exploit their natural resources, including forests, for the sake of economic development. Land conversion and forest burning are the primary causes of forest degradation and deforestation in Indonesia. Thus, the biodiversity of Indonesian tropical forests is decreasing tremendously. This article aims to comprehensively analyze the experiences of the Indonesian government to balance the principle of PSNR and sustainable forest management (SFM). The paper argues that the implementation of the PSNR principle in SFM faces many challenges, such as deforestation, forest degradation, and the failures in implementing laws, as well as weak law enforcement. Therefore, to balance the PSNR principle with SFM, the Indonesian government needs to undertake various efforts, such as strengthening law enforcement, carrying out social forest management, and exercising mandatory forest certification. Moreover, all these efforts need to be further improved. © 2021, Yijun Institute of International Law. All rights reserved.
1. In Panama, abandoned agricultural lands that supported tropical rain forest are invaded by the exotic invasive grass Saccharum spontaneum, which precludes native forest regeneration. This study aimed to evaluate the importance of several barriers to forest regeneration and highlight mitigation opportunities. 2. We examined four barriers to natural regeneration: Saccharum competition, seed dispersal limitation, fire and soil nutrient deficiency. Tree and shrub regeneration was measured in a factorial experiment combining Saccharum cutting treatments, distances from adjacent forest and a prescribed burn to assess the first three barriers, respectively. We compared soil nutrients in Saccharum plots with those from adjacent forest. Additionally, we determined the importance of distance to remnant vegetation (large-leaved monocots, shrubs and isolated trees) on forest regeneration. 3. Fire significantly decreased plant species richness of forest regeneration. Fire inhibited the germination of most species; the effect was exacerbated by cutting the Saccharum. 4. Grass competition significantly decreased seedling growth, while soil nutrient deficiency did not affect forest regeneration. 5. Seed dispersal limitation affected density and species richness. Significantly more species (3x) regenerated at 10 m compared with 35 m from the forest. Mean seedling densities were, respectively, four, three and two times higher under large-leaved monocots, isolated trees and shrubs than in open Saccharum. When seed input was experimentally equalized, large-seeded species had the highest establishment rate, suggesting that if their propagules were dispersed to the site they would regenerate in high proportions. However, under natural conditions they regenerated poorly and represented the most dispersal-limited species group. 6. Synthesis and applications. Our results suggest that facilitation of natural regeneration may be a feasible, low-cost management option for restoring native forest cover to large areas. Firebreaks must be established to promote biodiversity of forest regeneration. We do not recommend Saccharum cutting or fertilization as site treatments. Shading effectively eliminates Saccharum. Planting a variety of tree species in clumps throughout the Saccharum may overcome dispersal limitations and catalyse natural regeneration. Trees that attract different frugivores are recommended, especially large-seeded forest species. © 2005 British Ecological Society.
Throughout the tropics, regenerating secondary forests occupy vast areas previously cleared for agriculture and cattle ranching. However, despite the importance of regenerating forests in mitigating the pervasive negative consequences of forest loss and fragmentation on forest-associated biodiversity, longitudinal studies on species' phylogenetic responses to matrix regeneration are rare. We surveyed bats in continuous primary forest, primary forest fragments and in the regenerating secondary forest matrix of a whole-ecosystem Amazonian fragmentation experiment, ~15 and ~30 years after forest clearance, to investigate how changes in matrix quality through forest recovery affect phylogenetic α- and β-diversity. We found that temporal changes in phylogenetic α-richness were more marked in the secondary forest matrix than in forest fragments and continuous forest, evidencing a significant increase in total evolutionary history over time. However, when the effects of species richness were accounted for, the phylogenetic structure of each assemblage was reduced close to zero, evincing a random pattern of lineages in all habitat types. Temporal differences in phylogenetic β-diversity were driven mainly by βreplacement in secondary forest and continuous forest ~30 years after forest clearance. Both habitats also clustered together in terms of βrichness, indicating similar levels of evolutionary heritage. Consequently, regenerating secondary forest showed a reduction in the extinction probability of lineages over time. Synthesis and applications. Approximately 30 years of secondary forest regeneration were sufficient for phylogenetic richness to recover to levels similar to those observed in continuous forest. Promoting forest succession on degraded land through a combination of natural and active restoration, while ensuring the long-term protection of secondary forests regardless of their age, is of key importance for conserving tropical bat diversity and their associated ecosystem services. Such restoration measures would stimulate the recolonization of fragments and matrix habitats by evolutionarily distinct bat species, safeguarding phylogenetically diverse assemblages and ecological functions. Our study suggests that forest restoration in tropical degraded areas should be encouraged and secondary forests be protected by law, especially in countryside ecosystems with high primary forest cover, and in the surroundings of protected areas. © 2021 British Ecological Society.
Changes in bee species richness and diversity were studied along a forest regeneration gradient in seven sites in Buyangu Nature Reserve, Kakamega Forest, Kenya. At each site, 12 belt transects of 100 m length and 2 m width were established. The selected sites ranged from relatively undisturbed primary to late secondary forests, bush lands and the surrounding farming areas. A total of 4,485 individuals were identified out of 234 species of bee in four families. A Renyi Diversity Index was used to analyse bee diversity. One-way measures of ANOVA were calculated for bee diversity and species richness, with study sites and year as independent factors. The highest species richness and bee diversity were recorded in the open areas followed by secondary forests while evenness was higher in forested sites. There was a general similarity between sites in bee species composition, especially between those of almost similar vegetation structure. This similarity was suspected to have important implications in promoting current understanding of ecological resilience of bees in tropical ecosystems. The study concludes that the future of forest biodiversity and pollination services are dependent on strategic and holistic management of natural forests, secondary forests and the neighbouring agro-ecosystems. © IBRA 2011.
Use of reduced-impact logging (RIL) techniques has repeatedly been shown to reduce damage caused by logging. Unfortunately, these techniques do not necessarily ameliorate the low growth rates of many commercial species or otherwise assure recovery of the initial volume harvested during the next cutting cycle. In this study, we analyze the effect of logging and application of additional silvicultural treatments (liana cutting and girdling of competing trees) on the growth rates on trees in general and on of future crop trees (FCTs) of 24 commercial timber species. The study was carried out in a moist tropical forest in Bolivia, where we monitored twelve 27-ha plots for 4 years. Plots received one of four treatments in which logging intensity and silvicultural treatments were varied: control (no logging); normal (reduced-impact) logging; normal logging and low-intensity silviculture; and, increased logging intensity and high-intensity silviculture. Tree growth rates increased with intensity of logging and silvicultural treatments. The growth rates of FCTs of commercial species were 50-60% higher in plots that received silvicultural treatments than in the normal logging and control plots. Responses to silvicultural treatments varied among functional groups. The largest increase in growth rates was observed in FCTs belonging to the partially shade-tolerant and the shade-tolerant groups. These results indicate that silvicultural treatments, in addition to the use of RIL techniques, are more likely to result in a higher percentage of timber volume being recovered after the first cutting cycle than RIL alone. © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Anthropogenic activities drive tropical forest loss and biodiversity decay. However, few studies have addressed how the biodiversity response varies between disturbance-adapted species (i.e., winners) and those highly susceptible to disturbance (i.e., losers), or whether such responses differ between the taxonomic, functional, or phylogenetic dimensions of diversity. Understanding these dynamics can help prevent or buffer biotic homogenization processes. Using a meta-analytical approach with dung beetles as model organisms, we evaluated how anthropogenic habitat disturbances influence the multiple diversity dimensions of winner and loser species relative to conserved forest sites in the Neotropics. Habitats were organized according to a disturbance gradient ranging from second-growth forests, shaded agroforestry, lowly-shaded agroforestry, living fences, and pastures. Our database included 30 studies, from which we calculated nine metrics divided into three alfa diversity aspects: richness, evenness, and divergence. We also evaluated the beta-diversity response to disturbance and forest protection. All dimensions of dung beetle diversity decreased significantly with increasing disturbance levels, with phylogenetic diversity showing the highest losses, whereas evenness metrics increased in second-growth forests and agroforestry systems. Loser dung beetles showed high diversity loss as well as functional and phylogenetic clustering, reflecting a pervasive biotic homogenization in the most severely disturbed habitats, whereas winner species were insensitive to anthropogenic disturbances. Beta diversity increased significantly with disturbance and forest protection. Our study showed that heavy disturbances erode and homogenized all diversity dimensions of loser dung beetles. However, second-growth forests and agroforestry systems mitigated diversity loss and homogenization processes by favoring the coexistence between functional and phylogenetically distant species and maintaining assemblages compositionally similar to those in conserved forests, highlighting their importance for conservation. We encourage natural resource managers to consider protection of disturbed off-reserve forests in management schemes as these are essential for maintaining biodiversity in an increasingly anthropized world. © 2023 Elsevier B.V.
An understanding of ecosystem dynamics under different scenarios of degradation is required to reverse ecological degradation and identify restoration priorities. Such knowledge can be the result of scientific investigation, but important insight can also reside in observant local land managers. In seasonally dry tropical forests in southern Ecuador, recent decades have seen important advances in the knowledge of the biodiversity values of these forests, but the available data have not yet been integrated and translated into tools that support managers in deciding restoration measures. One powerful framework to organize and communicate information about ecosystem degradation and recovery dynamics is the state-transition model. We generated such a model by combining ecologist and local knowledge obtained through an adaptation of the Stanford/SRI expert elicitation protocol. Through this information, we identified five forest states with specific attributes of vegetation, human pressures, and restoration needs. Ecologists and locals agreed on the restoration actions but partially disagreed on the causes of degradation. Whereas ecologists considered that grazing management, often introduced with or after logging, was the catalyst for a transition to degraded states, locals attributed those transitions to the effects of logging alone. Importantly, however, both ecologists and locals considered that exclusion of livestock grazing was a necessary action to promote ecological recovery. A forward-looking strategy focusing on objectives for ecosystem recovery and ecosystem management for biodiversity and human well-being might be more successful than strategies that emphasize or seek to attribute responsibility for degradation. © 2019 by the author(s).
Large-diameter, tall-stature, and big-crown trees are the main stand structures of forests, generally contributing a large fraction of aboveground biomass, and hence play an important role in climate change mitigation strategies. Here, we hypothesized that the effects of large-diameter, tall-stature, and big-crown trees overrule the effects of species richness and remaining trees attributes on aboveground biomass in tropical forests (i.e., we term the "big-sized trees hypothesis"). Specifically, we assessed the importance of: (a) the " top 1% big-sized trees effect" relative to species richness; (b) the "99% remaining trees effect" relative to species richness; and (c) the "top 1% big-sized trees effect" relative to the "99% remaining trees effect" and species richness on aboveground biomass. Using environmental factor and forest inventory datasets from 712 tropical forest plots in Hainan Island of southern China, we tested several structural equation models for disentangling the relative effects of big-sized trees, remaining trees attributes, and species richness on aboveground biomass, while considering for the full (indirect effects only) and partial (direct and indirect effects) mediation effects of climatic and soil conditions, as well as interactions between species richness and trees attributes. We found that top 1% big-sized trees attributes strongly increased aboveground biomass (i.e., explained 55%-70% of the accounted variation) compared to species richness (2%-18%) and 99% remaining trees attributes (6%-10%). In addition, species richness increased aboveground biomass indirectly via increasing big-sized trees but via decreasing remaining trees. Hence, we show that the "big-sized trees effect" overrides the effects of remaining trees attributes and species richness on aboveground biomass in tropical forests. This study also indicates that big-sized trees may be more susceptible to atmospheric drought. We argue that the effects of big- sized trees on species richness and aboveground biomass should be tested for better understanding of the ecological mechanisms underlying forest functioning.
Research Highlights: We find that biochar plus fertilizer has synergistic and positive effects on seedling growth and robustness, but slightly lowers early seedling survival. Biochar plus fertilizer has the potential to greatly decrease costs associated with afforestation as compared to traditional fertilization and gives better results. Background and Objectives: Biochar can improve soil fertility and plant yield in crops. However, there is little information regarding the effects of biochar on trees, even though reforestation/afforestation projects are increasing and are often unsuccessful due to soil fertility limitations. This study aims to increase knowledge of biochar use as a reforestation tool. Materials and Methods: We measured survival and growth in an early ((Guazuma crinita Mart. [n = 240])) and a late (Terminalia amazonia (J.F. Gmel.) Exell. [n = 240]) successional species under 6 different biochar treatments in a 6-month nursery experiment. Results: (i) Survival was highest in the 1 t/ha biochar treatment, while treatments containing fertilizers or biochar at 5 t/ha lowered the survival rate of both species compared to the control; (ii) simultaneous addition of biochar and fertilizer lead to significant increases in height, diameter, total number of leaves, and aboveground and belowground biomass of both species as compared to other treatments; (iii) biochar treatment containing 1 t/ha with and without fertilizer showed significantly better results than applications of 5 t/ha; and (iv) Guazuma crinita responded more strongly to treatments containing biochar and fertilizers compared to Terminalia amazonia, which is suggestive of greater synergetic effects of biochar and fertilizer addition on early successional tree species. Conclusions: Applying biochar and fertilizer is synergistic and outperforms any single treatment, as well as the control, in terms of plant performance. This case study suggests that biochar can greatly improve reforestation/afforestation projects by increasing plant performance while substantially reducing fertilizer and labor maintenance costs. Field experiments and testing of additional species is needed to generalize the findings. © 2019 by the authors.
A key challenge for tropical conservation biologists is to assess how forest management practices affect biodiversity and associated ecosystem functions. Dung beetles (Scarabaeidae: Scarabaeinae) provide an ideal focal guild for such studies. We compared dung beetle assemblages and experimentally assessed rates of dung removal and seed burial in undisturbed forest, low-intensity selectively logged forest under sustainable forest management, and high-intensity logged forest, not under sustainable management in Malaysian Borneo. In total, 7923 individuals from 39 species of dung beetle were collected. There were no significant differences in abundance, biomass or diversity across sites. Species richness was significantly lower in the high-intensity logged sites. Beta diversity was low: of 35 species recorded in undisturbed forest sites, 32 were also captured in low-intensity sites and 29 in high-intensity sites. The environmental and vegetation variables measured had little influence on species composition. An average of 63-99% of dung was removed over 24. h. Mean dung and seed removal were significantly lower in the high-intensity logged sites. Dung removal rates were significantly and positively correlated with dung beetle species richness, but not with dung beetle biomass or abundance. However, the biomass of large-bodied, nocturnal dung beetles was positively correlated with dung removal. In contrast to previous studies, dung beetle biomass and abundance were not correlated with species richness, indicative of density compensation. Overall, dung beetle communities and associated ecosystem functions were robust to low-intensity but not high-intensity selective logging. These differences may be related to changes in the abundance and biomass of particular dung beetle species or guilds rather than community-wide measures of abundance and biomass, highlighting the need to move beyond simplistic biodiversity-ecosystem functioning correlations to understand the functional consequences of habitat modification in high-diversity ecosystems. © 2010 Elsevier Ltd.
Simple Summary     Longhorn beetles are a large family of beetles and have a wide-geographic distribution. Some of them are pests of many economic plants and invasive species. They also play roles in decomposition and nutrient cycling in forest ecosystems. They feed on living, dying, or dead woody plants in the larval stage. So far, 308 species of longhorn beetles have been reported from northern Thailand. However, the biodiversity and distribution of longhorn beetles in different elevation gradients and seasons, associated with environmental factors across six regions in the country, has not yet been investigated. In this study, longhorn beetle specimens were collected by malaise trap from 41 localities in 24 national parks across six regions in Thailand. A total of 199 morphospecies were identified from 1376 specimens. Seasonal species richness and abundance of longhorn beetles peaked during the hot and early rainy season in five regions, except for the southern region, which peaked in the rainy season. Our finding revealed that most species' distribution was correlated with the region and forest type (at middle and low elevations). Quantitative data from this study can be useful to manage agricultural and forest plantations.     Longhorn beetles are highly diversified and important for agriculture and health of the environment. However, the fauna and ecology of these beetles are not well known in Thailand. This study is the first to report the biodiversity, elevation, and seasonal distribution of longhorn beetles. Specimens were collected by malaise traps from 41 localities in 24 national parks throughout the country during 2006-2009. The traps were operated at each site for 12 consecutive months with a monthly service. A total of 199 morphotaxa in 36 tribes of 6 subfamilies were identified from 1376 specimens. Of these, 40.7% and 14.5% of total taxa were singletons and doubletons, respectively. The Shannon diversity index and observed species richness at Panernthung, Loei Forest Unit and Mae Fang Hotspring were high at 0.96 (30), 0.88 (50), and 0.86 (34), respectively. Local richness ranged between 3 and 50 species, while the species richness estimator showed between 6 and 1275 species. The most relatively abundant species, Nupserha lenita, Pterolophia sp.1, Oberea sp.3, Acalolepta pseudospeciosa, and Ac. rustricatrix represented 4.80%, 4.80%, 4.80%, 4.5%, and 4.43% of the species, respectively. The species with the widest distribution range of percentage of species occurrence (% SO) was Pt. sp.1 (63.4%), followed by Ac. rustricatrix (39%) and Moechotypa suffusa (39%). In a significantly negative relationship between species richness and elevation (p > 0.05, R-2 = 0.04), the species richness pattern showed a hump-shaped curve that peaked at the middle elevation (501-1000 m asl). Regarding seasonal variation, most of the species occurred during the hot season (March-April) and peaked in early rainy season (May), while a low number of species were found during the mid-rainy (June-October) and cold season (November-February). Ordination analysis indicated that the distribution of most species was associated with regions and forest type, and most of the species correlated with forest located at middle and low elevation. The results of this study indicated the very high biodiversity of longhorn beetles in Thailand, which suggests that an understanding of their seasonal and elevational distribution will be of value to agriculture management and conservation.     They also indicated that malaise traps are appropriate for the evaluation of biodiversity.
Forest restoration figures prominently on climate action plans, both in the public and private sector. Restoration has the potential to enhance forest recovery and carbon storage, yet could cause unanticipated alterations of forest biodiversity and functioning. In particular little is known about the long-lasting effects of active forest restoration. We therefore evaluated the effects of such management on adult trees and seedlings of actively restored forest to comparable areas where forest regenerated naturally. We investigated a forest site in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo that is recovering from selective logging between 1981 and 1991. Some of the area has been left to naturally regenerate, and some areas have been actively restored for production purposes between 1994 and 2004 through climber cutting and enrichment-planting of exclusively indigenous tree species. We hypothesized that active forest restoration affects forest diversity and composition negatively (i.e., reduction in diversity and presence of pioneer species), and that the silvicultural interventions had long-lasting effects (i.e., higher density of species that were planted, fewer climbers). Surprisingly, our findings suggest that active forest restoration promoted the recovery of adult tree species diversity, expressed as Shannon Diversity Index, and in particular promoted rare species. In actively restored plots, the number of adult individuals of tree species that were planted was enhanced, and the density of liana seedlings was reduced, demonstrating that these silvicultural interventions were effective and had long-lasting effects on the forest structure. Nevertheless, we could not detect differences in the number of seedlings of species that were planted nor in the density of adult lianas between actively restored and naturally regenerating forest sites. We also did not find differences in the species diversity of seedlings, but we observed a compositional shift in the species community for seedlings that were younger than one year. Furthermore, we did not detect a difference between actively restored and naturally regenerating forest plots in the abundance of the present tree guilds (i.e., pioneer or late-succession species) for neither adult trees nor seedlings, as all of our forest plots were dominated by late-succession species. Our results show that active forest restoration can promote species diversity and highlight that active forest restoration focusing on biomass production does not need to adversely affect biodiversity. This work emphasizes the potential of active forest restoration on biodiversity and potentially other key ecosystem functions which are needed to be restored in order to mitigate climate change and the current ecological crisis. © 2023 The Author(s)
Indigenous people inhabit approximately 85% of areas designated for biodiversity conservation worldwide. They also continue to struggle for recognition and preservation of cultural identities, lifestyles, and livelihoods-a struggle contingent on control and protection of traditional lands and associated natural resources (hereafter, self-determination). Indigenous lands and the biodiversity they support are increasingly threatened because of human population growth and per capita consumption. Application of the Endangered Species Act (ESA) to tribal lands in the United States provides a rich example of the articulation between biodiversity conservation and indigenous peoples' struggle for self-determination. We found a paradoxical relationship whereby tribal governments are simultaneously and contradictorily sovereign nations; yet their communities depend on the U. S. government for protection through the federal-trust doctrine. The unique legal status of tribal lands, their importance for conserving federally protected species, and federal environmental regulations' failure to define applicability to tribal lands creates conflict between tribal sovereignty, self-determination, and constitutional authority. We reviewed Secretarial Order 3206, the U. S. policy on "American Indian tribal rights, federal-tribal trust responsibilities, and the ESA," and evaluated how it influences ESA implementation on tribal lands. We found improved biodiversity conservation and tribal self-determination requires revision of the fiduciary relationship between the federal government and the tribes to establish clear, legal definitions regarding land rights, applicability of environmental laws, and financial responsibilities. Such actions will allow provision of adequate funding and training to tribal leaders and resource managers, government agency personnel responsible for biodiversity conservation and land management, and environmental policy makers. Increased capacity, cooperation, and knowledge transfer among tribes and conservationists will improve biodiversity conservation and indigenous self-determination.
Tropical deforestation is leading to a loss of economically productive timber concessions, as well as areas with important environmental or socio-cultural values. To counteract this threat in Southeast Asia, sustainable forest management (SFM) practices are becoming increasingly important. We assess the tools and guidelines that have been developed to promote SFM and the progress that has been made in Southeast Asia toward better logging practices. We specifically focus on practices relevant to biodiversity issues. Various regional or national mechanisms now inform governments and the timber industry about methods to reduce the impact of production forestry on wildlife and the forest environment. However, so many guidelines have been produced that it has become difficult to judge which ones are most relevant. In addition, most guidelines are phrased in general terms and lack specific recommendations targeted to local conditions. These might be reasons for the generally slow adoption of SFM practices in the region, with only a few countries having incorporated the guidelines into national legislation. Malaysia, Indonesia, and Laos are among the frontrunners in this process. Overall there is progress, especially in the application of certification programs, the planning and management of high conservation value forests, the regulation and control of hunting, and silvicultural management. To reduce further forest loss, there is a need to accelerate the implementation of good forest management practices. We recommend specific roles for governments, the forestry industry, and nongovernmental organizations in further promoting the implementation of SFM practices for biodiversity conservation.
Unplanned and invasive use of natural resources can have irreversible implications for the environment. Appropriate strategies for adequate management could have utmost importance for the conservation of biodiversity. Environments that harbor a huge structural complexity, such as agroforestry systems, even the simplest ones, may host a high species diversity and may therefore ensure the provision of important ecological services. To examine the effect of vegetation structure loss by land use simplification on biodiversity, we evaluate dung beetle (Scarabaeidae: Scarabaeinae) diversity in different land uses, considering: Brazilian Atlantic Forest, cacao-rubber agroforestry, and rubber monoculture. We found a decreasing gradient of dung beetle diversity from forest to monoculture, as cacao-rubber agroforestry maintaining an intermediate level of dung beetle diversity that is lower than that of the native forest but significantly higher than rubber monoculture. Species composition is rather similar when comparing forest and agroforestry, whereas monoculture holds a different assemblage. Although monoculture farming is still encouraged by the agribusiness market, our results support the idea that agroforestry is a reasonable option to be considered and adapted to compensate the deleterious effects of agriculture intensification on dung beetle diversity. We suggest that such land use would be the best choice to ensure dung beetle diversity maintenance in agricultural landscapes.
This study aims to assess the status of forest degradation through inventory of tree species in the tropical forests of Bodamalai, Indian Eastern Ghats. The Bodamalai complex was divided into ten 6.25 km x 6.25 km grids. Within each grid a 0.5 ha transect (5 m × 1 km) was inventoried for tree diversity. A total of 64 tree species (≥ 30 cm girth at breast height) representing 50 genera and 32 families were recorded from the total 5 ha area inventoried. The stand density, basal area and AGB for the total 5 ha area were 1449 stems, 27.72 m2 and 315.91 Mg, respectively. A positive correlation was obtained between altitude and stand density, species richness, basal area and AGB, and also with density of evergreen species. While a negative correlation was obtained between altitude and the density of dominant species Euphorbia antiquorum (one of the indicator species of scrub/degraded forests). This reveals that tropical forests of Bodamalai located at low altitudes are prone to high degradation. Although, Bodamalai is included under reserve forest category, the human population has unlimited and unspecified right of firewood collection, felling, lopping and herding cattle for grazing, browsing, etc. Further, illegal extraction of Santalum album (sandal wood), one of the valuable bioresources is also witnessed. We recommend the following for developing the degraded forest land of Bodamalai: (i) to create awareness on forest degradation among the local people, (ii) planting some important indigenous trees and (iii) to organize a village committee for maintenance of afforested landscape. © National Institute of Ecology, New Delhi.
A permanent plot of 30 ha (600 x 500 m2) was established for long-term ecological research on biodiversity and forest functioning in a tropical evergreen forest at Varagalaiar, Anamalais, Western Ghats. This paper gives the results of the first census of trees in the 30 ha plot. All trees ≥30 cm gbh were permanently tagged with sequentially numbered aluminium tags and their girth measured. 148 tree species (in 120 genera and 49 families) were enumerated in a total sample of 13,393 individuals. Species diversity, density and dispersion patterns were determined. The mean species richness, density and basal area per hectare were 65 species, 446 stems and 36.26 m2 respectively. The Sorensen similarity index for thirty 1-ha subplots varied from 0.7 to 0.9, indicating the homogeneity in species composition of the stand. The pronounced species hierarchy has resulted in the dominance of four species that occupy four different forest storeys: Drypetes longifolia (lower storey) Reinwardtiodendron anamallayanum(middle storey), Poeciloneuron indicum (upper storey) and Dipterocarpus indicus (emergent). The forest was dominated by Euphorbiaceae in terms of richness (18 species) and abundance of species (3788 stems), and Dipterocarpaceae based on the contribution to basal area (18.4%). Species richness and density decreased with increasing girth-class. Girth class frequency of the stand exhibited an expanding population of trees. Twenty-nine tree species, analysed for spatial dispersion at 1-ha scale, exhibited both clumped and uniform patterns, except Vateria indica which was randomly distributed in one hectare. Repeat census scheduled for subsequent years, will elucidate the behaviour of the individual species and the population dynamics of the tree flora and will be useful for forest conservation and management. It will also help to monitor human activity within this forest.
Tamaulipan thornscrub has often been removed in northeastern Mexico to give way to agriculture and induced grasslands for cattle. This results in over 90% of thornscrub being either removed or severely modified, with a few remaining fragments varying in size and distance to nearby fragments (isolation). Fragment size ranges from isolated trees in induced buffel grasslands to 300 ha of "continuous vegetation".     Remaining fragments are by no means conserved, as they are over-utilized for grazing goats, extraction of timber, fuel-wood and medicinal plants. Ecosystem fragmentation and isolation of fragments has an impact on the dynamics of thornscrub by reducing population sizes, promoting genetic erosion, and perhaps local extinction of species with large habitat requirements.     In here we present same measurements of plant, bird, ante, and beetles diversity, as well as some implications on seed parasitism, removal and dispersal Results contrast species richness under isolated Prosopis and Ebenopsis trees and thornscrub fragments from less than 10 to over 100 ha. Preliminary results imply that fragment size is not related to species number, but to ecosystem function. Seed removal rates were slower under isolated mesquite trees than under similar trees in continuous vegetation. Seed production was higher for isolated mesquite trees than for similar size ones inside continuous vegetation. Seed parasitism (while still inside the vines) was higher far the latter.
Land-use change is a primary driver of biodiversity loss. Tropical ecosystems face rapid conversion rates due to the encroachment of agricultural lands and supply needs for goods and services from an increasing population and changing market demands. Measuring the effect of land conversion on species diversity is challenging due to incomplete and uneven knowledge of different taxonomical groups. Here, we contrast different metrics for measuring biodiversity loss across three land-use typologies: secondary forest, agroforestry, and monoculture for five taxonomic groups: birds, frogs, fish, dung beetles, and macroinvertebrates in the Andean piedmont forests of the western equatorial Andes. Albeit our limited and uneven sample in space and time, we found that rarity, Non-Metric Multidimensional Scaling, and Multinomial Classification Model (i.e., classifications of habitat specialists and generalists) constitute a more sensitive set of indicators to assess land-use change impacts on tropical mountain biodiversity compared to classical metrics. Likewise, our results showed that land-use intensification influenced community assemblages in the five taxonomic groups. These non-classical biodiversity metrics can provide better insight into the effect of land conversion on these highly biodiverse ecosystems composed of many rare species. © 2023 The Author(s)
Abandoned plantations could potentially support a large number of native tree species through succession and restore the original tree community. In order to assess the ability of abandoned teak plantations to recover through regeneration, teak stands from 29 to 80 years old were sampled for seedling and sapling density, species richness and the use by large ungulates in the southern Western Ghats using 10 m circular plots. The influence of the forest-plantation edge was also studied. There was regeneration of a species-rich tree community in the understorey of abandoned teak plantations. However, regeneration was arrested, and thereby the large girth-class tree community remained species-poor. There was no significant change in the tree species richness with distance from natural forest, suggesting that the forest-plantation edge had little influence on the penetration of native tree species inside plantations. Asian elephant and Indian gaur dung densities were significantly lower in the plantations than in the forest. Indian gaur and sambar used the younger plantations intensively, and the density of their dung was negatively correlated with age of the plantation. Abandonment of mature teak stands arrested the succession of native trees. We provide evidence that abandoned teak plantations might not serve as suitable habitats for large herbivores during the dry months of the year in the region. The study highlights the need for active management of mature teak plantations inside wildlife reserves, in order to promote succession and improve the habitat for wild flora and fauna in the Western Ghats.
Aims Deforestation and biodiversity loss are two alarming, closely related problems, and the main factors triggering changes in land use. Indigenous agricultural practices in the western Amazon Basin are known as chakras, and their structure and dynamics are seemingly optimal for forest management. However, the variability in tree species and the degree of forest recovery after abandonment is poorly documented in this agroforestry system (AFS). The goals of this study were: (i) to investigate whether the different AFSs (chakras) preserve similar levels of forest diversity, (ii) to determine the effect of transformation of mature forests (MF) to chakras, in particular, forest alpha and beta diversity levels, and (iii) to investigate whether native tree species recovery leads to the original forest structure following chakra abandonment. Methods We assessed the floristic composition in three AFSs (cassava, corn, and cocoa), the secondary forest (SF), and the forest remnants in the buffer zone of the Northern Ecuadorian Amazon (NEA). All tree species with a diameter at breast height (dbh) ≥10 cm were inventoried in 61 plots (0.28 ha average) representing 17.44 ha. Alpha diversity was calculated in all systems to determine the levels of variability using species richness and the Shannon diversity index. Also, beta diversity was examined to evaluate the degree of dissimilarity among all AFSs with the MF in order to analyze changes in floristic composition. The divergence between the SF and the MF was analyzed to ascertain forest recovery after chakra abandonment. Important Findings A total of 4,060 trees (dbh ≥ 10 cm) representing 109 species, 96 genera, and 43 plant families were inventoried in 17.44 ha sampled in five systems in the buffer zone of the NEA. The most dominant plant families were Arecaceae, Myristicaceae, Fabaceae, Meliaceae, and Malvaceae, and the most representative genera included Iriartea, Virola, Guarea, Ocotea, Cordia, Chrysophyllum, and Inga. The MF in this zone is composed of 81 tree species circumscribed in 74 genera and 30 plant families. Transforming this MF to different chakras leads to a decrease of alpha diversity between 52% and 75%, particularly in AFS practiced for local food security (corn and cassava). However, all the AFSs preserve ca. 56% of the native flora existing in the MF, in which at least 8% of the species are threatened; however, the status of the remaining 92% of species is still unknown, indicating that the assessment of the rarity of the native trees is virtually unexplored. Additionally, all sites investigated consistently formed three clusters that corresponded to AFS, MF, and SF. Thus, the trend of forests to recover the original structure is facilitated by native trees left intact in the chakras. These results strongly support the potential to execute sustainable forest management and preservation of endangered tree species practicing this AFS. © The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences and the Botanical Society of China. All rights reserved.
Procedures and methodologies for evaluating the quality and uniformity of seedlings are essential for homogenizing lots in forest nurseries and successful planting for reforestation. A study was made in order to evaluate the correlations between the allocation of biomass and the Dickson Quality Index (IQD) for seedlings from six native tree species of the Atlantic Forest as well as to select quality indicators that most affect the IQD and which can be used in a practical and precise fashion for the evaluation of native forest seedlings. Seedlings from six tropical forest species were used: Calophyllum brasiliense, Eriotheca macrophylla, Inga laurina, Psidium cattleyanum, Roupala montana and Sloanea obtusifolia. The following characteristics were evaluated: dry leaf (MSF), dry stem (MSC) and dry root (MSR) mass, as well as the aerial part height (H) and the stem diameter (D). Based on these variables, the following calculations were made: ratios of root (RMR), stem (RMC) and leaf (RMF) mass, as well as the total dry mass (MST), that of the aerial part (MSPA), the ratio of the aerial part dry mass to the dry root mass (MSPA/MSR), and that of the aerial part height to the stem diameter (H/D), and the IQD. The results were analyzed via correlation analyses. Based on the conditions of this study it is possible to conclude that: (a) the differences between the average IQD values of the species studied were not explained by the allocation pattern of biomass characterizing each species; (b) the MSR, MST and the D are the best variables for predicting the IQD of the seedlings from the forest species analyzed in this study; and (c) because it is a non-destructive method, D can be considered the best practical indicator for estimating IQD values for Atlantic Forest seedling species lots. © 2021, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria. All rights reserved.
Agricultural lands occupy 38% of global land surface and are expected to grow significantly in the next years, increasing the need for more sustainable practices, as well as better informed conservation practices of natural ecosystems. Carbon stocks are important estimates for the assessment of potential emissions caused by deforestation, and therefore widely used in strategies to mitigate climate change in agroforestry systems. Although research on biomass and carbon accumulation in agricultural lands is well documented, comparisons with adjacent natural forest areas are uncommon, mainly in tropical regions. Here, we used forest inventory data and allometric models to estimate biomass and carbon stocks of natural vegetation types (gallery forest-GF, morichal-MOR, and savanna-SAV) and oil palm (Elaeis guineensis) crops in the Orinoquía bioregion, in Eastern Colombia. We found that natural forests (GF and MOR) hold 542.45 Mg ha−1 of aboveground biomass, whereas oil palm plantations store 284.87 Mg ha−1. Morichal vegetation, commonly known as peat swamp forests, accumulated the highest aboveground biomass and carbon per hectare among all vegetation types (natural and agricultural), with an estimate of 402.76 Mg ha−1. Thus, although oil palm crops are great reservoirs of biomass and carbon at the landscape level, it is the combination of natural and agricultural lands which assure highest carbon sequestration in the study area. These results highlight the importance of preserving natural areas in agricultural landscapes for climate mitigation and conservation of biodiversity, which may jointly benefit plantations sustainable development. © 2023 The Authors
Tropical forests support high levels of avian diversity but these areas have been impacted by extensive deforestation. The lowland tropical rainforest of Xishuangbanna in southwest China is one such impacted hotspot. In this region, rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) plantations have replaced most of the original forest, but numerous small fragments of forest remain. To assess the value of these fragments to avian diversity, we classified the fifteen selected remnant forest patches into three size categories, <1 ha, 1-3 ha, and 36 ha, and conducted avifauna surveys. We found that 97 bird species inhabit the fragments and that bird diversity increases with patch area. The resident species composition similarity index was low among forest patches, both within and across size categories, and also low between the wet and dry seasons. Ground insectivores, frugivores and large bird species were the most vulnerable to habitat fragmentation. Our study encouragingly shows that fragments can play an important role in bird conservation in regions that now lack large tracts of natural forest; however, current patches are too small to support stable annual populations of some species, while others are more tolerant of fragmentation. We discuss these findings and provide conservation strategies to improve bird conservation within rubber plantations in southern China. (C) 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Tropical forests are being reduced by human activities. The use of fire for agricultural expansion generates areas dominated by the bracken fern Pteridium, where forest regeneration is slow. This may be caused by seed limitation, especially of animal-dispersed seeds, due to the absence of seed dispersers from the forest in deforested areas, calling for restoration strategies to assist forest regeneration. We installed bird perches and artificial bat roosts to evaluate their effect on the density, species richness, and composition of animal-dispersed seeds and seedlings of tree and non-tree species in bracken-dominated areas in the tropical montane forest of Bolivia. We found that perches and bat roosts increased the density and species richness of animal-dispersed seeds and established seedlings. The seeds and seedlings dispersed by birds were clumped under the perches, while the seeds and seedlings dispersed by bats were distributed around the roosts. Perches had a higher density and species richness of seeds and seedlings compared to bat roosts, suggesting that the use of perches could be a better option as a restoration tool in bracken-dominated areas. The increase in seed rain and seedling establishment of animal-dispersed species in perches and bat roosts supports seed limitation, hindering forest succession in bracken-dominated areas. The use of bird perches accompanying other restoration techniques is a promising restoration strategy to accelerate forest regeneration in tropical areas dominated by Pteridium, which are widely distributed. © 2024 The Author(s). Restoration Ecology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Society for Ecological Restoration.
Insectivorous birds reduce arthropod abundances and their damage to plants in some, but not all, studies where predation by birds has been assessed. The variation in bird effects may be due to characteristics such as plant productivity or quality, habitat complexity, and/or species diversity of predator and prey assemblages. Since agroforestry systems vary in such characteristics, these systems provide a good starting point for understanding when and where we can expect predation by birds to be important. We analyze data from bird exclosure studies in forests and agroforestry systems to ask whether birds consistently reduce their arthropod prey base and whether bird predation differs between forests and agroforestry systems. Further, we focus on agroforestry systems to ask whether the magnitude of bird predation (1) differs between canopy trees and understory plants, (2) differs when migratory birds are present or absent, and (3) correlates with bird abundance and diversity. We found that, across all studies, birds reduce all arthropods, herbivores, carnivores, and plant damage. We observed no difference in the magnitude of bird effects between agroforestry systems and forests despite simplified habitat structure and plant diversity in agroforests. Within agroforestry systems, bird reduction of arthropods was greater in the canopy than the crop layer. Top-down effects of bird predation were especially strong during censuses when migratory birds were present in agroforestry systems. Importantly, the diversity of the predator assemblage correlated with the magnitude of predator effects; where the diversity of birds, especially migratory birds, was greater, birds reduced arthropod densities to a greater extent. We outline potential mechanisms for relationships between bird predator, insect prey, and habitat characteristics, and we suggest future studies using tropical agroforests as a model system to further test these areas of ecological theory.
Agricultural conversion of tropical forests is a major driver of biodiversity loss. Slowing rates of deforestation is a conservation priority, but it is also useful to consider how species diversity is retained across the agricultural matrix. Here, we assess how bird diversity varies in relation to land use in the Taita Hills, Kenya. We used point counts to survey birds along a land-use gradient that included primary forest, secondary vegetation, agroforest, timber plantation and cropland. We found that the agricultural matrix supports an abundant and diverse bird community with high levels of species turnover, but that forest specialists are confined predominantly to primary forest, with the matrix dominated by forest visitors. Ordination analyses showed that representation of forest specialists decreases with distance from primary forest. With the exception of forest generalists, bird abundance and diversity are lowest in timber plantations. Contrary to expectation, we found feeding guilds at similar abundances in all land-use types. We conclude that whilst the agricultural matrix, and agroforest in particular, makes a strong contribution to observed bird diversity at the landscape scale, intact primary forest is essential for maintaining this diversity, especially amongst species of conservation concern. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Morocco's argan oil is now the most expensive edible oil in the world. High-value argan markets have sparked a bonanza of argan activity. Nongovernmental organizations, international and domestic development agencies, and argan oil cooperatives aggressively promote the win-win aim of simultaneously benefiting local people and the health of the argan forest. This paper tests some of these win-win claims. Analysis of a panel of detailed household data suggests that the boom has enabled some rural households to increase consumption, increase their goat herds (which bodes poorly for the argan forest), and send their girls to secondary school. The boom has predictably made households vigilant guardians of fruit on the tree, but it has not incited investments in longer term tree and forest health. We evaluate landscape-level impacts of these changes using commune-level data on educational enrollment and normalized difference vegetation index data over the period from 1981 to 2009. The results of the mesoanalysis of enrollment are consistent with the microanalysis: the argan boom seems to have improved educational outcomes, especially for girls. Our normalized difference vegetation index analysis, however, suggests that booming argan prices have not improved the forest and may have even induced degradation. We conclude by exploring the dynamic interactions between argan markets, local institutions, rural household welfare, and forest conservation and sustainability.
Participatory forest management (PFM) has been applied to address declining tropical forest conditions. In the literature, there is a mixed evidence on PFM's role in improving forest conditions. However, most assessments ignore a relationship between household distance from PFM forests and impacts to non-PFM forests albeit being an essential aspect. Some PFM assessments show that distance matters in determining an individual's participation But, sparsely discussing the distance in relation to forest biophysical conditions in a landscape context. Drawing on the landscape approach and insights from Miombo forests of Kilwa in southern Tanzania, we illustrate the importance of studying PFM schemes in a landscape context to illuminate the relationship between household distance from PFM forests and impacts to non-PFM forests. Our study villages have forest abundances in areas between households and PFM forests. The average distance between households and PFM forests is 7.8 km. The long distances and forest abundances produce an ‘outbound effect’, whereby degrading and deforesting activities shift from PFM to non-PFM forests. Our analysis calls for landscape-level assessments that include forests under different governance regimes even those in unreserved landscapes – non-PFM forests. This is important for two reasons. First, for generating locally grounded contextual insights necessary for developing understandings of global forest conservation efforts from the ‘ground up’. Second, for revealing correct forest conditions in the entire landscape critical in the light of ongoing national and international interests to manage trees inside and outside designated forest reserves for both carbon sequestration and landscape restoration. © 2022 Elsevier B.V.
There is vigorous debate about the potential for reforestation to offset losses in biodiversity associated with tropical deforestation, but a scarcity of good data. We quantified developmental trajectories following active restoration (replanting) of deforested pasture land to tropical Australian rainforest, using 20 different bird community indicators within chronosequences of multiple sites. Bird species composition in restored sites (1-24. years old) was intermediate between that of reference sites in pasture and primary rainforest. Total species richness was much less sensitive to land cover change than composition indicators, because of contrasting species-specific response patterns. For example, open-country (grassland/wetland) bird species declined in richness and abundance with increasing site age, while rainforest-dependent species increased. Results from two different landscapes (uplands and lowlands) were remarkably consistent, despite differing bird assemblages. After 10. years, restored sites averaged about half the number of rainforest-dependent bird species typical of rainforest. Mean values at around 20. years overlapped with the " poorest" rainforest reference sites, but projections suggest that >150. years are required to reach mean rainforest levels, and high variability among sites means that many were not on track towards ever achieving a rainforest-like bird community. Regional rainforest endemics were half as likely to occupy older revegetated sites as non-endemic rainforest-dependent species. Between-site variability and slow colonisation by regional endemics strongly constrain the potential of rainforest restoration to offset the biodiversity impacts of tropical deforestation. The results also mean that ongoing monitoring of biodiversity is an essential part of restoration management. © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
Temporal and spatial variation in dung beetles abundances is a pattern observed in many tropical forests. The present study evaluated the seasonal patterns of dung beetles in a range of increasingly disturbed ecosystems of the state of Pará, northern Brazil, to identify valuable disturbance indicators. The areas included native forest, agriculture, pasture for extensive livestock grazing and secondary forests. Fieldwork was carried out encompassing the complete range of environmental conditions encountered during the year. In total, 13,649 individuals were captured within 23 genera and 99 species but with pronounced differences among ecosystems and seasons. The obtained results seem to demonstrate that dung beetles can be used to help identify ecosystems under very complex and variable environmental conditions. The ecological drift observed also demonstrates the possibility of using dung beetles as ecological indicators of disturbance in Amazonia. © koninklijke brill nv, leiden, 2017.
Some Eucalyptus species are widely used as a plantation crop in tropical and subtropical regions. One reason for this is the diversity of end uses, but the main reason is the high level of wood production obtained from commercial plantings. With the advancement of biotechnology it will be possible to expand the geographical area in which eucalypts can be used as commercial plantation crops, especially in regions with current climatic restrictions. Despite the popularity of eucalypts and their increasing range, questions still exist, in both traditional planting areas and in the new regions: Can eucalypts invade areas of native vegetation, causing damage to natural ecosystems biodiversity?The objective of this study it was to assess whether eucalypts can invade native vegetation fragments in proximity to commercial stands, and what factors promote this invasive growth. Thus, three experiments were established in forest fragments located in three different regions of Brazil. Each experiment was composed of 40 plots (1m2 each one), 20 plots located at the border between the forest fragment and eucalypts plantation, and 20 plots in the interior of the forest fragments. In each experimental site, the plots were paired by two soil exposure conditions, 10 plots in natural conditions and 10 plots with soil exposure (no plant and no litter). During the rainy season, 2g of eucalypts seeds were sown in each plot, including Eucalyptus grandis or a hybrid of E. urophylla×E. grandis, the most common commercial eucalypt species planted in the three region. At 15, 30, 45, 90, 180, 270 and 360 days after sowing, we assessed the number of seedlings of eucalypts and the number of seedlings of native species resulting from natural regeneration. Fifteen days after sowing, the greatest number of eucalypts seedlings (37m-2) was observed in the plots with lower luminosity and exposed soil. Also, for native species, it was observed that exposed soil improved natural germination reaching the highest number of 163 seedlings per square meter. Site and soil exposure were the factors that have the greatest influence on seed germination of both eucalypt and native species. However, 270 days after sowing, eucalypt seedlings were not observed at any of the three experimental sites. The result shows the inability of eucalypts to adapt to condition outside of their natural range. However, native species demonstrated their strong capacity for natural regeneration in forest fragments under the same conditions where eucalypts were seeded. © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
It has been suggested that the disturbance caused by logging of tropical forests impairs timber tree regeneration, whilst foresters view logging as a means to stimulate both the growth of the residual trees and the germination and establishment of new recruits. Whilst substantial increases in tree seedlings after logging have been shown, there have been no direct tests of whether this initial enhancement is maintained. We tested if the initial response to logging in a tropical forest in Ghana resulted in increases in seedling recruitment relative to unlogged parts of the same forest and whether subsequent seedling mortality was greater in areas disturbed by logging. We also compared seedling composition, density, species diversity and height 7. y after logging to see if disturbed areas differed from unlogged areas. Timber tree species seedling recruits were assessed after logging in 160 sample plots randomly located on skid trails, felling gaps and in unlogged parts of the same forest. Recruits were named, tagged, mapped, counted and heights measured on five occasions spanning 7. y after logging had ceased. Seedling recruitment was initially enhanced by logging disturbance, principally by Pioneer species, but after 1. y Non-Pioneers dominated the recruits. Mortality of recruits was initially greater in unlogged areas but declined over the 7. y of the study converging on that of disturbed areas to an annualised rate of 0.2. The resultant densities of surviving recruits declined after the initial increase, especially amongst Pioneers. After 7. y, Pioneers were least abundant. Species diversity was initially enhanced by logging disturbance but declined on skid trails after 3. y. In unlogged forest, diversity of recruits increased steadily, and converged on disturbed samples by 7. y. Species composition of recruits initially differed between unlogged and logged samples, but showed convergence after 3. y. The initial effects of disturbance were, however, still detectable at 7. y. The results confirm the initial enhancement of timber tree recruitment after logging disturbance which suffered no greater mortality than unlogged areas. Within 7. y of logging, however, most measures of seedling dynamics were similar in logged and unlogged forest presumably due to canopy closure. Whilst most of the tallest trees at 7. y were Pioneer timber species, Non-Pioneers were numerically dominant. We conclude that appropriately controlled logging does not impair timber tree regeneration. The benefits appear to be securing the establishment and fast growth of Pioneer timber species whose regeneration might be less successful in unlogged forest. © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
Many invasive alien species (IAS) are used by local communities for a variety of subsistence and income generating purposes. This frequently poses a conflict of interest for their removal due to forest conservation and biodiversity concerns. However, if local use can simultaneously check or control specific IAS, the conflict can be avoided and both development and forest conservation perspectives accommodated in the short to medium term. We examine this for Lantana camara invasion in southern India through assessment of the demand for and impacts of harvesting on this globally problematic IAS. We interviewed local artisans regarding their knowledge and quantities of Lantana used, along with forest surveys to estimate Lantana densities and size classes in harvested and unharvested sites, and lastly we undertook controlled cutting in moist and dry deciduous forests in both the wet and dry seasons to examine rate of regrowth and mortality. Over the entire study area the abundance of Lantana far outweighed local demand, but at small scales around villages, density and size classes were significantly reduced through harvesting. The controlled cutting experiment showed marked seasonal differences, with the most severe cutting intensity resulting in significant mortality when Lantana plants were cut in the wet season, but with limited effect when cut in the dry season. We conclude that promoting local use of IAS may be a feasible approach in controlling them and thereby limiting their impacts in forests. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Mammals figure prominently in tropical ecology because of their role in seed dispersal, herbivore control, and nutrient cycling. Urbanization is a conservation concern for mammals not only because of lost habitat, but also other negative impacts such as illegal hunting and pollution. Some mammals are resilient to urbanization and can persist in degraded habitats; however, this has not been studied in many tropical sites. We used camera traps to study mammals in Peperpot Nature Park (PNP), a secondary forest located 5 km from the capital of Suriname, and compared it to the large Central Suriname Nature Reserve (CSNR). We found fewer species in PNP (20) compared to CSNR (30), however, PNP included apex predators and species of conservation concern, and the two sites had a similar relative abundance of large cats and most mesocarnivores. Smaller mammal species had higher relative abundance at PNP while larger herbivores were scarce or absent, likely from poaching, as PNP is still connected to interior forests. The detection models revealed that the park, the camera trap was set in, was the most common significant factor for most species, suggesting that broader landscape level effects are important. In occupancy models, the null model was the most common top model across species, but then followed by park. Despite fewer species being detected than in large protected areas, the presence of some species in PNP which are historically absent in developed areas shows promise for small urban tropical forests to support robust mammal communities, provided they maintain some connectivity to larger source habitats.
Unplanned selective logging for charcoal and firewood is a common practice in tropical montane cloud forest (TMCF), a high priority ecosystem for biodiversity conservation at the global scale. However, limited information is available regarding the impact of such logging on forest regeneration. We evaluated the abundance and composition of tree regeneration in four TMCF sites subject to traditional selective logging in southern Mexico. At each site, we calculated a tree extraction index based on the number of stumps, logs and charcoal kilns and established six 200 m(2) plots where the abundance of adult, sapling and seedling trees were recorded and canopy cover estimated. Based on the extraction index and estimated basal area values, two sites each were classified as being of low (L) and high (H) logging intensity; the extraction index was three times lower in L (7.5 and 9.2) than in H (35 and 35) sites, while basal area was significantly higher in L than in H sites (80.2 +/- 10.2 vs. 41.9 +/- 4.96 m(2) ha(-1), respectively). No significant differences were found among sites in terms of canopy cover, diameter and density of adult trees or in the density of saplings and seedlings (0.72 individuals m(-2)). In all sites, species of intermediate shade-tolerance dominated the regeneration (76%), followed by the shade-tolerant (23%) and pioneer (1%) species. Regeneration of Quercus spp. (four species) dominated at all sites (50.5%); this is a group of particular interest to the local communities because of its utility for firewood and charcoal. The similarity in composition between adult and regenerating tree species was relatively high in all of the sites (Morisita-Horn Index L1=0.86, L2=0.64, H1=0.69 and H2=0.71). These results indicate that, under the evaluated selective logging intensities, TMCF can sustain sufficient regeneration of Quercus spp. and thus presents an opportunity for sustainable management. The legacy effects of traditional selective logging on TMCF tree regeneration are discussed.
Background: Understanding forest dynamics after logging is essential to define forest management cycles and intensities. In secondary forest, especially in the Atlantic Forest Domain, these studies are still scarce. Monitoring of the canopy structure after tree harvesting can be performed by hemispherical photographs, where canopy opening is commonly analyzed. This study evaluated changes in canopy opening four years after tree harvesting in a secondary Atlantic Rainforest in southern Brazil. We used hemispherical photographs to determine the Canopy Openness (CO), Leaf Area Index (LAI), and Diffuse Fraction of Photosynthetically Active Absorbed Radiation (FAPAR(dif)) in eleven permanent plots.     Results: We found that harvesting resulted in a momentary increase in canopy opening and light availability in the understory. Four years after harvesting, CO, LAI and FAPAR dif recovered or even exceeded the original values of the forest. We observed a significant correlation between CO and number of trees harvested with DBH > 30 cm. Weak correlations were found between these canopy related variables and the logging intensity.     Conclusion: In conclusion, we recognized that changes of CO, LAI and FAPAR(dif) after timber harvesting presented short duration. This indicates that the applied logging intensities, 21.8 to 51.1% of the total basal area, did not exceed the resilience of the forest canopy and it's recovering four years later. However, additional studies should be carried out to observe vegetation dynamics, such as species composition, vertical structure, productivity and community stability, in order to improve management schemes of secondary stands in the Atlantic Forest.
With the implementation of a new legal framework for more responsible forest management in Peru, private small-medium forest enterprises (SMFEs) have become the most important social actors engaged in commercial forestry in the Peruvian Amazon. Despite the role of SMFEs in contributing to employment and local economic growth, there is little information with respect to their economic performance and capacities. This is a hindrance to efforts aimed at better characterizing this important sector and its influence on the development and conservation of tropical forests. For this study, 29 private SMFEs were surveyed to inventory their capital assets in order to evaluate their capacities to carry out timber management. Results indicate that SMFEs vary greatly in terms of their produced and natural capital assets, and consequently in their forest management capabilities as well. While most SMFEs lack adequate capacity for sustainable forest management, those that had more valuable timber resources and physical infrastructure attained forest certification. SMFE capacities depend greatly on external mechanisms to ensure consistent technical and financial assistance.
Peat fires in tropical peatland release a substantial amount of carbon into the environment and cause significant harm to peatlands and the ecology, resulting in climate change, biodiversity loss, and the alteration of the ecosystem. It is essential to understand peat fires and to develop more effective methods for controlling them. To estimate carbon emissions and monitor fires, the depth of burning can measure the overall burnt down the volume, which is proportional to the carbon emissions that are emitted to the environment. The first step is to understand the technique of measuring the depth of the burn. However, there is a lack of integrated information regarding the burning depth for peat fires. This review paper discusses the techniques used to measure the burning depth, with particular attention given to quantifying carbon emissions. The article also provides information on the types of methods used to determine the burning depths. This research contributes to the field of peat fire by providing a readily available reference for practitioners and researchers on the current state of knowledge on peat fire monitoring systems. © 2021, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH, DE part of Springer Nature.
One reason for the rapid loss of species-rich tropical forests is the high opportunity costs of forest protection. In Kalimantan (Indonesian Borneo), the expansion of high-revenue oil palm (Elaeis guineensis) plantations currently threatens 3.3 million ha of forest. We estimate that payments for Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation (REDD) could offset the costs of stopping this deforestation at carbon prices of US$ 10-33 per tonne of CO2, or $ 2-16 per tonne if forest conservation targets only cost-efficient areas. Forty globally threatened mammals are found within these planned plantations, including the Bornean orangutan (Pongo pygmaeus) and Borneo pygmy elephant (Elephas maximus borneensis). Cost-efficient areas for emissions reductions also contain higher-than-average numbers of threatened mammals, indicating that there may be synergies between mitigating climate change and conserving biodiversity. While many policy and implementation issues need clarification, our economic assessment suggests that REDD could offer a financially realistic lifeline for Kalimantan's threatened mammals if it is included in future climate agreements.
Vast areas of degraded tropical forest, combined with increasing interest in mitigating climate change and conserving biodiversity, demonstrate the potential value of restoring tropical forest. However, there is a lack of long-term studies assessing active management for restoration. Here we investigate Above-Ground Biomass (AGB), forest structure, and biodiversity, before degradation (in old-growth forest), after degradation (in abandoned agricultural savanna grassland), and within a forest that is actively being restored in Kibale National Park, Uganda. In 1995 degraded land in Kibale was protected from fire and replanted with native seedlings (39 species) at a density of 400 seedlings ha-1. Sixty-five plots (50 m × 10 m) were established in restoration areas in 2005 and 50 of these were re-measured in 2013, allowing changes to be assessed over 18 years. Degraded plots have an Above Ground Biomass (AGB) of 5.1 Mg dry mass ha-1, of which 80% is grass. By 2005 AGB of trees ≥10 cm DBH was 9.5 Mg ha-1, increasing to 40.6 Mg ha-1 by 2013, accumulating at a rate of 3.9 Mg ha-1 year-1. A total of 153 planted individuals ha-1 (38%) remained by 2013, contributing 28.9 Mg ha-1 (70%) of total AGB. Eighteen years after restoration, AGB in the plots was 12% of old-growth (419 Mg ha-1). If current accumulation rates continue restoration forest would reach old-growth AGB in a further 96 years. Biodiversity of degraded plots prior to restoration was low with no tree species and 2 seedling species per sample plot (0.05 ha). By 2005 restoration areas had an average of 3 tree and 3 seedling species per sample plot, increasing to 5 tree and 9 seedling species per plot in 2013. However, biodiversity was still significantly lower than old-growth forest, at 8 tree and 16 seedling species in an equivalent area. The results suggest that forest restoration is beneficial for AGB accumulation with planted stems storing the majority of AGB. Changes in biodiversity appear slower; possibly due to low stem turnover. Overall this restoration treatment is an effective means of restoring degraded land in the area, as can be seen from the lack of regeneration in degraded plots, which remain low-AGB and diversity, largely due to the impacts of fire and competition with grasses. © 2016.
Humans began to cultivate land thousands of years ago, for growing crops after clearing the previous vegetation cover and plowing the soil. The soil disturbance altered, in particular, soil C dynamics which has recently been exacerbated by the increase in crop intensification (i.e., fertilization, irrigation, liming, mechanization). This has resulted in major losses of terrestrial carbon (C); i.e., global emissions by the expansion of agriculture for croplands were estimated at 98.4 Pg C for the period 1850-2015. Cropland management can alter soil inorganic carbon (SIC) stocks which, in arid and semiarid climates, can be similar to or more than the amount of soil organic carbon (SOC) stock. However, whether a specific practice leads to a net sequestration of SIC in cropland soils needs additional research. Otherwise, the conversion of land to cropland in temperate regions may release up to 36% of the SOC stock to 27 cm depth, and up to 30% of the SOC stock to 48 cm depth in tropical regions. In 2000, about 12% of Earth's ice-free land surface or 15 million km(2) was used for croplands. Climate, geology, and land and crop management practices control the magnitude of the cropland SOC stock. A major fraction (25-70%) of the carbon dioxide (CO2) fixed during crop photosynthesis by gross primary production (GPP) is respired autotrophically (R-a) back to the atmosphere. Estimates of global cropland GPP vary between 8.2 and 20.0 Pg C yr(-1) (1 Pg = 10(15) g). The remaining net primary production (NPP = GPP - Ra) is the main C input into cropland soils. Cropland NPP includes the production of biomass in foliage, shoots and roots, weed and seed production, root exudation, the carbon (C) transfer to microorganisms that are symbiotically associated with roots, and the volatile organic carbon (VOC) emissions that are lost from leaves to the atmosphere. However, not all components of cropland NPP have yet been measured in a single study. NPP enters soil by rhizodeposition and decomposition of plant litter, but the major fraction is heterotrophically converted back to CO2 by soil respiration and some is lost as methane (CH4). Aside decomposition, C losses from croplands soils occur also by fire, erosion, leaching, and harvest. Thus, a small amount of fixed C remains in cropland soils and accumulates as SOC due to a combination of short- and long-term stabilization processes. Stabilization processes include physical protection of organic matter (OM) against decomposers and their enzymes, stabilization by organo-mineral complexes and organo-metal interactions, and some as biochemically recalcitrant black carbon (BC). Soil aggregation, in particular, may be the most important stabilization process in the surface layers of cropland soils. Site-specific factors including climate, physicochemical characteristics, soil and vegetation management determine the balance between C input and losses. Cropland soils can be recarbonized through the adoption of recommended management practices (RMPs) such as conservation tillage, residue mulching and use of cover crops, practices which all contribute to SOC accumulation and sequestration by an additional transfer of C from the atmosphere to the soil. Translating science of cropland soil management into a global restorative program is a high priority for feeding the world, mitigating climate change and improving the environment.
To mitigate global climate change, a portfolio of strategies will be needed to keep the atmospheric CO2 concentration below a dangerous level. Here a carbon sequestration strategy is proposed in which certain dead or live trees are harvested via collection or selective cutting, then buried in trenches or stowed away in above-ground shelters. The largely anaerobic condition under a sufficiently thick layer of soil will prevent the decomposition of the buried wood. Because a large flux of CO2 is constantly being assimilated into the world's forests via photosynthesis, cutting off its return pathway to the atmosphere forms an effective carbon sink. It is estimated that a sustainable long-term carbon sequestration potential for wood burial is 10 ± 5 GtC y-1, and currently about 65 GtC is on the world's forest floors in the form of coarse woody debris suitable for burial. The potential is largest in tropical forests (4.2 GtC y-1), followed by temperate (3.7 GtC y-1) and boreal forests (2.1 GtC y-1). Burying wood has other benefits including minimizing CO2 source from deforestation, extending the lifetime of reforestation carbon sink, and reducing fire danger. There are possible environmental impacts such as nutrient lock-up which nevertheless appears manageable, but other concerns and factors will likely set a limit so that only part of the full potential can be realized. Based on data from North American logging industry, the cost for wood burial is estimated to be $14/tCO2($50/tC), lower than the typical cost for power plant CO2 capture with geological storage. The cost for carbon sequestration with wood burial is low because CO2 is removed from the atmosphere by the natural process of photosynthesis at little cost. The technique is low tech, distributed, easy to monitor, safe, and reversible, thus an attractive option for large-scale implementation in a world-wide carbon market. © 2008 Zeng; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
Land-use land-cover (LULC) changes are occurring rapidly in Southeast Asia (SEA), generally associated with population growth, economic development and competing demands for land. Land cover change is one of the vital factors affecting carbon dynamics and emissions. SEA is an important region to study urban-caused LULC emissions and the potential for nature-based solutions (NBS) and nature climate solutions (NCS), as it is home to nearly 15% of the world’s tropical forests and has some of the world’s fastest rates of urban growth. We present a fine-scale urban cluster level assessment for SEA of current (2015) and future (2050) scenarios for carbon sequestration service and climate mitigation potential. We identified 956 urban clusters distributed across 11 countries of SEA. Considering the urban expansion projected and decline in forests, this region could see a carbon loss of up to 0.11 Gigatonnes (Scenario SSP4 RCP 3.4). Comparing carbon change values to urban emissions, we found that the average offset value ranging from −2% (Scenario SSP1 RCP 2.6) to −21%. We also found that a few medium and large urban clusters could add to more than double the existing carbon emissions in 2050 in the SSP3 and SSP4 RCP 3.4 scenarios, while a minority of clusters could offset their emissions under SSP1. Our study confirms that NCS, and particularly reforestation, are in many cases able to offset the direct emissions from land cover conversion from SEA urban clusters. Hence, documenting the plausible LULC transitions and the associated impacts gains significance in the SEA region as the results can be useful for informing policy and sustainable land management. Copyright © 2023 Kamarajugedda, Johnson, McDonald and Hamel.
Livestock production in the tropics contributes significantly to global greenhouse gas emissions, so better understanding the role of silvopastoral systems (SPS) in mitigating such emissions is necessary. The aim of this study was to evaluate the amounts of carbon stored in the biomass and soil organic carbon (SOC) components of a Leucaena leucocephala cum Panicum maximum silvopasture system (SPS) compared to a deciduous tropical forest (DTF), and a grass monoculture (GM) in Michoacán, Mexico. The above- and below-ground biomass were measured by destructive sampling in the SPS and GM, while previously reported allometric equations were used to quantify biomass stocks in the DTF. The SOC concentration up to 30 cm was determined by dry combustion method. The SPS and DTF contained more aboveground biomass (41.8 ± 3.30 and 36.7 ± 5.72 Mg DM ha                             −1                             ) compared to GM (8.0 ± 0.76 Mg DM ha                             −1                             ). However, the SPS exhibited greater belowground biomass (16.4 ± 1.95 Mg DM ha                             −1                             ) than the other systems. The DTF had the highest SOC fraction in all depth classes with values ranging from 3.1 ± 0.07% to 3.7 ± 0.06%, respectively, compared to the other systems. The total carbon stocks in SPS was similar to DTF (120.7 ± 10.97 vs. 120.9 ± 6.38 Mg C ha                             −1                             ) but was significantly higher than GM (78.2 ± 8.41 Mg C ha                             −1                             ). In dry tropical conditions, SPS displays enormous potential for increasing biomass and soil carbon stocks compared to the GM and can thus be used as a greenhouse gas mitigation strategy in livestock production systems.                          © 2018, Springer Science+Business Media B.V., part of Springer Nature.
Most of the West African forests have disappeared or have been deeply fragmented. This deforestation dynamic is still ongoing under a strong demographic pressure, forests being mostly replaced by agricultural lands. On the other hand, some reforestation projects are also undertaken, in particular by planting non-native species like Cedrela odorata. To our knowledge, this study is the first to investigate the causes and consequences of Cedrela odorata spread in West African natural forests. We studied a 400ha area of natural forest where 100ha of permanent plots have been affected by a major fire in 1983. Within these permanent plots, 21,444 trees were mapped, botanically determined and their diameters at breast height were measured in 2018. Using a bayesian hierarchical framework, we modelled the causes of the spread of Cedrela odorata in the studied plots, and its consequences on aboveground biomass and tree community diversity. Regarding the causes, the occurrence of Cedrela odorata is significantly linked to the fire occurence 25 years ago, to the proximity of the forest edge and to the presence of hydromorphic soils. Regarding the consequences, Cedrela odorata invasion doesn’t have any significant impact on the above-ground biomass but has a strong negative effect on the tree community diversity, as far as decreasing Simpson diversity in Hill numbers from 27 equivalent species in slightly invaded plots to 2 equivalent species in largely invaded plots. Our results highlight the long-lasting impacts of human disturbance (fire, Cedrela odorata introduction) on forest ecosystems and the need to use local species for ongoing reforestation plans in West African semi-deciduous forests. © 2020, Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
Reforestation dry tropical forests (DTF) has several challenges that need to be overcome. In this perspective, this study evaluated the performance of Cenostigma microphyllum seedlings inoculated with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF plants) for 2 years after transplanting to the field with different rainfall intensity. AMF plants showed the highest gs values in both plots. These plants in wet plots stored more soluble sugars in their stems and roots, whereas root tissue was chosen under the dry plot. AMF plants had more phosphorus than Control plants in dry plots. Furthermore, AMF plants were 24% and 27% larger than Control plants in wet and dry plots, respectively. AMF plants root diameter was 25% and 18% greater in wet and dry plots, respectively, than in the control plants. Thus, the AMF plants showed higher main root biomass in both plots than the Control plants. The results of this study confirm that inoculation of C. microphyllum seedlings during germination confers a physiological advantage to these plants in field conditions after transplanting, regardless of water availability in the plot, even after two dry seasons. This can be a useful tool for recovering deforested areas in DTF. © 2023 Elsevier Ltd
The harvesting of acai berries (palm fruits from the genus Euterpe) in Amazonia has increased over the last 20 years due to a high local and global market demand and triggered by their widely acclaimed health benefits as a 'superfood'. Although such increase represents a financial boom for local communities, unregulated extraction in Amazonia risks negative environmental effects including biodiversity loss through acai intensification and deforestation. Alternatively, the introduction of certified sustainable agroforestry production programs of acai has been strategically applied to reduce the exploitation of Amazonian forests. Local acai producers are required to follow principles of defined sustainable management practices, environmental guidelines, and social behaviors, paying specific attention to fair trade and human rights. In this study we investigate whether sustainable agroforestry and certification effectively promotes biodiversity conservation in Amazonia. To address this question, we conducted a forestry inventory in two hectares of long-term certified acai harvesting areas to gain further knowledge on the plant diversity and forest structure in acai managed forests and to understand the contribution of certification towards sustainable forest management. On average, we found that certified managed forests harbor 50% more tree species than non-certified acai groves. Trees in certified areas also have significantly higher mean basal area, meaning larger and hence older individuals are more likely to be protected. Certified harvesting sites also harbor dense populations of threatened species as classified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (e.g. Virola surinamensis, classified as 'endangered'). Besides increasing the knowledge of plant diversity in acai managed areas, we present baseline information for monitoring the impact of harvesting activities in natural ecosystems in Amazonia.
Agricultural expansion is the primary cause of forest loss and fragmentation. It threatens the conservation of its biodiversity as well as the capability to provide ecosystem services. Land-use policies, such as zonation programs, have been traditionally used as a tool for promoting a sustainable natural resource management; however, we still lack standardized methodologies that can be applied world-widely to achieve this purpose. In the current context of rampant deforestation over the tropical forests, there is an urgent need of identifying policies that steer agricultural land-use change into a reduced pressure on forests. This study focuses on the outcomes of the first territorial planning law in the Province of Formosa (Argentina) located within the Chaco region, one of the world's deforestation hotspots. The research questions were: a) How did agriculture expand in Formosa before, during and after the enactment of the territorial planning law? b) Did the introduction of the law affect the spatial distribution of land-use change?; and c) How did the sanction of the law affect forest loss and forest fragmentation? Landsat imagery was used to map land-use change, and to calculate the cover loss and cover loss rate considering the zoning and physiognomic classification of the law. The forest fragmentation was evaluated in terms of forest loss spatial configuration, classified as perforation or shrinkage, forest edge generation, patch size distribution, and patch isolation. The territorial planning law effect over agricultural expansion was tested using a difference in difference model. After the law was passed, a reduced land-use pressure was observed for the forest within the conservation designated zone; however, the forest presented the highest cover loss rates among the physiognomic categories of the law. Land-use change within the conservation designated zone was predominantly made according to a perforation spatial configuration, which promoted the forest edge generation. The isolation between forest patches decreased and its size distribution changed towards a less large-patch-centered pattern, indicating that Formosa is experiencing an early fragmentation process. Overall, the territorial planning law in Formosa succeeded in the relief of land-use pressure on forest, but highlighted the need of incorporating spatial configuration guidelines for long-term forest conservation. The case of Formosa case could be useful in the design of future sustainable natural resource management policies and implies the importance of early natural resource planning. © 2021
Despite the growing ecological and social importance of second-growth and regenerating forests across much of the world, significant inconsistencies remain in the legal framework governing these forests in many tropical countries and elsewhere. Such inconsistencies and uncertainties undermine attempts to improve both the transparency and sustainability of management regimes. Here, we present a case-study overview of some of the main challenges facing the governance of second-growth forests and the forest restoration process in the Brazilian Amazon, with a focus on the state of Pará, which is both the most populous state in the Amazon and the state with the highest rates of deforestation in recent years. First, we briefly review the history of environmental governance in Brazil that has led to the current system of legislation governing second-growth forests and the forest restoration process in Pará. Next, we draw on this review to examine the kinds of legislative and operational impediments that stand in the way of the development and implementation of a more effective governance system. In particular, we highlight problems created by significant ambiguities in legal terminology and inconsistencies in guidance given across different levels of government. We also outline some persistent problems with the implementation of legal guidance, including the need to understand local biophysical factors in order to guide an effective restoration program, as well as difficulties presented by access to technical assistance, institutional support and financial resources for the establishment and monitoring of both existing secondary forests and newly regenerating areas of forest. Whilst we focus here on a Brazilian case study, we suggest that these kinds of impediments to the good governance of second-growth forests are commonplace and require more concerted attention from researchers, managers and policy makers. © 2014 by the authors. licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Background and aims We examined changes in soil organic matter arising from conversion of a 45-year old pasture to a 10 yr. old native tree plantation in Panama, to evaluate the effect of monoculture and mixtures.     Methods We intensively sampled the soil 0-10 cm depth in the pasture in 2001 and in 22 plantation plots in 2011, ranging from 5 monocultures to 3- and 6-species treatments; samples were also taken from an undisturbed forest site. Soil analyses included organic carbon (SOC) and delta C-13.     Results Conversion of the pasture to tree plantation resulted in an overall loss of SOC of 0.6 kg m(-2) (18%) in the top 10 cm, but neither tree species nor diversity had a significant effect. End-member delta C-13 values suggested that the contribution of C-3 plants to SOC was increased from 26% in the pasture to 55% after 10 years of plantation and SOC turnover times were calculated to be 21-36 yr.     Conclusions The magnitude of the loss in soil SOC is smaller than the increases in tree biomass (similar to 3 kg C m(-2)) and litter (similar to 0.3 kg C m(-2)) in the plantation, but still a significant part of the ecosystem C balance.
We assessed changes in floristic composition, diversity and anthropogenic activities in an East African forest; Echuya Central Forest Reserve (ECFR). Using 272 permanent sample plots, comparisons between 2015 and 2021 were made. Twenty-two tree species were recorded with Macaranga capensis being the most dominant. Tree species density increased significantly from 152 stems/ha in 2015 to 306 stems/ha in 2021. Similarly, trees basal area increased significantly from 19 m(2)/ha in 2015 to 38 m(2)/ha in 2021. The bamboo stem density decreased significantly from 11,931 stems/ha in 2015 to 1807 stems/ha in 2021. Shrubs, lianas, vines and herbs' densities did not show significant differences between 2015 and 2021. Furthermore, a number of human activities significantly increased from 22 activities per hectare in 2015 to 83 per hectare in 2021. The Non-Metric Multidimensional Scaling (NMDS) ordination shows that the human activities with the strongest impact on tree species composition and basal areas were fuelwood collection, human trails, livestock grazing and pole cutting. In conclusion, ECFR is floristically poor; secondary forest tree species are replacing the bamboo forest and human activities could be negatively affecting the ECFR flora. We recommend interventions of increasing people's livelihood incomes to decrease their dependence on forest resources.
Deforestation has a substantial impact on aboveground biodiversity, but the response of belowground soil fungi remains poorly understood. In a tropical montane rainforest in southwestern China, plots were established along a forest degradation gradient ranging from mature and regenerated forests to open land to examine the impacts of forest degradation and deforestation on ecosystem diversity and function. Here, we evaluated the changes in belowground fungal diversity and community composition using a metabarcoding approach. Soil saprotrophic fungal richness declined with increasing forest disturbance. For example, Penicillium spp. (phosphorus [P]-solubilizing fungi) dominated in mature forest but were less abundant in regenerating forests and showed the lowest abundance in open land sites. Conversely, the abundance of facultative pathogenic fungi increased along the disturbance gradient. The decline in soil saprophytic fungi may be a direct result of forest disturbance or it may be associated with increased availability of soil phosphorus indirectly through an increase in soil pH. The increase in abundance of facultative pathogenic fungi may be related to reduced competition with saprotrophic fungi, changes in microclimate, or increased spore rain. These results demonstrate a loss of dominant P-solubilizing saprotrophic fungi along the disturbance gradient, indicating a change from soil P limitation in mature tropical forests to soil C limitation in deforested sites. The increased prevalence of pathogenic fungi may inhibit plant succession following deforestation. Overall, this research demonstrates that soil fungi can be used as a sensitive indicator for soil health to evaluate the consequences of forest disturbance. © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.
Changes in ground-foraging ant assemblages occurring along an agricultural intensification gradient were analysed in Nicaragua (Central America). Five habitat types were compared: secondary forest fragments, organic shade coffee and cocoa plantations, corn fields and active pastures. Ants were captured by tuna baiting following standardised protocols. Species richness and diversity decreased along the gradient from forest to the pasture, and each of the agricultural systems (cocoa, coffee and corn plantations) significantly differed in diversity. Species composition also differed along the disturbance gradient, as shown by multivariate analysis. Forest and pasture were at the extremes of the gradient and shared no common species. The ant assemblages associated with coffee plots, although poorer in species, were more similar to those of the forest than to those of the cocoa plantations. The observed trends confirm that shaded agro-forestry plantations can help to maintain high biodiversity levels in tropical landscapes. © 2010 Dipartimento di Biologia Evoluzionistica dell'Universitá.
This study assessed changes in herb, shrub and tree composition of Coal mining-affected forest (CMAF) area in relation to a community reserve forest designated as Non-affected forest (NAF) of Changki village, Nagaland, Northeast India. In all the three plant life forms, Shannon-Wiener index, Simpson’s diversity index and Margalef richness index showed higher species diversity and richness in NAF compared to CMAF while Sorenson’s index reveals a low species similarity between the sites. Pielou’s evenness was higher at NAF and a contiguous pattern was prominently distributed in both the forest. The family Poaceae, Asteraceae and Cyperaceae dominated the CMAF while Euphorbiaceae, Rubiaceae and Poaceae dominated NAF. The NAF has greater plant density compared to CMAF and the IVI shows the dominant status of native tree Terminalia myriocarpa in the Northeastern tropical forest. Weeds like Ageratum conyzoides, Bidens pilosa and Drymaria cordata were prominently distributed in CMAF while Abarema clypearia, Inula cappa and Strobilanthes coloratus has been obstructed by mining. The result imparted that the plant diversity of Nagaland tropical forests are under threat due to coal mining which has reduced the vegetation diversity and induce the loss of dominant plant species. As such, regulation of mine waste, land reclamation projects, robust forest management and bioremediation can be scientifically integrated to reduce the mining repercussion effects. Moreover, the result emphasizes the need to impart the tribal knowledge of preserving natural forest to the upcoming generations and develop conservation strategies to prevent further degradation or loss of biodiversity in this part of the Indo-Burma hotspot region. © International Society for Tropical Ecology 2023.
Forest degradation and hunting are two major drivers of species declines in tropical forests, often associated with forest production activities and infrastructure. To assess how the medium-to-large bodied terrestrial vertebrate community varied across these two main gradients of anthropogenic impact, we conducted a camera-trap survey across three production forest reserves in central Sabah, Malaysian Borneo, each with different past and current logging regimes. We analyzed data from a 32-species community using a Bayesian community occupancy model, investigating the response of occurrence, diversity, and composition to forest degradation and accessibility (a proxy for hunting pressure). We found forest degradation to be a strong driver of occurrence of individual species. Such responses led to declines in diversity and shifts in community composition, where forest-dependent species decreased while disturbance-tolerant species increased in occupancy probability with increasing forest degradation. Accessibility had a weaker effect on community diversity and species occupancy, and low-level hunting pressure and management of access to our study sites likely played an important role in mitigating accessibility effects. Nonetheless, our results showed accessibility had compounding effects on a wildlife community already affected negatively by forest degradation. Despite the impacts of forest degradation and accessibility on the terrestrial vertebrate community, our results highlight how the application of more sustainable practices-reducing forest disturbance and managing unauthorized access to logging roads-resulted in more intact wildlife communities. Understanding how both disturbances combined affect the terrestrial vertebrate community is essential for evaluating and developing effective sustainability guidelines.Abstract in malay is available with online material.     Kemerosotan hutan dan pemburuan adalah dua faktor utama penurunan spesies di hutan tropika. Kedua-dua ancaman ini selalu dikaitkan dengan aktiviti pembalakan dan pembangunan infrastruktur. Untuk menilai bagaimana komuniti haiwan vertebrata darat sederhana dan besar bertindak balas terhadapkedua-dua ancaman antropogenik ini, kami menjalankan survei perangkap kamera di tiga hutan simpan di pedalaman Sabah, wilayah Borneo Malaysia, masing-masing dengan rejim pembalakan yang berbeza pada masa lalu dan kini. Kami menganalisis data dari 32 spesies menggunakan model Bayesian community occupancy untuk meneliti corak occupancy, diversity dan composition terhadap kemerosotan hutan dan kebolehcapaian (sebagai proksi tekanan pemburuan). Kami mendapati bahawa kemerosotan hutan adalah pemacu kuat kepada occupancy- spesies. Respon tersebut mengakibatkan penurunan dalam diversity dan perubahan dalam composition komuniti, di mana spesies yang bergantung kepada hutan menurun sementara spesies yang lebih bertahan terhadap kemerosotan hutan meningkat dari segi occupancy. Kebolehcapaian (proksi tekanan pemburuan) menunjukkan kesan yang lebih lemah pada diversity dan occupancy. Tekanan pemburuan pada kadar yang rendah dan pengawalan akses ke lokasi survei kami berkemungkinan memainkan peranan penting dalam mitigasi kesan kobolehcapaian. Namun demikian, hasil kajian kami menunjukkan kebolehcapaian memberi kesan secara akumulatif kepada komuniti spesies yang sudah terpengaruh negatif oleh kemerosotan hutan. Meskipun ada impak kemerosotan hutan dan kebolehcapaian kepada komuniti vertebrata darat, hasil kajian kami menyoroti bagaimana pengurusan hutan yang lebih mampan seperti mengurangkan gangguan hutan dan menghadkan akses pemburu akan menghasilkan komuniti hidupan liar yang lebih utuh. Memahami bagaimana kedua-dua gangguan tersebut mengaruhi komuniti vertebrata darat secara bergabung adalah penting untuk menilai dan membangunkan garis panduan kelesterian alam yang efektif.     This study examines the impact of forest degradation and hunting on the terrestrial vertebrate community in Malaysian Borneo. Using camera traps across three forest reserves, it reveals that forest degradation significantly affects species occurrence, diversity, and composition, leading to declines in forest-dependent species and increases in disturbance-tolerant ones. While hunting pressure has a weaker effect, managing access to logging roads helps mitigate its impact, emphasizing the importance of sustainable practices for maintaining intact wildlife communities.image
Aims: The forest dynamics plots have been used as an effective platform to study the mechanism of biodiversity maintenance and community assembly. The semi-humid evergreen broad-leaved forest (SHEBF) is the zonal vegetation in the Central Yunnan Plateau. Because of the long-term influence of human activities and natural disturbance such as wildfires, the original SHEBF communities have been mostly destroyed, and replaced by secondary vegetation types. The extreme shrinkage of this zonal vegetation has raised increasing concern of conservation. Based on three forest dynamics plots we established in the Central Yunnan Plateau, we aim to explore the general characteristics of SHBEF in its floristic composition, community structure and diversity Methods: According to the Center for Tropical Forest Science (CTFS) standards at the Smithson Institute for Tropical Research, we established three forest dynamics plots (10 ha (500 m × 200 m), 8.24 ha (one subplot with 260 m × 240 m and two subplots with 100 m × 100 m), and 20.16 ha (720 m × 280 m)) as the data collection source of SHEBF from the following three areas: Zhujiangyuan (ZJY) in Qujing City, Diaoling Mountains (DLS) in Chuxiong City, and Jizu Mountains (JZS) in Dali City, respectively. The community data of the three forest dynamics plots were obtained using a portable backpack LiDAR and a laser rangefinder. We implemented floristic analysis, community classification, and community structure analysis for the communities in the plots. Results: (1) A total of 619 species of vascular plants belonging to 120 families and 355 genera were found in the three plots, including 70 families, 120 genera, 157 species in the ZJY plot, 92 families, 224 genera, 319 species in DLS plot, 100 families, 255 genera, 353 species in JZS plot. (2) A total of 103,951 woody individuals with DBH ≥ 1 cm were found in the three plots, including 24,932 individuals in the ZJY plot, 25,222 individuals in the DLS plot, 53,797 individuals in the JZS plot, with densities of 2,493, 3,061, and 2,690 ind./ha, respectively. (3) The proportion of temperate floras at the genus and species levels of all vascular plants in three plots was 51.3% and 24.7%, and the proportion of endemic species in plots was 33.0%. (4) The plant communities in plots were divided into eight alliances, Castanopsis orthacantha alliance, C. delavayi alliance, Lithocarpus craibianus alliance, L. dealbatus alliance, Pinus yunnanensis alliance, Cyclobalanopsis delavayi alliance, L. mairei alliance and Quercus senescens alliance; the DLS plot had the highest alliances diversity and ZJY plot the least. (5) The DBH class structure of tree species in the JZS plot and DLS plot were inverted “J” type, and unimodal in ZJY plot. The community data indicated that an intensive fire disturbance covered a part of the JZS plot 80–100 years ago, and a light-to-moderate disturbance swept across the DLS plot 50–80 years ago, and a stand replacing fire occurred the ZJY plot 36 years ago. Conclusion: This study laid a foundation for long-term systematic monitoring of the SHEBF community based on the forest dynamics plots while providing a theoretical basis for the diversity protection of this vegetation type and the sustainable forest management. © 2023, Chinese Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Forest structural complexity is a key element of ecosystem functioning, impacting light environments, nutrient cycling, biodiversity, and habitat quality. Addressing the need for a comprehensive global assessment of actual forest structural complexity, we derive a near-global map of 3D canopy complexity using data from the GEDI spaceborne lidar mission. These data show that tropical forests harbor most of the high complexity observations, while less than 20% of temperate forests reached median levels of tropical complexity. Structural complexity in tropical forests is more strongly related to canopy attributes from lower and middle waveform layers, whereas in temperate forests upper and middle layers are more influential. Globally, forests exhibit robust scaling relationships between complexity and canopy height, but these vary geographically and by biome. Our results offer insights into the spatial distribution of forest structural complexity and emphasize the importance of considering biome-specific and fine-scale variations for ecological research and management applications. The GEDI Waveform Structural Complexity Index data product, derived from our analyses, provides researchers and conservationists with a single, easily interpretable metric by combining various aspects of canopy structure. © The Author(s) 2024.
Feeding behavior of large herbivores determines the composition of their dung and together with environmental factors the intensity of decomposition processes leading to the recycling of nutrients in tropical forests. Large herbivore dung and its decomposition has so far been characterized by stoichiometric analyses of elements such as C and N. The objective of our study was to examine the suitability of biomarker analyses and analytical pyrolysis to infer large herbivore feeding behavior and the decomposition of their dung in different environments. Our conceptual approach included exposure of fresh dung of a grazing ruminant (gaur, Bos gaurus) and a non-ruminant mixed-feeder (the Asian elephant, Elephas maximus) in two tropical forest types (dry and moist) and analysis of dung biochemical composition in two seasons (dry and wet). To this end we characterized the dungs’ lignin and carbohydrate (sugar) signatures and pyrolysis products before and after 28 days of exposure. Our results showed that stoichiometric as well as biomarker analyses were able to differentiate gaur and elephant dung independent of season and forest type, while analytical pyrolysis products did not differ between dung types. The lignin signature of fresh dung additionally indicated the forage preference of animals in different forest types and seasons. During decomposition, C and N contents decreased and the chemical composition of both dung types converged. The lignin signature of dung at the end of the experiment showed higher lignin decomposition in moist forest and wet season than dry forest and dry season. We conclude that detailed biochemical analyses can provide deeper insights into the main controls of large herbivore dung and its decomposition in tropical forests than stoichiometric analysis. In particular lignin may be a suitable indicator to investigate large herbivore feeding behavior and the environmental conditions of their habitat. © 2020 Elsevier Ltd
Research highlights: Tropical forest restoration can be supported by the production of timber species in their understory. While they may appear at odds, they can be reconciled to promote environmental conservation and services. The lack of information on the management of tropical species causes a technical constraint for timber production in the understory of restoration sites, especially given the light restrictions. This issue could be amended with the development of methods to easily manage and estimate light availability, targeting management practices that balance restoration success and productivity. Materials and Methods: We conducted this study in an area within the Atlantic Forest, Brazil, where we tested the efficiency of chemical thinning to increase light availability in the understory of a five-year-old restoration planting, aiming to increase the growth rates of desirable timber species. Moreover, we tested the viability of using hemispherical photography taken with a smartphone to assess light incidence to assist restoration management practices. We calculated the percentage of photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) using a ceptometer in four different thinning intensities and compared them to the smartphone measures using correlation analysis. Results: Chemical thinning increased light incidence in the understory, with potential impacts on timber species productivity. Light management through PAR and canopy opening were highly correlated overall, especially after three months of management and 60% of thinning intensity. Conclusions: These findings demonstrate the potential for chemical thinning as a management practice to enhance light availability in the understory of tropical forest restoration sites. Additionally, our study highlights the value of using affordable and accessible tools like smartphones and fisheye clips for the indirect assessment of light conditions to promote natural regeneration and guide forest management and timber production in tropical forest restoration. © 2023 by the authors.
The effects of human disturbance on biodiversity can be mediated by environmental conditions, such as water availability, climate and nutrients. In general, disturbed, dry or nutrient-depleted soils areas tend to have lower taxonomic diversity. However, little is known about how these environmental conditions affect functional composition and intraspecific variability in tropical dry forests. We studied a seasonally dry tropical forest (SDTF) under chronic anthropogenic disturbance (CAD) along rainfall and soil nutrient gradients to understand how these factors influence the taxonomic and functional composition. Specifically we evaluated two aspects of CAD, wood extraction and livestock pressure (goat and cattle grazing), along soil fertility and rainfall gradients on shrub and tree traits, considering species turnover and intraspecific variability. In addition, we also tested how the traits of eight populations of the most frequent species are affected by wood extraction, livestock pressure, rainfall and soil fertility. In general, although CAD and environmental gradients affected each trait of the most widespread species differently, the most abundant species also had a greater variation of traits. Considering species turnover, wood extraction is associated with species with a smaller leaf area and lower investment in leaf mass, probably due to the indirect effects of this disturbance type on the vegetation, i.e. the removal of branches and woody debris clears the vegetation, favouring species that minimize water loss. Livestock pressure, on the other hand, affected intraspecific variation: the herbivory caused by goats and cattle promoted individuals which invest more in wood density and leaf mass. In this case, the change of functional composition observed is a direct effect of the disturbance, such as the decrease of palatable plant abundance by goat and cattle herbivory. In synthesis, CAD, rainfall and soil fertility can affect trait distribution at community and species levels, which can have significant implications for the ecosystem functioning of SDTF under increasing levels of disturbance, climate change and soil nutrient depletion. © 2018 The Author(s). Published by IOP Publishing Ltd.
Airborne imaging spectroscopy (IS) and laser scanning (ALS) have been explored widely for tree species classification during the past decades. However, African agroforestry areas, where a few exotic tree species are dominant and many native species occur less frequently, have not yet been studied. Obtaining maps of tree species would provide useful information for the characterization of agroforestry systems and detecting invasive species. Our objective was to study tree species classification in a diverse tropical landscape using IS and ALS data at the tree crown level, with primary interest in the exotic tree species. We performed multiple analyses based on different IS and ALS feature sets, identified important features using feature selection, and evaluated the impact of combining the two data sources. Given that a high number of tree species with limited sample size (499 samples for 31 species) was expected to limit the classification accuracy, we tested different approaches to group the species based on the frequency of their occurrence and Jeffries-Matusita (JM) distance. Surface reflectance at wavelengths between 400-450 nm and 750-800 nm, and height to crown width ratio, were identified as important features. Nonetheless, a selection of minimum noise fraction (MNF) transformed reflectance bands showed superior performance. Support vector machine classifier performed slightly better than the random forest classifier, but the improvement was not statistically significant for the best performing feature set. The highest F1-scores were achieved when each of the species was classified separately against a mixed group of all other species, which makes this approach suitable for invasive species detection. Our results are valuable for organizations working on biodiversity conservation and improving agroforestry practices, as we showed how the non-native Eucalyptus spp., Acacia mearnsii and Grevillea robusta (mean F1-scores 76%, 79% and 89%, respectively) trees can be mapped with good accuracy. We also found a group of six fruit bearing trees using JM distance, which was classified with mean F1-score of 65%. This was a useful finding, as these species could not be classified with acceptable accuracy individually, while they all share common economic and ecological importance.
A quarter of the deforested Amazon has regrown as secondary tropical forest and yet the climatic importance of these complex regenerating landscapes is only beginning to be recognised. Advances in satellite remote-sensing have transformed our ability to detect and map changes in forest cover, while detailed ground-based measurements from permanent monitoring plots and eddy-covariance flux towers are providing new insights into the role of secondary forests in the climate system. This review summarises how progress in data availability on Amazonian secondary forests has led to better understanding of their influence on global, regional and local climate through carbon and non-carbon climate benefits. We discuss the climate implications of secondary forest disturbance and the progress in representing forest regrowth in climate models. Much remains to be learned about how secondary forests function and interact with climate, how these processes change with forest age, and the resilience of secondary forest ecosystems faced with increasing anthropogenic disturbance. Secondary forests face numerous threats: half of secondary forests in the Brazilian legal Amazon were 11 years old or younger in 2023. On average, 1%-2% of Amazon secondary forests burn each year, threatening the permanence of sequestered carbon. The forests that burn are predominantly young (in 2023, 55% of burned secondary forests were <6 years old, <4% were over 30 years old). In the context of legally binding international climate treaties and a rapidly changing political backdrop, we discuss the opportunities and challenges of encouraging tropical forest restoration to mitigate anthropogenic climate change. Amazon secondary forests could make a valuable contribution to Brazil’s Nationally Determined Contribution provided there are robust systems in place to ensure permanence. We consider how to improve communication between scientists and decision-makers and identify pressing areas of future research. © 2025 The Author(s). Published by IOP Publishing Ltd.
Deforestation accounts for nearly 20% of anthropogenic greenhouse gasemissions in the world. Deforestation results in carbon emissions when treesand underlying vegetation are burning or decomposing. Deforested areas thatare later cultivated also release carbon to the atmosphere when soil carbon isoxidized. Further, deforested areas converted to other land uses (e.g., pastures)might sequester less carbon than forests, enabling greater levels of CO2 in theatmosphere. Providing incentives to prevent deforestation in foreign countrieshas been proposed in climate change legislation. An objective of thislegislation is to provide funding from carbon markets to assist foreigncountries in reducing deforestation and increasing forest restoration andafforestation. Challenges to this approach include implementing deforestationreduction activities in developing countries that may lack the capacity tomonitor and enforce measures, avoiding harm to indigenous communities whorely on forest resources, and matching policies with the various drivers ofdeforestation in different regions around the world. Legislative policies ondeforestation and climate change are analyzed in this chapter, and challengesfor restoring forests in the tropics are discussed.Deforestation1 is responsible for the largest share of additional carbondioxide (CO2) released to the atmosphere due to land use changes,approximately 20% of total anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissionsannually.2 Deforestation results in carbon emissions when trees and underlyingvegetation are burning or decomposing. Deforested areas that are latercultivated also release carbon to the atmosphere when soil carbon is oxidized.Further, deforested areas converted to other land uses (e.g., pastures) mightsequester less carbon than forests, enabling greater levels of CO2 in theatmosphere. Forests store approximately 45% of terrestrial carbon, and in the1990s were estimated to remove 2.6 billion tons of carbon (mtCO2) from theatmosphere per year; this sequestered amount is equivalent to approximately33% of anthropogenic carbon emissions from fossil fuel and land usechanges.3 Data on carbon sequestration and emissions are not available formany regions, making global estimates uncertain.Much of the deforestation responsible for CO2 releases occurs in tropicalregions, specifically in developing countries such as Brazil, Indonesia, and theDemocratic Republic of the Congo. Tropical forests store approximately 25%of the total global terrestrial carbon. Scientists estimate that tropicaldeforestation and other land use changes may have been responsible forreleasing approximately 1.5 billion metric tons of CO2 per year to theatmosphere during the 1 990s, and may be contributing similar amounts ofcarbon to the atmosphere today.4 Some contend that deforestation due tologging might result in small carbon emissions because timber converted intoproducts will not release CO2 immediately. Others disagree, stating that thepercentage of wood transformed into wood products is probably small intropical and temperate regions.Deforestation rates vary across the world, yet are generally higher intropical regions (see Figure 1). By continent, the highest rate of net forest lossis in South America, which lost approximately 4.3 million hectares (ha) of itsforest (0.5%) annually from 2000 to 2005. This is followed by Africa, whichlost approximately 4.0 million ha (0.6%) of its forest annually during the sameperiod. North America (including Central America), in contrast, lostapproximately 333,000 ha (0.05%) annually from 2000-2005; and in China,there was a reported gain of 4.1 million ha of forest annually (2.2%) during thesame period, primarily due to large-scale afforestation efforts.5. © 2010 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. All rights reserved.
Should "avoided tropical deforestation" be used to alleviate climate change? It is hotly debated today whether the reduction of tropical deforestation should be encouraged by means of a mechanism within the Convention on Climate Change. This mechanism ("avoided deforestation") would benefit developing countries which voluntarily reduce their deforestation rates, thereby generating at least two positive impacts: (i) an increase in the financial resources available to curb tropical deforestation, with expected positive side-effects on biodiversity conservation, the environmental services provided by these forests, and sustainable development as a whole, (ii) improved effectiveness of the global fight against climate change since tropical deforestation contributes extensively to world carbon emissions. Several proposals were designed for such a mechanism, yet their implementation poses significant methodological problems: (i) baselines calculated ex ante lack accuracy due to insufficient knowledge concerning the direct and underlying causes of deforestation, (ii) baselines calculated ex post lack legitimacy as they only refer to past trends, and (iii) uncertainty as to the actual possibility of relating a reduction in the deforestation rate to public policy options in the host country. Drawing lessons from our analysis, we recommend not promoting mechanisms based on financial rewards for an assumed voluntary reduction of national tropical deforestation rates. Two reasons justify our standpoint: the mechanism would probably generate fake reductions ("hot air") and undesirable side-effects would appear that are detailed in this paper. Rather, we encourage industrialized countries to better use already existing multi- and bilateral instruments, which focus on bettering governance deficiencies in countries hosting tropical forests. Besides, "perverse incentives" should be suppressed from public policies in tropical countries. © 2008 NSS Dialogues EDP Sciences.
We have previously reported that the prominent industrial enzyme producer Trichoderma reesei (teleomorph Hypocrea jecorina; Hypocreales, Ascomycota, Dikarya) has a genetically isolated, sympatric sister species devoid of sexual reproduction and which is constituted by the majority of anamorphic strains previously attributed to H. jecorina/T. reesei. In this paper we present the formal taxonomic description of this new species, T. parareesei, complemented by multivariate phenotype profiling and molecular evolutionary examination. A phylogenetic analysis of relatively conserved loci, such as coding fragments of the RNA polymerase B subunit II (rpb2) and GH18 chitinase (chi18-5), showed that T. parareesei is genetically invariable and likely resembles the ancestor which gave raise to H. jecorina. This and the fact that at least one mating type gene of T. parareesei has previously been found to be essentially altered compared to the sequence of H. jecorina/T. reesei indicate that divergence probably occurred due to the impaired functionality of the mating system in the hypothetical ancestor of both species. In contrast, we show that the sexually reproducing and correspondingly more polymorphic H. jecorina/T. reesei is essentially evolutionarily derived. Phenotype microarray analyses performed at seven temperature regimens support our previous speculations that T. parareesei possesses a relatively high opportunistic potential, which probably ensured the survival of this species in ancient and sustainable environment such as tropical forests. © 2010, American Society for Microbiology.
Agroforestry systems can influence the occurrence and abundance of pests and diseases because integrating crops with trees or other vegetation can create diverse microclimates that may either enhance or inhibit their development. This study analyzes the severity of coffee rust in two agroforestry systems in the provinces of Ja & eacute;n and San Ignacio in the department of Cajamarca (Peru). This research used a quantitative descriptive approach, and 319 photographs were collected with a professional camera during field trips. The photographs were segmented, classified and analyzed using the deep learning MobileNet and VGG16 transfer learning models with two methods for measuring rust severity from SENASA Peru and SENASICA Mexico. The results reported that grade 1 is the most prevalent rust severity according to the SENASA methodology (1 to 5% of the leaf affected) and SENASICA Mexico (0 to 2% of the leaf affected). Moreover, the proposed MobileNet model presented the best classification accuracy rate of 94% over 50 epochs. This research demonstrates the capacity of machine learning algorithms in disease diagnosis, which could be an alternative to help experts quantify the severity of coffee rust in coffee trees and broadens the field of research for future low-cost computational tools for disease recognition and classification
Primary tropical forests are becoming increasingly disturbed and fragmented, making it critically important to understand the conservation value of degraded forests. Many populations of even the largest and most iconic species are now found outside of primary habitats, and the long-term survival of these and many other species depends on appropriate management of degraded areas, whether protected or not. However, for conservation in degraded habitats to be successful, an adequate understanding of the minimal ecological requirements necessary for species persistence within them is required. We combined ground and helicopter nest surveys of critically endangered Bornean orangutans with high-resolution measurements of forest canopy structure from airborne Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) to understand orangutan nest site selection across multiple spatial scales in degraded forests of the Lower Kinabatangan region, Malaysian Borneo. We found orangutans to be selective when choosing nest sites, with nests more likely to be observed in canopies of tall and uniform height and closer to full canopy gaps, which was consistent across spatial scales and orangutan age and sex classes. These sites likely offer orangutans an improved vantage point and/or shelter from wind and rain. In contrast, no discernible relationships between nest site selection and canopy complexity, or nest abundance and landscape forest structure or aboveground carbon density were recorded. Our findings suggest that although orangutans do nest across a range of forest conditions, their optimum requirement for nesting strongly depends on forest patches with sufficient tall canopy of uniform height. These results serve to inform degraded forest conservation strategies across Borneo, particularly where orangutans are a focal species.
Mixed forest plantations now emerge as an alternative to traditional plantations in the tropics and represent ecological gains associated with production, wood quality and nutrient cycling. Mixed plantations with higher diversity may also be advantageous concerning their use of soil water. To shed light onto water-related issues of mixing Eucalyptus and a high diversity of tropical native trees, we explored the following questions: What is the impact of high diversity mixed plantations of Eucalyptus intercropped with native trees on soil water? How does the mixture affect the physiology of water use in native trees? Firstly, we tested the hypothesis that stands of Eucalyptus mixed with a high diversity of native trees consume less water compared to Eucalyptus monocultures, by measuring the temporal dynamics of soil water. Secondly, we tested how mixing with Eucalyptus affects the hydraulic performance of fast- and slow-growing native species in these forestry systems. This is the first time a large experiment has been implemented to compare the effects of monospecific Eucalyptus plantations, native species mixtures and mixed plantations of Eucalyptus and native species on soil water dynamics under controlled conditions in terms of site, age, soil type, topography and climate. We found that high diversity mixed plantations of Eucalyptus and native trees use less soil water, than Eucalyptus monocultures. However, the soil under the mixtures was drier than in native species stands. The mixing with Eucalyptus affected the hydraulic performance of native species by decreasing the leaf water potential and stomata] conductance of the fast-growing species, suggesting that fast-growing species performance may be especially constrained by competition for water from Eucalyptus. These findings have important implications for forest management and ecological restoration in the tropics. They will help to further develop silvicultural options to adapt to climate change and improve plantation forestry by using mixed plantations for production purposes or rehabilitation of degraded lands.
Combining spatially explicit land cover data from remote-sensing and faunal data from field observations is increasingly applied for landscape-scale habitat and biodiversity assessments, but without modelling changes quantitatively over time. In a novel approach, we used a long-term time series including historical map data to predict the influence of one century of tropical forest change on keystone species or indicator groups in the Kakamega-Nandi forests, western Kenya. Four time steps of land cover data between 1912/13 and 2003, derived from Landsat satellite imagery, aerial photography and old topographic maps, formed the basis for extrapolating species abundance data on the army ant Dorylus wilverthi, the guild of ant-following birds and three habitat guilds of birds differing in forest dependency. To predict the species' spatio-temporal distribution, we combined spatially explicit geographical information system (GIS)-based modelling with statistical modelling, that is, ordinary least square (OLS) regression models for D. wilverthi and simultaneous autoregressive (SAR) models for ant-following birds. We directly related bird habitat guilds to five forest classes as distinguished in the land cover time series. Extrapolation results over time predict dramatic losses in abundance for D. wilverthi (56%), ant-following birds (58%) and forest bird individuals in general (47%) due to a forest loss of 31% and small-scale fragmentation within the past century. Extrapolations based on a scenario of further deforestation revealed the negative consequences of clearing and splitting up continuous forest into isolated patches, whereas a reforestation scenario suggests the positive impact of natural forest regrowth and indigenous-tree planting. This study demonstrates the high potential of integrating remotesensing and field-based faunal data for landscape-scale quantitative assessments over time. In addition, it shows the suitability of extrapolation studies for evaluating measures of forest conservation.
Recent developments in international policy on Reduced Emissions from Deforestation in Developing countries (REDD) open the way for crediting of carbon saved by rural communities through management of the forests in their vicinity. Since the annual changes in forest carbon stock under this kind of management are relatively small and often under the canopy, they cannot easily be assessed using remote sensing, so ground-level data collection is likely to be essential over large areas of forests. The potential role of communities in measuring, monitoring and reporting carbon stock changes in their forests has been explicitly mentioned in UNFCCC documentation on methodology for REDD+, the extended form of REDD that includes forest enhancement, sustainable forest management and forest conservation. This book presents practical methods by which communities can do it. These methods were developed and tested with communities in villages in Africa and Asia under a six-year research programme. The reliability of the data gathered by the community is shown to be equivalent to that of professional forest inventories while the costs are much lower. Involvement of local communities in collection of this data may be the most cost-effective solution for national REDD+ programmes. Moreover, it could provide the basis for a transparent system for distribution of the financial rewards from REDD+ and the carbon market. The book first presents the policy context, concepts, methods and general results, which include estimates of typical carbon savings resulting from community management in different types of tropical forests. It also looks at the governance issues that may be involved and a variety of ways in which incentive schemes might be designed to encourage communities to participate. The second half of the book is devoted to case studies from the countries involved in the research. These provide both ideas and practical experience to enable agencies to engage with local communities to monitor carbon stock changes. © Margaret M. Skutsch, 2011. Published by Taylor & Francis. All rights reserved.
This paper assesses the role of protected and community managed forests for the long term maintenance of forest cover in the tropics. Through a meta-analysis of published case-studies, we compare land use/cover change data for these two broad types of forest management and assess their performance in maintaining forest cover. Case studies included 40 protected areas and 33 community managed forests from the peer reviewed literature. A statistical comparison of annual deforestation rates and a Qualitative Comparative Analysis were conducted. We found that as a whole, community managed forests presented lower and less variable annual deforestation rates than protected forests. We consider that a more resilient and robust forest conservation strategy should encompass a regional vision with different land use types in which social and economic needs of local inhabitants, as well as tenure rights and local capacities, are recognized. Further research for understanding institutional arrangements that derive from local governance in favor of tropical forest conservation is recommended. (C) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Invasive plant species can drive ecosystem change, particularly on oceanic islands that are vulnerable to plant invasions and subsequent biodiversity loss. While invasive species management is vital for habitat restoration, efficacy of management efforts and the ability of native plants to regenerate varies among studies. The aim of this study was to examine the consequences of managing a thicket-forming woody plant species—Psidium cattleyanum Sabine (strawberry guava)—on subtropical forest regeneration, comparing spatial scales and management periods. We surveyed 15 locations on Norfolk Island, an isolated Pacific Island with a high proportion of endemic and threatened species, by establishing paired managed and unmanaged plots to assess changes in species-area relationships, abundance, richness, and composition of the plant community. Total plant richness was higher in managed plots at the largest scale examined (125 m2). However, there was no significant difference between managed and unmanaged plots in the slopes of species-area relationships when canopy, understory, and seedling strata were combined. Stratum-specific analyses revealed that management-driven changes were most evident in the subcanopy strata, which had significantly higher woody plant abundance and richness in managed plots. Compositional dissimilarity between managed and unmanaged plots was greater in locations with higher moisture levels, suggesting that post-management regeneration is related to environmental conditions. This study suggests that P. cattleyanum suppresses plant recruitment and its removal allows for forest regeneration, indicating that management of dominant invasive woody species facilitates plant recruitment on Norfolk Island if nearby native propagule sources are present. © 2023, The Author(s).
Vegetation structural complexity is an important component of forest ecosystems, influencing biodiversity and functioning. Due to the heterogeneous distribution of vegetation elements, structural complexity underpins ecological dynamics, species composition, microclimate, and habitat diversity. Field measurements and Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) data, such as airborne (ALS) and terrestrial (TLS), can assess structural characteristics of forest and agroforestry systems at various spatial scales. This assessment is urgently needed for monitoring ecosystem restoration in degraded lands (e.g., in oil palm landscapes), where it is not well-known how structural measures derived from these different approaches relate to each other. Here, we compared the degree of correlation between individual and multivariate datasets of vegetation structural complexity metrics derived from ALS, TLS, and ground-based inventory approaches. The study was conducted in a 140 ha oil palm monoculture, enriched with 52 plots in the form of tree islands representing agroforestry systems of varying sizes and planted diversity levels in Sumatra, Indonesia. Our datasets comprised 25 ALS, five TLS, and nine groundbased inventory metrics. We studied correlations among metrics related to traditional stand summary, heterogeneity, and vertical and horizontal stand structure. We used principal component analysis for data dimensionality reduction, correlation analysis to quantify the strength of relationships between metrics, and Procrustes analysis to investigate the agreement between datasets. Significant correlations were found between ALS and TLS metrics for canopy density (r = 0.79) and maximum tree height (r = 0.58) and between ALS and ground-based inventory measures of stand heterogeneity and height diversity (r between 0.60 and -0.63). Further, we observed significant agreements between the ordinations of multivariate datasets (r = 0.56 for ALS - TLS; and r = 0.46 for ALS - ground-based inventory). Our findings underline the ability of ALS to capture structural complexity patterns, especially for canopy gap dynamics and vegetation height metrics, as captured by TLS, and for measures of heterogeneity and vertical structure as captured by ground-based inventories. Our study highlights the strength of each approach and underscores the potential of integrating ALS and TLS with ground-based inventories for a comprehensive characterization of vegetation structure in complex agroforestry systems, which can provide guidance for their management and support ecosystem restoration monitoring efforts.
Increasing reductions of tropical forests, especially in the Mata Atlântica bioma, have led to serious environmental consequences. However, there isagreat need for new restoration models in tropical forestry. The aim of this work was to evaluate alternatives to accelerate restoration and decrease costs for such restoration. Pigeon pea may help ecological restoration. The main hypothesis was that different densities of Cajanus cajan can promote ecological restoration. Cajanus cajan was interplanted with native trees ina2 × 4 m spacing. After 22 and 34 months of planting, four different treatments were evaluated. The treatments were: no guandu between tree lines; two seeds between tree lines; elimination of the one guandu plant after six months of planting and complete elimination of the two guandu plants after six months of planting. For data collection 100 trees were chosen by chance in each treatment. The results showed an increase in height where Cajanus cajan was present. 34 months after planting the total basal area of native trees planted close to two pigeon pea plants were significantly smaller when compared to those planted close to one pigeon pea per tree. The mortality of pioneer species without pigeon pea was significantly superior to the mortality of non-pioneer species in the same condition. The soil structure around Cajanus cajan showedalarger content of organic matter and less phosphorus, when compared to the testimony treatment. This study suggests negative and positive effects for the intercropping of Cajanus cajan and the native trees; therefore the first hypothesis is refuted and the second hypothesis is not.
Tree seedlings are commonly planted to restore abandoned agricultural lands, whereas vegetative plantings have received little study. We evaluated the ability of 10 tree species to establish and survive over 3 years by planting 2-m-tall vegetative stakes at three sites in southern Costa Rica. We quantified above- and belowground stake and seedling biomass for two species (Erythrina poeppigiana and Gliricidia sepium) after 1 year and canopy cover and height of E. poeppigiana stakes and saplings at 3 years. We also compared economic, logistical, and ecological advantages of each methodology. Erythrina poeppigiana and E. berteroana had the highest number of live stakes by the study's conclusion (> 90%) and were among species with largest canopies. Most others ranged between 40 and 70% with highly site-specific survival and growth rates, whereas three species did poorly. Four species developed fruit by year 3, including Ficus pertusa and Acnistus arborescens, that are consumed by frugivores. Above- and belowground biomass was 7-50 times greater in stakes (65-125 g) than seedlings (2-15 g). Stake roots were considerably more extensive and reached lengths more than 6 m. Erythrina poeppigiana stakes had higher canopy cover than saplings after 3 years but not height. Seedlings are 2-10 times more expensive to establish, although transporting stakes is more cumbersome and the suite of species that establish vegetatively is limited. This underused technique should be included in the growing repertoire of tropical forest restoration tools. Given tradeoffs in propagation methods, a combination is likely to be most efficient and successful.
The structure and dynamics of small plantations of pine (Pinus caribaea; 4 and 18.5 yr old in 1980) and mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla; 17 and 49 yr old in 1980) were compared with those of paired secondary forest stands of similar age and growing adjacent to each other under similar edaphic and climatic conditions. The study was conducted in the Luquillo Experimental Forest between 1980 and 1984. Comparisons included a variety of demographic, production, and nutrient cycling characteristics of stands. Although the small unmanaged plantations had a lower number of species in understory than paired secondary forests, the understory of the older plantations developed high species richness, including many of native tree species. After 17 yr, native tree species invaded the overstory of plantations. After 50 years the species richness in the understory of a mahogany plantation approached that of its paired secondary forest. Plantation understories had important ecological roles, including high nutrient accumulation. Understory plant tissue, particularly leaf litter, had higher nutrient concentration in pine plantations than in paired secondary forests. Understory biomass in plantations accumulated a higher proportion of the total nutrient inventory in the stand than did the understory in paired secondary forests. Plantations had higher aboveground biomass and net aboveground biomass production than paired secondary forests. Higher root densities and biomass were found in secondary forests as were greater depth of root penetration, higher nutrient concentration in roots, and more microsites where roots grow, than paired plantations. These characteristics may improve the capacity of secondary forests relative to that of paired plantations to rapidly recapture nutrients that become available by mineralization and that could otherwise be lost through hydrological or gaseous pathways. Both forest types accumulated nutrients and mass, but secondary forests recirculated nutrients much faster than the plantations, which tended to store the nutrients. Plantations had higher leaf fall and total litterfall, had litterfall with lower nutrient concentrations, accumulated more nutrients in litter, decomposed more litter on an annual basis, exhibited more variation in the spatial distribution of litter mass, and had more month-to-month variation in litter storage than paired secondary forests. Litter of the secondary forests, on the other hand, had a faster nutrient turnover than plantation litter, though plantations retranslocated more nutrients before leaf fall than did secondary forests. Nutrient retranslocation increased with plantation age. Plantations, particularly pine plantations, produced more litter mass per unit nutrient return than did paired secondary forests. Total nutrient storage in soil gave the best correlation with nutrient use efficiency estimated as element : mass ratios in various compartments. Nutrient use efficiency ranked differently among forest pairs, depending upon which nutrient and ecosystem parameters were being compared. Because of high retranslocation of nutrients, and in spite of greater nutrient "need" to produce higher biomass, plantations had nutrient demands on soil similar to paired secondary forests. Among the ecosystem parameters measured, nutrients in leaf fall correlated best with differences in soil nutrients across stands. Nutrient concentrations in understory species appeared to be a sensitive indicator of whole-stand nutrient use efficiency. Some of the observations of the study could be attributed to intrinsic differences between small unmanaged plantations and secondary forests, but many could be explained by species differences (i.e., timing of leaf fall), age of plantation (i.e., accumulation of biomass or species), or the relative importance of angiosperms and gymnosperms (i.e., nutritional quality of litter). The study challenges the conventional dogma with respect to differences between plantations and native successional ecosystems and underscores the dangers of generalizing about all tropical tree plantations or all natural tropical forests, or even extrapolating from one sector of the ecosystem to another.
Tropical forests are experiencing reduced productivity and will need restoration with suitable species. Knowledge of species-specific responses to changing environments during early stage can help identify the appropriate species for sustainable planting. Hence, we investigated the variability in whole-tree canopy conductance and transpiration (Gt and EL) in potted saplings of common urban species in Thailand, viz., Pterocarpus indicus, Lagerstroemia speciosa, and Swietenia macrophylla, across wet and dry seasons in 2017–2018. Using a Bayesian modeling framework, Gt and EL were estimated from sap flux density, informed by the soil, atmospheric and tree measurements. Subsequently, we evaluated their variations with changing vapor pressure deficit (VPD) and soil moisture across timescales and season. We found that Gt and EL were higher and highly variable in L. speciosa across seasons than S. macrophylla and P. indicus. Our results implied that water-use in these species was sensitive to seasonal VPD. L. speciosa may be suitable under future climate variability, given its higher Gt and EL across atmospheric and soil moisture conditions. With their lower Gt and EL, P. indicus and S. macrophylla may photosynthesize throughout the year, maintaining their stomatal opening even under high VPD. These findings benefit reforestation and reclamation programs of degraded lands. © 2021, The Author(s).
The northwestern Amazonian landscape includes most of the representative landscape units that characterize Amazonia, and for this reason it constitutes an excellent place to investigate relationships between the abiotic environment (geology, geomorphology, soils) and biodiversity. In this review we assess these relationships on three temporal/spatial scales. At the macroscale, the geology of this area includes the sub-Andean zone in the west, the Guiana Shield to the north, and the varied Neogene substrate and river valleys. These geological units account for much of the habitat variation that can be linked to species distributions. For instance, observations of different tree species communities in Ecuadorian or Peruvian Amazonia are explained by variations in soils and geological substrate. Mesoscale abiotic heterogeneity is reflected in the spatial configuration of different land units, which create conditions for habitat-specific forest types. Experimental field studies are needed to compare effects of the abiotic environment (water and soil nutrients) with those related to dispersal and species interactions. At microscales, processes in the biotic environment probably contribute most strongly to pattern formation in diversity and composition of floras or plant communities.
In recent years, the tropical coastal forest of the Siangjiaowan Ecological Reserve has been severely invaded by shade-intolerant species and Leucaena leucocephala due to road construction which created adverse edge effects along the forest. In addition, many valuable tree species lack new recruits. The composition and structure of this forest are dramatically altered compared to those 40 yr ago. To understand the current status of this coastal forest, we established a 1.55-ha sampling plot (300 m long, 40∼60 m wide) in the forest in January 2012. Each individual of a woody species was identifed and tagged, and its height, diameter at breast height (DBH), and location were recorded. In total, 1765 trees ha-1 belonging to 58 species with a DBH of ≥ 1 cm were recorded; among them, Aglaia formosana and Macaranga tanarius had the highest species abundances. For trees with a DBH of < 1 cm, a total of 3023 stems ha-1 belonging to 53 woody species was recorded, with 934 stems belonging to Agl. formosana. Among the 58 species with individuals with a DBH of ≥ 1 cm, e.g., Hernandia nymphiifolia and Barringtonia asiatica, most of them appeared to have a fuctuating diameter structure, indicating that many disturbance events had occurred during their regeneration process. Sorted by the Importance Value Index (IVI) of this stand, Bar. asiatica and Her. nymphiifolia were listed as nos. 1 and 3. However, Mac. tanarius and Melanolepis multiglandulosa, both very shade-intolerant species, were nos. 2 and 6 in the IVI. Furthermore, Mac. tanarius and Leu. leucocephala rapidly occupy tree-fall gaps created by disturbances from typhoons. From 1974 to 2012, species abundances of Her. nymphiifolia and Bar. asiatica were respectively reduced by 31 and 21%, and those of Murraya paniculata and Morinda citrifolia were reduced 51 and 55%, while those of Mac. tanarius and Mel. multiglandulosa increased 56-and-4 fold. The leaf area index of this tropical forest decreased from 3.96 to 1.73 after 2 typhoons hit in August 2012, but had rebounded to 3.02 in only 75 d after the second typhoon. Preliminary ecological restoration efforts of this forest were initiated in July 2012. We reduced the density of 3 invasive shade-intolerant species in a wind-disturbed site and planted Bar. asiatica and other native species of this coastal forest, in an effort to improve the stand structure of this tropical coastal forest.
Timber plantations have recently received considerable attention as a forest restoration strategy for heavily degraded lands in the humid tropics. Plantations can facilitate secondary forest regrowth by providing an understory environment more favorable for native plant recruitment than unmanaged degraded habitats. To better understand secondary forest development and to evaluate plantation use as a restoration strategy, we studied natural forest succession after plantation harvest in Kibale National Park, Uganda. We asked four questions concerning using plantations as a restoration tool. How does timber harvest affect forest succession? How does initial on-site recruit availability (e.g., seeds, seedlings) after logging influence successional pathways? How easily can forest succession be enhanced through intervention? How does using exotic timber plantations to restore forests compare with fire exclusion as a restoration strategy? Timber harvesting killed or severely damaged many native stems, hindering subsequent forest regrowth. Despite this setback, native stem densities 4-6 years after logging equaled or surpassed native stem densities in unlogged plantations, suggesting timber removal accelerated forest succession. Successional habitats with high and low initial densities of on-site recruits first diverged in forest structure and composition, but then converged for many of these variables within 6 years of logging. Intervening to accelerate forest succession met with mixed results. Removing non-tree vegetation did not enhance tree establishment, growth, or survival after 2 years. However, leaving standing, dead timber trees as perches for seed-dispersing birds seemed to increase seedling establishment relative to control areas. Mortality and growth of seedlings planted into successional habitats 1-2 and 5-6 years after logging were similar, and predicting individual species responses based on successional status was unsuccessful. We compared succession in unlogged and logged (5-6 years after logging) plantations to a similar aged site where fires were excluded but no plantation species established. Our results suggest excluding fire is a better strategy for promoting forest succession than establishing then not harvesting plantations. Fire exclusion versus establishing then harvesting timber are comparable restoration strategies differentially enhancing tree sapling recruitment and growth, respectively. While forest regeneration was successful where fire was excluded long-term fire exclusion may be difficult, and several non-ecological challenges to using plantations exist (e.g., the conflict of managing for biodiversity versus timber production). In summary, our research suggests managers should carefully weigh the risks of using plantations or fire exclusion against other forest restoration strategies. © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Community-based conservation and development has become the prevailing programmatic paradigm of conservation organizations and development donors over the last 20 years, spawning a myriad of integrated conservation and development projects (ICDP) around the world. Appealing for its ambitious aspiration to harmonize sustainable economic development at the local level with the conservation of legally established protected areas (e.g., parks and reserves), the ICDP approach recently has drawn criticism from conservation biologists for failing to ensure adequate protection of biodiversity. Development planners and economists have also raised questions about the financial sustainability of ICDPs in practice and the replicability of the model from highly local contexts to larger regional scales. This paper briefly reviews the central elements of the concept of integrated conservation and development and the emerging debate over its effectiveness. A description of the Community Initiative Program (CIP), a pilot program of the Rondônia Natural Resources Management project (PLANAFLORO) in the western Brazilian Amazon state of Rondônia, follows. The CIP is a significant experiment because it boldly attempted to apply the principles of ICDP to the regional scale involving numerous different communities in one program simultaneously. Based on the author's mid-term review of the CIP in 1999, the development and conservation impacts of the program are considered. While the CIP has not significantly curbed the degradation of protected areas in Rondônia as intended, the evidence suggests lower rates of deforestation in municipios (i.e. counties) with the highest concentrations of CIP projects. Although the economic development impacts are mixed, approximately 50% of the projects delivered tangible benefits to local communities. Lessons learned from the CIP are presented in the final section. Among the lessons learned from the CIP, detailed in the final section, are several that will be familiar to other ICDP evaluators: the importance of thematic coherence in initial project design, the need for explicit attention on environmental conservation objectives, deficient institutional capacity of implementing organizations, inadequate attention to women's concerns and roles in community projects, and lack of technical criteria for measuring project sustainability.
In Assam, a north-eastern state of India, most of the traditional agroforestry systems are still practised. The plant species composition of three agroforestry systems namely homegardens tea gardens and agrisilvicultural systems, were assessed using quadrat method. A total of 516 plant species belonging to 241 genera under 91 families were recorded, which consisted of 134 trees, 143 shrubs (67 shrub species and 76 species of saplings) and 239 herbs (93 herb species, 33 climber species and 113 species of seedlings). Homegardens had the highest species richness (475 plant species) belonging to 234 genera under 90 families. This was followed by agrisilvicultural systems (101 spp., 43 genera, 29 families), and the least was in tea gardens (79 spp., 41 genera, 25 families). The highest average number of plant species per system was recorded in homegarden (108.96 ± 5.96, range 23–207 spp.). A negative correlation was found between the agroforestry system plot size and plant species richness. Sorenson’s similarity index showed a very low degree of similarity in the plant species recorded among the three selected systems. Out of 516 plant species recorded across the different agroforestry systems, 1.0% species (n = 3) were vulnerable (Aquilaria malaccensis, Saraca asoca and Santalum album), 8.9% species (n = 46) were least concerned, 1.6% species (n = 8) were data deficient and 88.6% species (n = 457) were not assessed. Only homegarden recorded all the three plant species under the vulnerable category of IUCN Red List. It can be concluded that the agroforestry systems, specially the homegardens harbour rich plant diversity and act as miniature versions of natural forests by conserving rare, threatened and data-deficient plant species. The results suggest that the agroforestry systems with some management interventions need to be promoted as conservation models in areas with high pressure on tropical forests. © 2021, NAAS (National Academy of Agricultural Sciences).
The Eastern Ghats (EGs) comprise a chain of ancient low hills in the state of Andhra Pradesh adjoining the cast coast of India. These hill ranges are well known for a rich array of tropical forests with great conservation significance which support large human populations. A series of protected areas (PAs) have been established by the government along these ranges to conserve the regional biodiversity, but their effectiveness is often questionable. In order to assess the ecological status of the forests both within and outside the PAs and to assess the impacts of ongoing forestry practices a survey was conducted along the EGs. Plant species richness, and density of shrubs and trees, were estimated along disturbance gradients (core, buffer and fringe situations) using random plots of 10-m radius for trees, and 5-m radius (nested) plots for shrubs and saplings. Indirect evidence (spoor) of domestic and wild animals was recorded within the sample plots to compare habitat use by the animals. Srivenkateshwara National Park in the Seshachalam Hills, Gundlabrahmeshwaram Sanctuary in Nallamalais and some parts of Srisailam-Nagarjunasagar Tiger Reserve, had the least degraded forests due to their PA status. However, collection of non-timber forest products, bamboo harvesting and livestock grazing continues in all areas irrespective of legal status. All bamboo areas have been heavily worked. It is recommended that bamboo working should be stopped in core areas of the PAs and reduced from nine to six months (October to March) in the buffer zones. Summer is a period of potential water shortage for wild animals and bamboo workers' camps near water courses may affect habitat use by these species. The proposed Gudem Maripakhala Sanctuary, well known for its biogeographical value and diverse flora, is seriously threatened as a result of to extensive 'podu' (slash and burn) cultivation. It is suggested that an integrated approach to biodiversity conservation and better agricultural practices, should be adopted in this area. Some of the primary and old growth forests should be identified, mapped and given immediate protection, until a scientifically-based management plan is developed.
In the last few decades there has been a growing concern about the alarming increase in the rate of deforestation of the tropical forests and its impact on their biodiversity. This concern seems to be well placed considering that the tropical forests, which account for only about 7% of the total area, contain over 50% of the earth's biodiversity. In this paper, we address the conservation status of forests in India in the light of the worldwide view on this problem. We examine the changes in the forest area in the country for two time periods: (a) between 1900 and 2000, and (b) between 1990 and 1995. Our analyses suggest that the status of Indian forests in post-independence India has deteriorated far less when compared to pre-independence period, as also far less when compared to countries such as Brazil and Indonesia. However, it is necessary to continue keeping a close vigil on the rates of deforestation and formulate stronger conservation strategies that would strengthen further the conservation status of the forests in the country.
Intensive deforestation is reducing dry tropical forest areas worldwide and increasing its fragmentation. Forest remnants can be the basis for the future recovery of this forest type if appropriate management practices are applied. This requires a better knowledge of their conservation status and the assessment of their perceived value by land users. In this study we compare the structure, species richness and diversity of different types of tropical dry forest remnants in Nicaragua and we assess their conservation status based on a new index: Social simplified Importance Value Index (SsIVI). This index summarizes both ecological indicators and the perception by local stakeholders of the conservation status of the tree species present. Results show that gallery and hillslope forest remnants have higher species richness and diversity than isolated vestigial patches. In all remnants, species richness and diversity is higher in the tree layer than in the regeneration layer. No differences are observed in valorisation among different types of remnants either for the tree layer or for the regeneration layer. In the hillslope forests, where several degrees of disturbance are present, the valorisation decreases with increasing degradation. Results of species composition and forest structure indicate a strong degradation of dry tropical forest remnants in Nicaragua. However, the similar social valorisation of the three types of remnants suggests that they face similar threats but also similar opportunities to be preserved. A decrease in valorisation with increasing degradation warns about the potential loss of the most degraded areas, unless forest restoration is applied. © Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009.
In the current deforestation context, agroforestry is increasingly considered in the tropical zone for its potential contribution to biodiversity conservation. In Guinée Forestière (Guinea, West Africa), coffee-based species rich agroforests are currently expanding on agricultural land around most villages. To assess the role these agroforests play with respect to biodiversity conservation, we compared their tree structure and diversity with those of a neighbouring natural forest. Eighty plots were sampled using a variable area transect method (60 plots distributed into 3 village agroforests, 20 natural forest plots). The structure of coffee-based agroforests showed obvious signs of farmers' management: density of mature trees was significantly lower than in natural forest and most juvenile trees were eliminated and replaced by coffee trees. However, tree seedling density was not significantly different than in natural forest. Tree species richness and diversity were also lower than in natural forest but much higher than in any other agricultural or agroforestry land use system. These results are close to those obtained in the coffee-based agroforests of Central America, confirming that coffee-based agroforests retain many forest species that play a key role in the conservation of regional forest tree diversity. © 2010 Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
The forest restoration challenge (globally 2 billion ha) and the prospect of changing climate with increasing frequency of extreme events argues for approaching restoration from a functional and landscape perspective. Because the practice of restoration utilizes many techniques common to silviculture, no clear line separates ordinary forestry practices from restoration. The distinction may be that extra-ordinary activities are required in the face of degraded, damaged, or destroyed ecosystems. Restoration is driven by the desire to increase sustainability of ecosystems and their services and restoration is likely to have multiple goals arising from the motivations of those involved. The process of setting restoration objectives translates vague goals into feasible, measurable targets and ultimately actions on the ground. Our objective for this review is to synthesize the science underpinning contemporary approaches to forest restoration practice. We focus on methods and present them within a coherent terminology of four restoration strategies: rehabilitation, reconstruction, reclamation, and replacement. While not a consensus terminology, these terms have a logical foundation. Rehabilitation restores desired species composition, structure, or processes to a degraded ecosystem. Reconstruction restores native plant communities on land recently in other resource uses, such as agriculture. Reclamation restores severely degraded land generally devoid of vegetation, often the result of resource extraction, such as mining. Replacement of species (or their locally-adapted genotypes) with new species (or new genotypes) is a response to climate change. Restoration methods are presented as available tools; because adding vegetation is an effective restoration technique, the discussion of methods begins with a description of available plant materials. We then discuss altering composition under different initial overstory conditions, including deployment methods depending upon whether or not an overstory is present, how much of the landscape will be restored, and the complexity of the planting design. We present some major approaches for altering structure in degraded forest stands, and describe approaches for restoration of two key ecosystem processes, fire and flooding. Although we consider stand-level designs, what we describe is mostly scalable to the landscape-level. No restoration project is undertaken in a social vacuum; even stand-level restoration occurs within a system of governance that regulates relationships among key agents. Gathering information and understanding the social dimensions of a restoration project is as necessary as understanding the biophysical dimensions. Social considerations can trump biophysical factors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Land cover dynamics (LCD) in areas affected by different management types are hard to predict. Such is the case of tropical montane cloud forest (TMCF) areas in Mexico. The millenary itinerant milpa involves local cyclical deforestation and natural reforestation dynamics with long-lasting fallow periods. Conversely, induced grasslands for cattle, non-traditional maize cultivation with short fallow periods, and sedentary agriculture involve persistent deforestation rates. Also, human density changes could alter LCD. Ignoring such factors may lead to equivocal conclusions. We analyzed LCD using remote sensing analyses with LANDSAT images during two periods (1993–2005, 2005–2014) in a TMCF area in Sierra Norte, Oaxaca, affected by milpas, sedentary agriculture, and grasslands. We divided the study area into six indigenous sub-regions with different human population growth rates (HPG). We identified five land-cover types: mature forests (MF) dominated by TMCF species, early successional pine forests (PF), shrubby fallows (SH), croplands (milpas and more sedentary maize croplands together), and grasslands. We show that: (a) The 1993–2005 period was more variable than the 2005–2014 period, 27 % vs. 21 % of the total area displayed transitions into another class. (b) MF area dominated (277,128 ha), increased from 1993 (64.0 %) to 2014 (67.6 %), and was not statistically associated with HPG. (c) PFs decreased from 27 % in 1993 to 15 % in 2014, and their rate of change was negatively associated with HPG. (d) The total forest area (MF + PF) decreased by 9.3 %. (f) Grasslands, SHs, and croplands fluctuated between periods and sub-regions, but none exceeded 7 % of the total area. (g) Grasslands showed the greatest increase rate, mainly at the expense of forestlands. (h) The grassland and SH increments were positively associated with HPG. The heterogeneity in LCD among periods and sub-regions reveals the relevance of considering temporal and spatial scales within the same region. The persistence of MF and the PF decrease can be ascribed to the disruption of the successional dynamics related to the decline of the traditional milpa enforced by federal and state policies at the beginning of the 21st century, the sedentarization of agriculture, local conservation areas, increases of induced pastures, and human emigration. Although Sierra Norte is an essential reservoir of TMCFs, the decline of the total forest area, particularly secondary forests, is of concern given their roles in resilience and as carbon, culture, and biodiversity reservoirs. Humid mid-elevation areas of Sierra Norte are one of the few examples of mature forest persistence and secondary forest decline. © 2023 Elsevier B.V.
Remnants of lowland rain forest remain following deforestation, but the longer-term effects of fragmentation remain poorly understood, partly due to the long generation times of trees. We study rain forest trees in three size classes: seedlings (<1 cm dbh), saplings (1–5 cm dbh), and trees (>5 cm) that broadly reflect pre- and post-fragmentation communities, and we examine the impacts of fragmentation on forest regeneration in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo. We found that seedling richness (measured as the number of genera per plot) in fragments was about 30 percent lower than in plots in undisturbed forest, and about 20 percent lower than in an extensive tract of selectively logged forest, providing evidence of recruitment declines in fragments. Seedling richness was lowest in small, isolated, and disturbed fragments, potentially signaling an extinction debt given that these fragmentation impacts were not observed in trees. Unlike seedlings, saplings showed no declines in richness in fragments, suggesting that density dependent mortality (where rare individuals have a higher survival rate) and/or year-to-year variation in which species are recruiting could potentially compensate for the reductions in seedling richness we observed. Longer-term studies are required to determine whether sporadic or failed recruitment in small fragments will eventually translate into reduced richness of mature trees, or whether the processes that currently retain high sapling richness will continue in fragments. © 2018 The Authors. Biotropica published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation
Soil phototrophic microbes play key roles in many ecosystem functions, including nutrient cycling, water absorption and retention, substrate weathering and soil stabilization, as well as colonization and persistence of other organisms. Knowledge about the diversity and biomass of soil phototrophs remains limited, especially in tropical forests and savannas. Here, we investigate changes in the diversity and abundance of soil phototrophs across the 4-km elevation gradient on Mt. Cameroon, Africa, from tropical forests (0–2300 m) to treeless savanna (2300–3600 m) and afroalpine vegetation (3600–4000 m). We evaluated the role of soil chemistry and vegetation cover in shaping phototrophic diversity patterns using soil, tree and herb census data from 224 permanent plots. Cyanobacteria from Chroococcales accounted for 65% of the species richness and > 70% of the biovolume. The highest phototrophic diversity and biovolume were recorded in treeless savanna and afroalpine vegetation, and lowest values in mid-elevation tropical forests with dense understory vegetation and hence limited light availability. Higher diversity and biovolume of soil phototrophs were associated with less productive, well-illuminated soils with lower organic matter and nitrogen content and higher pH, phosphorus and cation content. Changes in microbial richness and biovolume across tropical forests showed a U-shaped elevation pattern, with higher values recorded in coastal and lowland forests up to 1000 m elevation, the lowest values in the mid-elevation open-canopy forests with dense understory vegetation caused by disturbances of forest elephants and higher values again in montane forests between 1800 and 2200 m. Above the tree line, soil phototrophic biovolume also showed a U-shaped elevation pattern, with lower richness recorded in compact grasslands between 2700 and 3400 m. At lower-elevation savanna, soil phototrophs are indirectly supported by regular fires during the dry season, which reduces plant cover and increases soil phosphorus and cations, while barren lava fields at higher elevations around the summit support soil phototrophs directly via increased soil P and K content and indirectly by inhibiting plant growth and vegetation cover. Our results shed light on an overlooked part of soil biodiversity in major tropical ecosystems and uncover the role of various ecological filters in structuring phototrophic microbial communities in tropical soils. © 2021, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.
Forest foundation species, vital for shaping community structure and dynamics through non-trophic level interactions, are key to forest succession and sustainability. Despite their ecological importance, the habitat ranges of these species in China and their responses to future climate change remain unclear. Our study employed the optimal MaxEnt model to assess the range shifts and their essential drivers of four typical forest foundation species from three climatic zones in China under climate scenarios, including Acer tegmentosum, Acer pseudosieboldianum (temperate zone), Quercus glandulifera (subtropical zone), and Ficus hispida (tropical zone). The optimal MaxEnt model exhibited high evaluation indices (AUC values > 0.90) for the four foundation species, indicating excellent predictive performance. Currently, we observed that A. tegmentosum and A. pseudo-sieboldianum are predominantly inhabited temperate forest areas in northeastern China, Q. glandulifera is primarily concentrated in subtropical forests in southeastern China, and F. hispida is mainly distributed across the tropical forests in southern China. Climate factors, particularly temperature, emerged as the primary environmental factors influencing the potential range of forest foundation species. Moreover, precipitation strongly influenced the potential range of A. tegmentosum and A. pseudo-sieboldianum , while elevation exhibited a greater impact on the range of Q. glandulifera and F. hispida . Under future climate scenarios, suitable areas for A. tegmentosum and A. pseudo-sieboldianum tend to expand southward, F. hispida tends to expand northward, while Q. glandulifera exhibited a tendency to contract towards the center. This study advances our understanding of the spatial and temporal dynamics of forest foundation species in China under climate change, providing critical insights for conservation efforts and sustainable forest management practices.
Understanding how transformed habitats act as reservoirs of biodiversity is a key challenge at a time when ecosystems are under unprecedented pressure. Here we compare tree and bird biodiversity in actively cultivated and abandoned cacao agroforests, and use a space for time approach to ask how this diversity has changed over 100 years of succession. Tree and bird communities were surveyed in cacao agroforests, secondary forests at different stages of succession and primary forests in the Northern Range of Trinidad, West Indies, to test the prediction that there are consistent temporal trends in alpha and beta-diversity across taxa. Temporal alpha-diversity was taxon dependent. We found that tree alpha-diversity increased with forest age. In contrast, there was no temporal trend in bird alpha-diversity. Tree and bird species richness were negatively correlated. Tree and bird composition varied with forest age and environmental distance. A greater proportion of native trees, and of highly forest-dependent and insectivorous birds were found in older forests. Our analyses show that actively cultivated and young abandoned cacao agroforests can sustain high bird alpha-diversity, despite lower levels of tree alpha-diversity. Old secondary and primary forests have unique species compositions including more sensitive and specialist species. Compositional shifts with successional stage for both trees and birds produce a patchwork of habitats that contribute to regional gamma-diversity. Synthesis and applications. Our research highlights the value of actively cultivated cacao agroforests and secondary forest alongside primary forests as reservoirs of biodiversity. By supporting both biodiversity and livelihoods, traditionally grown shade-cacao agroforests fall within a people and nature framework. Taken together, these results emphasise the contributions of secondary forests, which are often overlooked, to conservation. © 2021 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Ecological Society
The importance of spatial scale has been acknowledged as one of determining factors of species diversity in local and regional diversity. The aim of this study was to evaluate contribution of alpha (α) and beta (β) diversity across land-use type to gamma (γ) diversity at the margins of tropical forest in Central Sulawesi using dung beetles (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) as a focal group. Baited pitfall traps set in four land-use types ranging from natural forest through cacao agroforestry systems to open areas during two years of sampling (2009 and 2012). A total of 28 dung beetle species belonging to four genera were captured during the study period. The results showed that contribution of β diversity was higher than that of α diversity of dung beetles. Each land-use type contributed about 56.5 to 62.5% of the total species richness (γ diversity). The similar pattern of biodiversity between each spatial scale and during the two sampling years emphasized the large contribution of each land-use type to maintaining a high portion of the regional species richness. It suggests the importance of managing other land-use types, such as secondary forest and agroforestry as well as protecting the remaining natural forests. © 2013 Institut Pertanian Bogor
Tropical forests significantly contribute to local livelihoods as well as global carbon storage and biodiversity conservation. Therefore, a strategy that harmonizes a better quality of life for local people with tropical forest conservation is required. In Community-based ecotourism (CBET), the local community participates in related economic activities. In this chapter, we summarize our current studies that quantified the contribution of CBET to the income and livelihoods of local people and forest conservation. We selected the Chambok CBET site in Cambodia for our case study. First, we quantified the effectiveness of CBET in forest conservation by analyzing forest cover change with published maps created from satellite images. Second, we evaluated the contribution of CBET to household income and livelihood changes through a household survey using a questionnaire. Analysis of the forest cover change maps revealed that deforestation had significantly decreased inside the CBET area as compared to outside it, although the reduction was not enough to stop net deforestation. The survey revealed that the total monthly income of CBET member households and non-CBET households was not significantly different. It also showed that the community members felt the livelihood change after the implementation of CBET. However, this change may have been caused by general socioeconomic changes in Cambodia. We conclude that CBET effectively contributed to forest conservation but in a limited capacity to household income. © The Author(s) 2021.
The litter in tropical ecosystems is one of the compartments responsible for the transference of nutrients to the soil, having great importance for the conservation and maintenance of biodiversity. Thus, this study aimed to quantify the contribution and stock of litter and the leaf decomposition rate of Gardneriana byrsonima A. Juss (murici) in two areas of Caatinga, semiarid region of Alagoas State. Litter production was measured monthly from March of 2012 to February of 2013. The litter decomposition rate and the remaining leaf mass of the murici were also calculated and analyzed for its material chemically. The leaf decomposition was measured in litter bags and the material was chemically analyzed. In the area of Olho D'água Casado, the litter produced was over Delmiro Gouveia. The leaf fraction contributed to the higher percentage in the litter training in both areas. The leaf material showed slow decomposition to high levels of lignin, cellulose, hemicellulose, and high C:N ratio. © 2019 Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro (UFRRJ).
The development of gas transportation projects is considered as one of the main causes of the loss of biodiversity, habitat fragmentation and edge effect. This study has important implications in terms of conservation, forest regeneration and wildlife management.The biological monitoring methodology was designed and implemented for linear projects such as identification criteria considering borders, functional food webs and transversal adaptive management approach to the different stages of a development project (construction, operation and closure) allowing the biological monitoring program of the "Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for the development of the southern Kinteroni field area" (Peru) evolve through these stages and function as a management tool and as a support for the various planning entities involved in the development of linear projects in tropical forest. The identification of the distances between the edge zones, intermediate and deep forest was conducted by measuring the intensity of light, allowing adjusting the model by the different characteristics of the forest. Wildlife records were made using camera traps. Copyright 2013, Society of Petroleum Engineers.
Invasive alien species constitute a major threat to biodiversity and cases of extinction caused by invasive alien animals are abundant. However, while invasive alien plants also harm native biota there exists a lack of cases demonstrating their ability to cause extinction of native plant species. Different alien species (vertebrates, invertebrates, pathogens etc.) commonly deliver different simultaneous impacts like predation, disease or competition. In such situations, assessing the contribution of plant invasion in causing decline of a given plant population in its natural habitat can be difficult, yet is desirable to avoid or minimize wastage of managers' resources. Using native angiosperms in lowland wet forests of Mauritius, we first compared native seedling diversity in forest areas that have been weeded of invasive alien plants about a decade previously, with adjacent similar but non-weeded areas. Then, using the weeded area, we compared results of native plant surveys carried out around the time that invasive alien plants were controlled, with the same community about a decade latter. Species richness and abundance of seedlings were higher in the weeded areas compared to the adjacent non weeded forest. We also found that several species that were presumed extinct or critically threatened with extinction had recovered dramatically as a consequence of the sole removal of invasive alien plants. This shows that the threat posed by invasive alien plants can be overwhelmingly important in driving native plant population declines in tropical forests and that imminent plant extinctions can be averted by timely control of alien plants. © 2011 Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
Correlations between foliar nutrient concentrations and soil nutrient availability have been found in multiple ecosystems. These relationships have led to the use of foliar nutrients as an index of nutrient status and to the prediction of broadscale patterns in ecosystem processes. More recently, a growing interest in ecological stoichiometry has fueled multiple analyses of foliar nitrogen : phosphorus (N:P) ratios within and across ecosystems. These studies have observed that N:P values are generally elevated in tropical forests when compared to higher latitude ecosystems, adding weight to a common belief that tropical forests are generally N rich and P poor. However, while these broad generalizations may have merit, their simplicity masks the enormous environmental heterogeneity that exists within the tropics; such variation includes large ranges in soil fertility and climate, as well as the highest plant species diversity of any biome. Here we present original data on foliar N and P concentrations from 150 mature canopy tree species in Costa Rica and Brazil, and combine those data with a comprehensive new literature synthesis to explore the major sources of variation in foliar N:P values within the tropics. We found no relationship between N:P ratios and either latitude or mean annual precipitation within the tropics alone. There is, however, evidence of seasonal controls; in our Costa Rica sites, foliar N:P values differed by 25% between wet and dry seasons. The N:P ratios do vary with soil P availability and/or soil order, but there is substantial overlap across coarse divisions in soil type, and perhaps the most striking feature of the data set is variation at the species level. Taken as a whole, our results imply that the dominant influence on foliar N:P ratios in the tropics is species variability and that, unlike marine systems and perhaps many other terrestrial biomes, the N:P stoichiometry of tropical forests is not well constrained. Thus any use of N:P ratios in the tropics to infer larger-scale ecosystem processes must comprehensively account for the diversity of any given site and recognize the broad range in nutrient requirements, even at the local scale. © 2007 by the Ecological Society of America.
Large areas of remaining tropical forests are affected by anthropogenic disturbances of various intensities. These disturbances alter the structure of the forest ecosystem and consequently its carbon budget. We analysed the role of fine root dynamics in the soil carbon budget of tropical moist forests in South-east Asia along a gradient of increasing disturbance intensity. Fine root production, fine root turnover, and the associated carbon fluxes from the fine root system to the soil were estimated with three different approaches in five stands ranging from an old growth forest with negligible anthropogenic disturbance to a cacao agroforestry system with planted shade trees. Annual fine root production and mortality in three natural forest sites with increasing canopy openness decreased continuously with increasing forest disturbance, with a reduction of more than 45% between the undisturbed forest and the forest with large timber extraction. Cacao agroforestry stands had higher fine root production and mortality rates than forest with large timber extraction but less than undisturbed forest. The amount of carbon annually transferred to the soil carbon pool through fine root mortality was highest in the undisturbed forest and generally decreased with increasing forest use intensity. However, root-related C flux was also relatively high in the plantation with planted shading trees. In contrast, the relative importance of C transfer from root death in the total above- and below-ground C input to the soil increased with increasing forest use intensity and was even similar to the C input via leaf litter fall in the more intensively managed agroforest. We conclude that moderate to heavy disturbance in South-east Asian tropical moist forests has a profound impact on fine root turnover and the related carbon transfer to the soil. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Deforestation of tropical peat swamp forests is rapidly taking place across Southeast Asia to make way for agricultural expansion. Within forest ecosystems, macrofungi play a vital role, including wood decomposition and nutrient cycles. To reveal the effects of deforestation and land cover conversion on macrofungi in Southeast Asian tropical forests we assessed the relationship between environmental variables such as air temperature, relative air humidity, soil pH, soil moisture, canopy cover, canopy closure, habitat type (i.e., peat swamp forest, large-scale plantation, monoculture smallholding, and polyculture smallholding) and available substrata with macrofungal species richness and abundance. We sample macrofungi across four habitats on Peninsula Malaysia including peat swamp forest, large-scale plantations, monoculture smallholding and polyculture smallholding. We found that substrate richness had a positive effect on macrofungal morphospecies richness, while soil pH and air temperature had a negative effect. For macrofungal abundance, canopy closure and soil moisture had negative effects, whereas substrate richness and relative air humidity had positive effects. Our data showed considerable variation in functional group responses to environmental variables. The abundance of wood-inhabiting fungi was driven primarily by substrate richness, while relative air humidity, soil moisture, and habitat type play minor roles. The abundance of terricolous saprotrophic fungi was determined principally by habitat type, substrate richness, and relative air humidity. Macrofungal community structure was mainly influenced by substrate richness, followed by microclimates and soil characteristics. Our results can provides critical ecological data to support conservation stakeholders conserve macrofungi in natural and agricultural peatlands. Our study suggests that the expansion of oil palm monocultures, to the detriment of peat swamp forests, is likely to have negative effects on macrofungal biodiversity and further agricultural expansion should be prevented. © 2020 The Authors
Rainforest conversion and expansion of plantations in tropical regions are associated with changes in animal communities and biodiversity decline. In soil, Collembola are one of the most numerous invertebrate groups that affect the functioning of microbial communities and support arthropod predators. Despite that, information on the impact of changes in land use in the tropics on species and trait composition of Collembola communities is very limited. We investigated the response of Collembola to the conversion of rainforest into rubber agroforestry (“jungle rubber”), rubber, and oil palm plantations in Jambi Province (Sumatra, Indonesia), a region which experienced one of the strongest recent deforestation globally. Collembola were sampled in 2013 and 2016 from the litter and soil layer using heat extraction, and environmental factors were measured (litter C/N ratio, pH, water content, composition of microbial community and predator abundance). In the litter layer, density and species richness in plantation systems were 25%–38% and 30%–40% lower, respectively, than in rainforest. However, in the soil layer, density, species richness, and trait diversity of Collembola were only slightly affected by land-use change, contrasting the response of many other animal groups. Species and trait composition of Collembola communities in litter and soil differed between each of the land-use systems. Water content and pH were identified as main factors related to the differences in species and trait composition in both litter and soil, followed by the density of micro- and macropredators. Dominant species of Collembola in rainforest and jungle rubber were characterized by small body size, absence of furca, and absence of intense pigmentation, while in plantations, larger species with long furca and diffuse or patterned pigmentation were more abundant. Overall, land-use change negatively affected Collembola communities in the litter layer, but its impact was lower in the soil layer. Several pantropical genera of Collembola (i.e., Isotomiella, Pseudosinella, and Folsomides) dominated across land-use systems, reflecting their high environmental adaptability and/or efficient dispersal, calling for studies on their ecology and genetic diversity. The decline in species richness and density of litter-dwelling Collembola with the conversion of rainforest into plantation systems calls for management practices mitigating negative effects of the deterioration of the litter layer in rubber plantations, but even more in oil palm plantations. © 2021 The Authors. Ecology and Evolution published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Cost-effective, large-scale strategies are needed to restore degraded ecosystems worldwide. Applied nucleation is one technique that can accelerate succession in tropical forests. However, the effectiveness of irrigation and fertilization in the context of large-scale applied nucleation in tropical dry forests (TDFs) has not yet been tested. To this end, we established a large-scale experiment in southwestern Colombia on abandoned pastures. We planted 11,382 seedlings of 11 native species coupled with six management treatments that varied in the amounts of fertilizer and water. We monitored survival, height, and resprouting ability seedlings over 2 years. We also estimated the cost of seedling production, planting procedures, management, and monitoring, and assessed their cost-effectiveness using seedling survival as an indication of effectiveness. After 2 years, 73% (8,266) of seedlings planted survived, and species survival ranged from 5 to 99%. Individuals that received the lowest amount of fertilizer (25 g of Nitrogen, Phosphorus, and Potassium [NPK]) with additional irrigation had the highest survival rates (>76%). Final height ranged from 52 to 330 cm across species. Seedlings that received the highest amount of fertilizer (50 g of NPK) without additional irrigation had the highest mean final height (174 +/- 9.0 cm). The control was cheapest ($7313/ha) and the most cost-effective method in terms of seedling survival. Our findings suggest that the best way to establish cost-effective, large-scale restoration projects in TDFs is to plant native species mixtures of locally adapted species without fertilization and irrigation and to invest in long-term monitoring.
1. Biodiversity data are needed for conservation and management of tropical habitats, but the high diversity of these ecosystems makes comprehensive surveys prohibitively expensive and indicator taxa reflecting the biodiversity patterns of other taxa are frequently used. Few studies have produced the necessary comprehensive data sets to assess the quality of the indicator groups, however, and only one previous study has considered the monetary costs involved in sampling them. 2. We surveyed four plant groups (herbs, liverworts, trees, lianas) and eight animal groups (ants, canopy and dung beetles, birds, butterflies, bees, wasps and the parasitoids of the latter two) in 15 plots of 50×50m2 each, representing undisturbed rainforest and two types of cacao agroforest in Sulawesi, Indonesia. We calculated three biodiversity measures (α and β diversity; percentage of species indicative of habitat conditions), built simple and multiple regression models among species groups (single groups, combinations of 2-11 groups, averaged relative diversity of all 12 groups), and related these to three measures of survey cost (absolute costs and two approaches correcting for different sampling intensities). 3. Determination coefficients (R2 values) of diversity patterns between single study groups were generally low (<0·25), while the consideration of several study groups increased R2 values to up to 0·8 for combinations of four groups, and to almost 1·0 for combinations of 11 groups. Survey costs varied 10-fold between study groups, but their cost-effectiveness (indicator potential versus monetary cost) varied strongly depending on the biodiversity aspect taken into account (α or β diversity, single or multiple groups, etc.). 4. Synthesis and applications. We found that increasing the number of taxa resulted in best overall biodiversity indication. We thus propose that the most cost-efficient approach to general tropical biodiversity inventories is to increase taxonomic coverage by selecting taxa with the lowest survey costs. © 2010 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology © 2010 British Ecological Society.
Agricultural intensification and forest conservation are often seen as incompatible. Agricultural interventions can help boost food security for poor rural communities but in certain cases can exacerbate deforestation, known as the rebound effect. We tested whether coupling agricultural interventions with participatory forest zoning could improve food security and promote forest conservation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Simple agricultural interventions led to a >60% increase in cassava yields and a spill-over effect of improved cassava variety uptake in non-intervention zones. Household surveys conducted at the end of the 8 year project implementation period revealed that households that received agricultural interventions had more favorable attitudes toward forest zoning and conservation. The surveys also showed that farmers in the intervention domain practiced less land-intensive field and fallow management strategies compared to those practiced in the non-intervention domain. However, an 18 year time series analysis of Landsat satellite data revealed that agricultural expansion persisted in areas both with and without intervention assistance, and there is risk of a rebound effect. Approximately 70% of the tree cover loss that occurred outside of the agricultural areas was located within a 3 km buffer zone surrounding the outermost edges of the agricultural areas, which suggested that the majority of tree cover loss was caused by agricultural expansion. Within that 3 km buffer, average annual tree cover loss during the post-intervention period was higher in the intervention domain compared to the non-intervention domain (0.17% yr(-1) compared to 0.11% yr(-1) respectively, p < 0.001), suggesting risk of a rebound effect. The disconnection between household perceptions of zoning adherence and actual behavior indicates the importance of strengthening governance structures for community-based monitoring and enforcement.
Tropical ecosystem conversion to agriculture has caused widespread habitat loss and created fragmented landscapes composed of remnant forest patches embedded in a matrix of agricultural land uses. Non-traditional agricultural export (NTAE) crops such as pineapple are rapidly replacing multiuse landscapes characterized by a diverse matrix of pasture and smallholder crops with intensive, large-scale, monoculture plantations. Using an interdisciplinary approach, we conduct a case study to examine the coupled social and ecological implications of agricultural intensification in this region, with larger application to regions experiencing similar patterns of agricultural intensification. Guided by frameworks from both political and landscape ecology, we: (1) describe the social and economic implications of pineapple expansion, specifically the concentration of land, labor and financial resources, (2) quantify pineapple cultivation's spatial characteristics, and (3) assess the effects of pineapple expansion on surrounding forest ecosystems, on the agricultural matrix and on biodiversity conservation. Our results indicate that pineapple production concentrates land, labor, and financial resources, which has a homogenizing effect on the agricultural economy in the study region. This constrains farm-based livelihoods, with larger implications for food security and agricultural diversity. Landscape ecology analyses further reveal how pineapple production simplifies and homogenizes the agricultural matrix between forest patches, which is likely to have a negative effect on biodiversity. To offset the effects of pineapple expansion on social and environmental systems, we recommend developing landscape level land use planning capacity. Furthermore, agricultural and conservation policy reform is needed to promote landscape heterogeneity and economic diversity within the agricultural sector. Our interdisciplinary research provides a detailed examination of the social and ecological impacts of agricultural intensification in a tropical landscape, and offers recommendations for improvement relevant not only to our study region but to the many other tropical landscapes currently undergoing non-traditional agricultural export driven agricultural intensification. © 2015 Elsevier Ltd.
If global policies intended to promote forest conservation continue to use the definition of "forest" adopted in 2001 by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (an area of >0.05-1 ha with >10-30% cover of plants >2-5 m tall at maturity), great quantities of carbon and other environmental values will be lost when natural forests are severely degraded or replaced by plantations but technically remain "forests." While a definition of "forest" that is globally acceptable and appropriate for monitoring using standard remote sensing options will necessarily be based on a small set of easily measured parameters, there are dangers when simple definitions are applied locally. At the very least, we recommend that natural forest be differentiated from plantations and that for defining "forest" the lower height limit defining "trees" be set at more than 5 m tall with the minimum cover of trees be set at more than 40%. These changes will help reduce greenhouse gas emissions from what is now termed forest "degradation" without increasing monitoring costs. Furthermore, these minor changes in the definition of "forest" will promote the switch from degradation to responsible forest management, which will help mitigate global warming while protecting biodiversity and contributing to sustainable development.
Forest removal for livestock grazing is a striking example of human-caused state change leading to a stable, undesirable invasive grass system that is resistant to restoration efforts. Understanding which factors lead to resilience to the alternative grass state can greatly benefit managers when planning forest restoration. We address how thresholds of grass cover and seed rain might influence forest recovery in a restoration project on Hawaiʻi Island, USA. Since the 1980s, over 400,000 Acacia koa (koa) trees have been planted across degraded pasture, and invasive grasses still dominate the understory with no native woody-plant recruitment. Between this koa/grass matrix are remnant native Metrosideros polymorpha (ʻōhiʻa) trees beneath which native woody plants naturally recruit. We tested whether there were threshold levels of native woody understory that accelerate recruitment under both tree species by monitoring seed rain at 40 trees (20 koa and ʻōhiʻa) with a range of native woody understory basal area (BA). We found a positive relationship between total seed rain (but not bird-dispersed seed rain) and native woody BA and a negative relationship between native woody BA and grass cover, with no indication of threshold dynamics. We also experimentally combined grass removal levels with seed rain density (six levels) of two common understory species in plots under koa (n = 9) and remnant ʻōhiʻa (n = 9). Few seedlings emerged when no grass was removed despite adding seeds at densities two to 75 times higher than naturally occurring. However, seedling recruitment increased two to three times once at least 50% of grass was removed. Existing survey data of naturally occurring seedlings also supported a threshold of grass cover below which seedlings were able to establish. Thus, removal of all grasses is not necessary to achieve system responses: Even moderate reductions (~50%) can increase rates of native woody recruitment. The nonlinear thresholds found here highlight how incremental changes to an inhibitory factor lead to limited restoration success until a threshold is crossed. The resources needed to fully eradicate an invasive species may be unwarranted for state change, making understanding where thresholds lie of the utmost importance to prioritize resources. © 2023 The Ecological Society of America.
The Amazonian rain forests of Yasuni National Park, Ecuador (YNP), count among the world's forests regions with highest biodiversity, but are strongly threatened by deforestation. Cryptogams (bryophytes and lichens) are common and characteristic organisms in these forests, are sensitive to environmental changes, and are considered effective ecological indicators. The objective of this study was to explore the response of epiphytic cryptogams to forest succession in the Amazonian forests of YNP. We hypothesized that alteration of structural and micro-environmental characteristics of the forest, including reduction of canopy cover and lowering of tree species richness, lead to a reduction of species richness and changes in species composition of epiphytic cryptogams. We assessed species richness and composition of cryptogams on the bases of 442 trees in three stage of forest succession (early, intermediate, late), using generalized linear mixed models, multivariate analysis, beta diversity components and Mantel test. We registered 146 species of cryptogams, including 50 of lichens and 96 of bryophytes (39 mosses, 57 liverworts). Diversity of epiphytic cryptogams was highest in late succession forest, and lowest in early succession forest. Major changes in species richness and composition correlated with changes in canopy openness relative to the shift from early to late stages of forest succession. The results demonstrate for the first time the importance of tree species richness for cryptogamic epiphyte richness in Amazonian rain forests. Maintenance of high tree species diversity and structural heterogeneity in late succession forests can considerably contribute to the conservation of the cryptogamic epiphytes of Amazonian rain forests.
Tropical forest serves as an important pivotal role in terrestrial biological diversity. The Data Collection Survey on Forest Conservation aims to provide a comprehensive analysis of the current state of forests and evaluate the effectiveness of conservation efforts. This survey integrates advanced data collection methods, including remote sensing and Geographic Information Systems (GIS), to monitor forest health, biodiversity, and threats. This study makes an attempt to data collection surveying methods to assess forest management in Mahavir Swami Wildlife Sanctuary (MSWS), Lalitpur, UP, India, using Sentinel-2A sensor data. We selected tree samples from thirty transects in MSWS through random sampling. A method of collecting tree measurement factors based on height and DBH with a variety of high-precision methods is proposed. The data collection survey used in this study can help forest managers, environmentalist, and conservationist for formulating policies for management of forest ecosystem at various scales.  © 2025 Pankaj Lavania et al., published by Sciendo.
Understanding the mechanisms that drive the change of biotic assemblages over space and time is the main quest of community ecology. Assessing the relative importance of dispersal and environmental species selection in a range of organismic sizes and motilities has been a fruitful strategy. A consensus for whether spatial and environmental distances operate similarly across spatial scales and taxa, however, has yet to emerge. We used censuses of four major groups of organisms (soil bacteria, fungi, ground insects, and trees) at two observation scales (1-m2 sampling point vs. 2,500-m2 plots) in a topographically standardized sampling design replicated in two tropical rainforests with contrasting relationships between spatial distance and nutrient availability. We modeled the decay of assemblage similarity for each taxon set and site to assess the relative contributions of spatial distance and nutrient availability distance. Then, we evaluated the potentially structuring effect of tree composition over all other taxa. The similarity of nutrient content in the litter and topsoil had a stronger and more consistent selective effect than did dispersal limitation, particularly for bacteria, fungi, and trees at the plot level. Ground insects, the only group assessed with the capacity of active dispersal, had the highest species turnover and the flattest nonsignificant distance−decay relationship, suggesting that neither dispersal limitation nor nutrient availability were fundamental drivers of their community assembly at this scale of analysis. Only the fungal communities at one of our study sites were clearly coordinated with tree composition. The spatial distance at the smallest scale was more important than nutrient selection for the bacteria, fungi, and insects. The lower initial similarity and the moderate variation in composition identified by these distance-decay models, however, suggested that the effects of stochastic sampling were important at this smaller spatial scale. Our results highlight the importance of nutrients as one of the main environmental drivers of rainforest communities irrespective of organismic or propagule size and how the overriding effect of the analytical scale influences the interpretation, leading to the perception of greater importance of dispersal limitation and ecological drift over selection associated with environmental niches at decreasing observation scales. © 2021 The Authors. Ecology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Ecological Society of America.
This paper discusses the theory of decentralized forest management, the associated narrative and the underlying hypotheses. That discussion informs the assessment of whether decentralization can lead to forest conservation. The paper argues that the ideal model of democratic decentralization described in the literature is unlikely to be implemented given the governance constraints present in many tropical forest countries. Even if that model could be implemented, it is shown that decentralization cannot be expected to necessarily lead to forest conservation. The policies required to complement the current decentralization model are discussed, including financial incentives and monitoring and evaluation mechanisms. (C) 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
High deforestation rates in tropical forests of South America lead to biodiversity loss, climate change and alterations in nature’s contributions to people. Deforestation drivers vary across scales due to the heterogeneity of environmental and socioeconomic conditions and forest types. Here, we test the effects of deforestation drivers on deforestation rate from 2000 to 2020 at national and regional scales using Peru as a study case. To do that, we selected nine deforestation drivers commonly used in tropical deforestation analyses. We used the forest cover loss dataset of Global Forest Change to calculate deforestation rates. We conducted five path analyses, one for the national scale and the others for the four regions, using the district as a spatial unit. The national path model explained 34% of the total observed variance and showed that temperature, agriculture, transport network, precipitation, rural population and fire had a positive effect on deforestation, while the slope had a negative effect. The regional path models (63% of the total observed variance in the Coast region, 32% in the Andean, 60% in the High Rainforest and 75% in the Low Rainforest) showed that many national drivers remained at the regional scale. However, we found that the strength, relation (positive/negative) and type (direct/indirect) may vary. Therefore, identifying regional differences in deforestation dynamics is crucial for forest conservation planning and for addressing effective policies in tropical countries. However, improving the quality and availability of national data is essential for further advancing our understanding of this complex process. © The Author(s) 2024.
Forest cover change directly affects biodiversity, the global carbon budget, and ecosystem function. Within Latin American and the Caribbean region (LAC), many studies have documented extensive deforestation, but there are also many local studies reporting forest recovery. These contrasting dynamics have been largely attributed to demographic and socio-economic change. For example, local population change due to migration can stimulate forest recovery, while the increasing global demand for food can drive agriculture expansion. However, as no analysis has simultaneously evaluated deforestation and reforestation from the municipal to continental scale, we lack a comprehensive assessment of the spatial distribution of these processes. We overcame this limitation by producing wall-to-wall, annual maps of change in woody vegetation and other land-cover classes between 2001 and 2010 for each of the 16,050 municipalities in LAC, and we used nonparametric Random Forest regression analyses to determine which environmental or population variables best explained the variation in woody vegetation change. Woody vegetation change was dominated by deforestation (541,835km2), particularly in the moist forest, dry forest, and savannas/shrublands biomes in South America. Extensive areas also recovered woody vegetation (+362,430km2), particularly in regions too dry or too steep for modern agriculture. Deforestation in moist forests tended to occur in lowland areas with low population density, but woody cover change was not related to municipality-scale population change. These results emphasize the importance of quantitating deforestation and reforestation at multiple spatial scales and linking these changes with global drivers such as the global demand for food. Resumen Los cambios en la cobertura de bosque tienen efectos directos sobre la biodiversidad, el ciclo global del carbono, y el funcionamiento de los ecosistemas. Muchos estudios en la region de America Latina y el Caribe han documentado extensa deforestacion; sin embargo, existen estudios locales que reportan recuperacion del bosque. Ambas dinamicas, deforestacion y reforestacion, han sido relacionadas con cambios demograficos y socioeconomicos. Por ejemplo, dinamicas poblacionales, como la migracion rural urbana, pueden estimular la recuperacion del bosque, mientras que el aumento en la demanda mundial de alimentos puede promover la expansion agricola. Dado a que ningun estudio ha evaluado conjuntamente los procesos de deforestacion y reforestacion a escala municipal o regional, no existe un analisis sobre de la distribucion espacial de estos procesos. Hemos superado esta limitacion al producir, simultaneamente, mapas del cambio en las coberturas de vegetacion lenosa y usos del suelo entre 2001 y 2010 para cada uno de los 16,050municipios de America Latina. Se utilizo el analisis no parametrico de regresion Random Forest para determinar cuales de las variables demograficas o medioambientales explican la variacion del cambio en vegetacion lenosa. Los cambios mas significativos en la cobertura de vegetacion lenosa fueron causados por procesos de deforestacion (541,835km2), particularmente en los biomas de bosque humedo, bosque seco, y en las sabanas o matorrales de America del Sur. Igualmente, se registro un aumento en la cobertura de vegetacion lenosa (362,430km2), especialmente en zonas aridas o empinados poco favorables para la agricultura industrial.     La deforestacion en los bosques humedos tiende a ocurrir en zonas de baja elevacion y de poca densidad poblacional, sin embargo, los cambios en vegetacion lenosa no estuvieron relacionados con cambios en poblacion a nivel de municipio. Estos resultados enfatizan la importancia de cuantificar la deforestacion y la reforestacion a multiples escalas espaciales y de vincular estos cambios con acontecimientos globales, como el incremento mundial en la demanda de alimentos.
Over 400 million hectares of tropical forests are managed for timber production, comprising more than half of the remaining global permanent tropical forest estate. A growing proportion of tropical production forests are managed under Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) principles. The objective of SFM is to achieve multiple benefits, including forest protection, biodiversity conservation and income enhancement. However, the outcomes resulting from the implementation of SFM in tropical forest ecosystems have seldom been examined rigorously. In this paper, we present a methodological approach to assess broad-scale impacts of SFM policy in tropical forest ecosystems. As a case study, we investigated deforestation and timber production in logging concessions in the Republic of Congo after the implementation of its SFM-based forestry law in 2000. Compliance with the forestry law was incomplete, allowing a unique opportunity to compare deforestation and legal timber production outcomes in concessions that implemented SFM-based policy compared to those that did not. Quasi-experimental matching analysis indicated that deforestation in matched parcels in compliant concessions was up to 2-times higher than matched parcels in non-compliant concessions, equivalent to 67km2 of forest loss for the period 2005-2010. Annual deforestation data demonstrated that deforestation was stable or increased in all six concessions following the respective date of compliance in each concession. Legal timber production increased (by 5%, from 0.18 to 0.19 CBM/ha/yr) and became more stable, in compliant compared to non-compliant concessions. Our results suggest that the presence of SFM in a concession does not immediately lead to less deforestation. Rather, SFM policy may be associated with higher deforestation, because SFM is also associated with higher legal timber production, foreign capital, and international timber demand. Our findings measure short-term associations between SFM and deforestation in the Congo, and underscore the need for empirical evaluation of long-term impacts of SFM in tropical forest ecosystems worldwide. © 2015 Elsevier Ltd.
Accurate land cover change estimates are among the headline indicators set by the Convention on Biological Diversity to evaluate the progress toward its 2010 target concerning habitat conservation. Tropical deforestation is of prime interest since it threatens the terrestrial biomes hosting the highest levels of biodiversity. Local forest change dynamics, detected over very large extents, are necessary to derive regional and national figures for multilateral environmental agreements and sustainable forest management. Current deforestation estimates in Central Africa are derived either from coarse to medium resolution imagery or from wall-to-wall coverage of limited areas. Whereas the first approach cannot detect small forest changes widely spread across a landscape, operational costs limit the mapping extent in the second approach. This research developed and implemented a new cost-effective approach to derive area estimates of land cover change by combining a systematic regional sampling scheme based on high spatial resolution imagery with object-based unsupervised classification techniques. A multi-date segmentation is obtained by grouping pixels with similar land cover change trajectories which are then classified by unsupervised procedures. The interactive part of the processing chain is therefore limited to land cover class labelling of object clusters. The combination of automated image processing and interactive labelling renders this method cost-efficient. The approach was operationally applied to the entire Congo River basin to accurately estimate deforestation at regional, national and landscape levels. The survey was composed of 10 × 10 km sampling sites systematically-distributed every 0.5° over the whole forest domain of Central Africa, corresponding to a sampling rate of 3.3%. For each of the 571 sites, subsets were extracted from both Landsat TM and ETM+ imagery acquired in 1990 and 2000 respectively. Approximately 60% of the 390 cloud-free samples do not show any forest cover change. For the other 165 sites, the results are depicted by a change matrix for every sample site describing four land cover change processes: deforestation, reforestation, forest degradation and forest recovery. This unique exercise estimates the deforestation rate at 0.21% per year, while the forest degradation rate is close to 0.15% per year. However, these figures are less reliable for the coastal region where there is a lack of cloud-free imagery. The results also show that the Landscapes designated after 2000 as high priority conservation zones by the Congo Basin Forest Partnership had undergone significantly less deforestation and forest degradation between 1990 and 2000 than the rest of the Central African forest. © 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
The Hainan gibbon (Nomascus hainanus) is one of the most endangered primates in the world, confined to mature natural forest in Hainan Island, China. We assessed changes in habitat condition on the island between 1991 and 2008, using vegetation maps generated by remote-sensing images. We defined forest suitable for gibbons based on composition, tree size and canopy cover. During the 17-year period, the area of suitable gibbon forest decreased by 540km2 (35%) across the whole island, and by 6.3km2 (7%) in the locality of the sole remaining gibbon population at Bawangling National Nature Reserve. The forest patches large enough (>1km2) to support a gibbon group decreased from 754km2 to 316km2 in total area, and from 92 to 64 in number. Suitable natural forest was mainly replaced by plantations below 760m, or degraded by logging, grazing and planting of pines above 760m. Meanwhile, forests in former confirmed gibbon areas became more fragmented: mean area of patches decreased by 53%. We mapped the patches of natural forest in good condition which could potentially support gibbons. We recommend a freeze on further expansion of plantations between core patches at Bawangling, Jiaxi-Houmiling and Yinggeling Nature Reserves in accordance with forest protection regulations; establishment of nature reserves in currently unprotected natural forest patches elsewhere in line with the local government's nature reserve expansion policy; and active natural-forest restoration between remaining fragments at Bawangling. © 2010 Elsevier Ltd.
Forest degradation as a result of logging, shifting cultivation, agriculture and urban development is a major issue throughout the tropics. It leads to loss in soil fertility, water resources and biodiversity, as well as contributes to climate change. Efforts are therefore required to try to minimize further degradation and restore tropical forests in a sustainable way. This is the first research-based book to examine this problem in East Africa. The specific focus is on the forests of Ethiopia, Tanzania and Uganda, but the lessons learned are shown to be applicable to neighbouring countries and others in the tropics. A wide range of forest types are covered, from dry Miombo forest and afromontane forests, to forest-savannah mosaics and wet forest types. Current management practices are assessed and examples of good practice presented. The role of local people is also emphasized. The authors describe improved management and restoration through silviculture, plantation forestry and agroforestry, leading to improvements in timber production, biodiversity conservation and the livelihoods of local people. © Frans Bongers and Timm Tennigkeit 2010. All rights reserved.
Illegal extraction from protected areas is often shaped by the surrounding socio-economic landscape. We coupled village-scale socio-economic parameters collected using household surveys with measured levels of illegal resource extraction proximate to study villages to investigate the socio-economic drivers of illegal extraction from Kibale National Park, Uganda. The level of illegal tree harvesting and the number of illegal entry trails into the Park were driven by subsistence demand from villages adjacent to the Park and by for-profit extraction to supply local urban markets, whereas grazing in the Park was linked to high livestock ownership. Capital asset wealth, excluding livestock, was found to mitigate illegal resource extraction from the Park. We also found high human population density to coincide spatially with park-based tourism, research and carbon sequestration employment opportunities. Conservation strategies should be integrated with national policy to meet the needs of local communities and to manage urban demand to reduce illegal extraction from protected areas. Copyright © Fauna & Flora International 2013.
We studied the demography of two populations of Agave angustifolia, one in a preserved tropical dry forest (Xochicalco), and the other one in a pastureland area used for cattle grazing (Tembembe), to test whether populations are likely to thrive on the deteriorated habitats left after cattle ranching. Seed germination and seedling survival experiments were carried out in different natural microsites (i.e. under tree canopies and in open microsites). We built Lefkovitch matrices and carried out prospective (elasticity) and retrospective (Life Table Response Experiments) analyses for both populations. Numerical simulations were performed to project the effect of inflorescences harvest and seedling introduction. Seedling survival and seed germination were highest in Tembembe. Population growth rate was slightly higher in Tembembe (lambda = 1.268) than in Xochicalco (lambda = 1.208). Prospective and retrospective analyses showed that stasis and growth contributed most to population growth rate and that the differences between the two populations were accounted for a lower fecundity and stasis in Xochicalco compared to Tembembe. Simulations of inflorescence harvest showed that lambda dropped below unity only when all inflorescences were eliminated. The simulated introduction of seedlings produced a substantial rise in lambda. As the lambda values reflect thriving populations at both sites, we suggest that this species could be successfully used in restoration programs.
Rattan, Old World climbing palm, is an extremely valuable nontimber forest product whose canes are gathered for both market and nonmarket uses. I evaluated the effects, of harvesting commercial rattan, Calamus zollingeri Becc., on genet survival and ramet demography in two primary forest sites near Lore Lindu National Park in Sulawesi, Indonesia. I monitored 168 permanently marked C. zollingeri genets for 4 years and surveyed random transects for C. zollingeri genet and ramet populations and evidence of cane harvesting in 1996 and 2000. Cane harvesting had no significant effect on genet survival or mean ramet densities. However, current cane extraction rates significantly reduced mean cane lengths and total available cane throughout the study period. Based on observed genet and ramet populations and average cane growth rates area during the stud of 1.4 m/year, the sustained-yield harvesting potential of C. zollingeri is approximately 101 m and 56 m/ha/year in the two study sites. Although C. zollingeri exhibits life-history traits well suited to sustained-yield harvesting, including production of multiple canes, cane resprouting following harvest, rapid cane growth, and widespread abundance below 1100 m, current harvest rates exceed growth and yield, and supplies of cane are being depleted. Rattan harvesting is widespread in Lore Lindu National Park. Approximately 18% of the park (42,000 ha) is likely subject to intensive and unsustainable extraction of C. zollingeri.
Firmly incorporated into the Kyoto Protocol, market mechanisms offer an innovative and cost-effective means of controlling atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases. However, as with markets for many other goods and services, a carbon market may generate negative environmental externalities. Possible interpretations and application of Kyoto provisions under COP-6bis and COP-7 raise concerns that rules governing forestry with respect to the Kyoto carbon market may increase pressure on native forests and their biodiversity in developing countries. In this paper, we assess the following two specific concerns with Kyoto provisions for forestry measures. First, whether, under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), by restricting allowable forestry measures to afforestation and reforestation, and explicitly excluding protection of threatened native forests, the Kyoto Protocol will enhance incentives for degradation and clearing of forests in developing countries; second, whether carbon crediting for forest management in Annex I (industrialized) regions under Article 3.4 creates a dynamic that can encourage displacement of timber harvests from Annex I countries to developing nations. Given current timber extraction patterns in developing regions, additional harvest pressure would certainly entail a considerable cost in terms of biodiversity loss.     In both cases, we find that the concerns about deleterious impacts to forests and biodiversity are justified, although the scale of such impacts is difficult to predict. Both to ensure reliable progress in managing carbon concentrations and to avoid unintended consequences with respect to forest biodiversity, the further development of the Kyoto carbon market must explicitly correct these perverse incentives. We recommend several steps that climate policymakers can take to ensure that conservation and restoration of biodiversity-rich natural forests in developing countries are rewarded rather than penalized. To correct incentives to clear natural forests through CDM crediting for afforestation and reforestation, we recommend for the first commitment period that policymakers establish an early base year, such as 1990, such that lands cleared after that year would be ineligible for crediting. We further recommend an exception to this rule for CDM projects that are explicitly designed to promote natural forest restoration and that pass rigorous environmental impact review. Restoration efforts are typically most effective on lands that are adjacent to standing forests and hence likely to have been recently cleared. Thus, we recommend for these projects establishing a more recent base year, such as 2000.     For the second and subsequent commitment periods, we recommend that climate policymakers act to restrain inter-annex leakage and its impacts by ensuring that crediting for forest management in industrialized countries is informed by modelling efforts to anticipate the scale of leakage associated with different Annex I 'Land use, land-use change and forestry' policy options, and coupled with effective measures to protect natural forests in developing countries. The latter should include expanding the options permitted under the CDM to carbon crediting for projects that protect threatened forests from deforestation and forest degradation.     Ultimately, carbon market incentives for forest clearing can be reduced and incentives for forest conservation most effectively strengthened by fully capturing carbon emissions associated with deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries under a future emissions cap. Finally, we note that these recommendations have broader relevance to any forest-based measures to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions developed outside of the specific context of the Kyoto Protocol.
Despite huge gains in productivity, environmental impacts of industrial agriculture based on a few high-yielding crop cultivars and the massive use of chemical fertilisers and pesticides have led to a search for new pathways leading to more sustainable agriculture in both temperate and tropical regions. New strategies incorporating ecological knowledge gained from the observation of natural ecosystems is an alternative to design "ecologically intensive" agroecosystems. Such systems are indeed both ecological and productive. Designing ecologically intensive agroecosystems calls for in-depth knowledge of biological regulations in ecosystems, and for the integration of traditional agricultural knowledge held by local farmers. This article reviews the main initiatives underlying ecologically intensive agroecosystems, analyses basic concepts, and proposes a framework for action. The rainforest model, the dry forest model, and the American Prairie are exemplified as three main natural systems at the basis of the mimicry concept. The link between biodiversity and the mimicry hypotheses, and the use of the concepts of productivity, efficiency, stability, and resilience for agroecosystems are discussed. Six main principles for cropping system design based on natural ecosystem mimicry are identified. A three-step framework for action is proposed, including nature observation, experimental design, and participatory design. Although far from being a panacea, the mimicry approach can provide new ways for agroecosystem design both in temperate and tropical countries.
A multifunctional landscape approach to forest protection has been advocated for tropical countries. Designing such landscapes necessitates that the role of different land uses in protecting forest be evaluated, along with the spatial interactions between land uses. However, such evaluations have been hindered by a lack of suitable analysis methodologies and data with fine spatial resolution over long time periods. We demonstrate the utility of a matching method with multiple categories to evaluate the role of alternative land uses in protecting forest. We also assessed the impact of land use change trajectories on the rate of deforestation. We employed data from Kalimantan (Indonesian Borneo) at three different time periods during 2000-2012 to illustrate our approach. Four single land uses (protected areas (PA), natural forest logging concessions (LC), timber plantation concessions (TC) and oil-palm plantation concessions (OC)) and two mixed land uses (mixed concessions and the overlap between concessions and PA) were assessed. The rate of deforestation was found to be lowest for PA, followed by LC. Deforestation rates for all land uses tended to be highest for locations that share the characteristics of areas in which TC or OC are located (e.g. degraded areas), suggesting that these areas are inherently more susceptible to deforestation due to foregone opportunities. Our approach provides important insights into how multifunctional landscapes can be designed to enhance the protection of biodiversity. © 2015 IOP Publishing Ltd.
Conversion of natural, heterogenous tropical forests to intensively managed, monoculture-production landscapes is a major threat to biodiversity. This phenomenon is driven by global demand for commodities such as wood, palm oil, sugar, and soybean. The economies of many countries in tropical areas depend on these commodities, and there is a need to ensure economic welfare while protecting biodiversity. Certification schemes such as those developed by the Forest Stewardship Council and Roundtable for Sustainable Palm Oil are intended to provide incentive to companies to employ environmentally and socially sustainable production practices. One element of these certification schemes is the concept of High Conservation Values (HCVs) which fall into six categories that encompass ecological indicators and human dimensions. The HCV process has expanded beyond production landscapes to include long-term conservation planning. Despite expansion, implementation of the HCV process as it pertains to biodiversity is challenged, in part, by a lack of specificity regarding target metrics. Another challenge is that, in practice, there is a short time period for assessment, resulting in limited collection of primary data and a reliance on secondary data sources for interpolation. HCV guidance advances a precautionary approach to assessment, but in some regions, there is not enough known about the biology, behavior, or interspecific associations of species to effectively assess what is not observed. In this paper, we assess environmental HCVs in a well-studied timber production system in Sarawak, East Malaysia. Using an original long-term multi-method dataset of avifaunal surveys as well as published datasets of other taxa, we 1) assess biodiversity metrics at the site including presence of Rare, Threatened, and Endemic species, 2) assess change over time at assessment locations, and 3) evaluate costs and benefits of the various methods and provide best practice recommendations for HCV assessment and long-term monitoring. Finally, we recommend transparent data-archiving and sharing for improved accuracy and efficiency in the HCV process. Managed landscapes are important areas for ecological research that are beneficial not only to the restoration and conservation of species and ecosystems but also to well-informed certification and long-term sustainability. Copyright © 2022 Styring, Unggang, Ragai, Kueffner, Froehlich, Megom, Joseph, Jukie, Tarang, Nazrin, Sulok, Sekina, Setia, Giannone, Aron, Swartz, Hyde, Tyler and James.
Fire is a natural disturbance in many ecosystems worldwide, including tropical savannas, where it drives the assembly of animal and plant communities. The effect of fire is often indirect, impacting the availability of essential resources like food and shelter. The Brazilian Cerrado is the largest tropical savanna in the world, and ants comprise a very high proportion of its animal biomass. About one-third of the Cerrado ant fauna actively forages in the canopy. These ants use trees not just in search of food but also as their main shelter resource, as most arboreal ants nest mainly in cavities produced by wood-boring beetles. While it seems clear that fire can have important direct and indirect effects on arboreal ants, the number of studies using an experimental approach focusing on such impacts is relatively few. Here, we aimed to understand the impacts of fire on arboreal ants’ usage of shelter resources. Moreover, we also evaluated the potential influence of different fire intensities on these resources’ usage. For this, we assessed the colonization rates of experimental cavities under four different burning intensities: ‘control’, ‘low-intensity’, ‘intermediate-intensity’, and ‘high-intensity’. We hypothesized that fire would have a detrimental effect on cavity occupation. This effect would be stronger in higher intensity burns, once they can dramatically decrease the availability of natural cavities and, thus, the abundance and richness of arboreal ants. We also predicted that some ant species would be indicative of different fire intensities, due to differences in heat tolerance and colony size. Our data showed that fire had a major positive effect on experimental cavity use by arboreal ants, with more ant species, more colonized trees, and higher cavity occupation under fire treatments. This effect was higher with the increase of fire intensity. Some ant species were found more commonly on distinct fire treatments, which was mainly due to their different nesting site requirements and colony sizes. Jointly, these results show that fire affects arboreal ant cavity colonization patterns, and that fire intensity is extremely critical in shaping these patterns. Altogether, our work offers important insights for a better understanding of the effects of ecological disturbances on resource use patterns of a highly abundant and diverse organism. © 2020 Elsevier Ltd
The long-term trend in tropical forest area receives less scrutiny than the tropical deforestation rate. We show that constructing a reliable trend is difficult and evidence for decline is unclear, within the limits of errors involved in making global estimates. A time series for all tropical forest area, using data from Forest Resources Assessments (FRAs) of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, is dominated by three successively corrected declining trends. Inconsistencies between these trends raise questions about their reliability, especially because differences seem to result as much from errors as from changes in statistical design and use of new data. A second time series for tropical moist forest area shows no apparent decline. The latter may be masked by the errors involved, but a "forest return" effect may also be operating, in which forest regeneration in some areas offsets deforestation (but not biodiversity loss) elsewhere. A better monitoring program is needed to give a more reliable trend. Scientists who use FRA data should check how the accuracy of their findings depends on errors in the data. © 2008 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA.
Global biodiversity is increasingly threatened by land-use change, but the direct and indirect drivers of species diversity in human-modified tropical landscapes are poorly known. Forest-dependent species are expected to be particularly sensitive to changes in landscape composition (e.g., forest loss) and configuration (e.g., increase of forest edges), both directly and indirectly through cascading landscape effects on local patterns of forest structure and resource availability. In contrast, non-forest-dependent species are probably more strongly related to landscape changes than to local forest patterns, as these species are able to use resources not only from the forest, but also from other landscape elements over larger spatial scales. We tested these hypotheses using structural equation modeling. In particular, we sampled 20 landscapes (115 ha each) from the Brazilian Atlantic rainforest to assess the effect of landscape-scale forest cover and amount of forest edges on the diversity of frugivorous birds, both directly and indirectly through the effect that these landscape variables may have on vegetation complexity and fruit biomass. We separately assessed the response of forest-dependent and non-forest-dependent frugivores to infer potential mechanisms underlying bird assemblages in fragmented landscapes. The diversity of forest-dependent birds mainly decreased with the simplification of vegetation complexity in more deforested landscapes, but increased with increasing fruit biomass in more forested landscapes (indirect effects). Both patterns were significant, thus supporting a strong bottom-up control, i.e., local habitat simplification and resource scarcity in highly deforested landscapes limits the maintenance of forest-dependent birds. Conversely, but as expected, non-forest-dependent birds were more strongly and directly related to landscape-scale patterns. In particular, landscapes with higher forest edge amount showed higher bird species diversity, probably because the increasing length of ecotones and interspersion/juxtaposition of different habitat types in landscapes with more forest edges can increase resource availability and foraging efficiency of non-forest-dependent birds. As the seed dispersal services offered by forest-dependent species cannot be ecologically compensated for by the proliferation of non-forest-dependent species, preventing forest loss is imperative to maintain forest-dependent birds and forest regeneration in this vanishing biodiversity hotspot. © 2018 by the Ecological Society of America
Tropical regions are undergoing rapid land use change, with major implications for global biodiversity. Selective logging and agroforestry are particularly widespread across tropical forests, often occurring in close proximity. But while a number of studies have addressed their impacts separately, few have directly compared how they influence forest vertebrates. Here, we assessed the occurrence of medium- to large-bodied mammals in logged forest, unlogged forest, and agroforestry areas in three study areas in interior Sarawak, Malaysian Borneo. We detected 34 species across 99 camera trap locations and used multi-species occupancy models to estimate species-specific occurrence while accounting for imperfect detectability, spatial autocorrelation, natural habitat heterogeneity, and metrics of site accessibility (distance to human infrastructure) as proxies for potential hunting pressure. We found that species occurrences were unaffected by the distance to the nearest road or village and only responded to elevation and the distance to the nearest river in a single species each. Detection rates tended to vary with micro-habitat characteristics such as the size of tree stumps and the prevalence of trees and rattan palms, which are often not considered in camera-based occupancy studies. Occurrence rates of five species varied across habitat types but were not detectably lower in agroforestry sites than in unlogged forest for any species. Our results indicate that without unsustainable hunting, agroforestry and logged forest provide usable habitat for some, though not all, rainforest mammals. We also suggest that camera trap studies may benefit from the incorporation of fine-scale habitat information into detectability estimation. Abstract in Malaysian is available with online material. © 2022 Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation.
Natural regeneration of large-seeded, late-successional trees in fragmented tropical landscapes can be strongly limited by a lack of seed dispersal resulting in the need for more intensive restoration approaches, such as enrichment planting, to include these species in future forests. Direct seeding may be an alternative low-cost approach to planting nursery-raised tree seedlings, but there is minimal information on its efficacy or when in the successional process this technique will be most successful. We tested directly seeding five native tree species into habitats representing passive and active restoration approaches: (1) recently abandoned pasture; (2) naturally establishing, young secondary forests; and (3) young, mixed-species (fast-growing N-fixers and commercially valuable species) tree plantations established to facilitate montane forest recovery in southern Costa Rica. We monitored germination, survival, growth, and above- and below-ground biomass over a 2-year period. Germination in pastures, secondary forests, and tree plantations was similar (∼43%). Seedling survival after one and two years was significantly higher under tree plantations (91% year 1, 75% year 2) compared to secondary forests (76, 44%) or pastures (74, 41%). Moreover, seedlings had greater total biomass and lower root:shoot ratios in the plantations, suggesting higher nutrient availability in that treatment. Costs for direct seeding were 10- to 30-fold less per 100 seedlings after 2-year compared to nursery-raised seedlings planted at the same sites; however, there are important trade-offs to the two restoration approaches. Planting nursery-raised seedling is a more effective but higher cost approach for rapidly establishing canopy cover and restoring large areas whereas direct seeding is a more efficient way to enrich an existing system. We particularly recommend using direct seeding as a complimentary measure to the more intensive restoration approach of planting fast-growing and N-fixing trees. © 2010 Elsevier B.V.
Despite the overall trend of worldwide deforestation over recent decades, reforestation has also been found and is expected in developing countries undergoing fast urbanization and agriculture abandonment. The consequences of reforestation on landscape patterns are seldom addressed in the literature, despite their importance in evaluating biodiversity and ecosystem functions. By analyzing long-term land cover changes in Puerto Rico, a rapidly reforested (6 to 42% during 1940-2000) and urbanized tropical island, we detected significantly different patterns of fragmentation and underlying mechanisms among forests, urban areas, and wetlands. Forest fragmentation is often associated with deforestation. However, we also found significant fragmentation during reforestation. Urban sprawl and suburb development have a dominant impact on forest fragmentation. Reforestation mostly occurs along forest edges, while significant deforestation occurs in forest interiors. The deforestation process has a much stronger impact on forest fragmentation than the reforestation process due to their different spatial configurations. In contrast, despite the strong interference of coastal urbanization, wetland aggregation has occurred due to the effective implementation of laws/ regulations for wetland protection. The peak forest fragmentation shifted toward rural areas, indicating progressively more fragmentation in forest interiors. This shift is synchronous with the accelerated urban sprawl as indicated by the accelerated shift of the peak fragmentation index of urban cover toward rural areas, i.e., 1.37% yr21 in 1977-1991 versus 2.17% yr21 in 1991-2000. Based on the expected global urbanization and the regional forest transition from deforested to reforested, the fragmented forests and aggregated wetlands in this study highlight possible forest fragmentation processes during reforestation in an assessment of biodiversity and functions and suggest effective laws/regulations in land planning to reduce future fragmentation. © 2014 Gao, Yu.
Facilitation is an important ecological mechanism with potential applications to forest restoration. We hypothesized that different facilitation treatments, distance from the forest edge and time since initiation of the experiment would affect forest restoration on abandoned pastures. Seed and seedling abundance, species richness and composition were recorded monthly during two years under isolated trees, bird perches and in open pasture. Seed arrival and seedling establishment were measured at 10. m and 300. m from the forest edge. We sampled a total of 131,826 seeds from 115 species and 487 seedlings from 46 species. Isolated trees and bird perches increased re-establishment of forest species; however, species richness was higher under isolated trees. Overall, abundance and richness of seeds and seedlings differed between sampling years, but was unaffected by distance from the forest edge. On the other hand, species composition of seeds and seedlings differed among facilitation treatments, distance from the forest edge and between years. Seedling establishment success rate was larger in large-seeded species than medium- and small-seeded species. Our results suggest that isolated trees enhance forest re-establishment, while bird perches provide a complementary effort to restore tree abundance in abandoned pastures. However, the importance of seed arrival facilitation shifts toward establishment facilitation over time. Arriving species may vary depending on the distance from the forest edge and disperser attractors. Efforts to restore tropical forests on abandoned pastures should take into account a combination of both restoration strategies, effects of time and proximity to forest edge to maximize regeneration. © 2013 Gesellschaft für Ökologie.
Forest landscape restoration is a global priority to mitigate negative effects of climate change, conserve biodiversity, and ensure future sustainability of forests, with international pledges concentrated in tropical forest regions. To hold restoration efforts accountable and monitor their outcomes, traditional strategies for monitoring tree cover increase by field surveys are falling short, because they are labor-intensive and costly. Meanwhile remote sensing approaches have not been able to distinguish different forest types that result from utilizing different restoration approaches (conservation versus production focus). Unoccupied Aerial Vehicles (UAV) with light detection and ranging (LiDAR) sensors can observe forests` vertical and horizontal structural variation, which has the potential to distinguish forest types. In this study, we explored this potential of UAV-borne LiDAR to distinguish forest types in landscapes under restoration in southeastern Brazil by using a supervised classification method. The study area encompassed 150 forest plots with six forest types divided in two forest groups: conservation (remnant forests, natural regrowth, and active restoration plantings) and production (monoculture, mixed, and abandoned plantations) forests. UAV-borne LiDAR data was used to extract several Canopy Height Model (CHM), voxel, and point cloud statistic based metrics at a high resolution for analysis. Using a random forest classification model we could successfully classify conservation and production forests (90% accuracy). Classification of the entire set of six types was less accurate (62%) and the confusion matrix showed a divide between conservation and production types. Understory Leaf Area Index (LAI) and the variation in vegetation density in the upper half of the canopy were the most important classification metrics. In particular, LAI understory showed the most variation, and may help advance ecological understanding in restoration. The difference in classification success underlines the difficulty of distinguishing individual forest types that are very similar in management, regeneration dynamics, and structure. In a restoration context, we showed the ability of UAV-borne LiDAR to identify complex forest structures at a plot scale and identify groups and types widely distributed across different restored landscapes with medium to high accuracy. Future research may explore a fusion of UAV-borne LiDAR with optical sensors, and include successional stages in the analyses to further characterize and distinguish forest types and their contributions to landscape restoration. © 2023 The Authors
The geographic-ecological distribution of Ormosia macrocalyx Ducke was analyzed to delimit the occupation areas (AO) in Mexico, in order to recognize the ecological requirements of this tree species, which can contribute to the development and establishment of appropriate protection programs. All georeferenced species records were obtained from national and international herbaria as well as national forest inventories. Each record was correlated with the ecological variables from database of National Commission for the Knowledge and Use of Biodiversity and National Institute of Statistics and Geography and maps of the AO were drawn up. The AO were calculated and delimited by the Cartographic method by conglomerates. This species is distributed in the southern states of Mexico, occupying zones of high precipitation (>= 800 mm), at elevations lower than 1,150 m asl and mainly on Gleysol soils. It has been recorded in forest remnants in agroforestry systems and as isolated individuals. Five AO and 6 satellites were delimited, the 2 largest areas located within Tabasco and Chiapas. Due to its specialized habitat and the fragmented ecosystems in which it is found, this species can be categorized as vulnerable.
The relationship between species richness and aboveground biomass (richness-biomass relationship) is a major facet of ecosystem functions and has stimulated debates over the past decades. However, we still lack basic knowledge on whether this relationship has consistent patterns across natural and human-impacted vegetation cover types. More importantly, the effects of disturbance and climatic conditions on species richness and aboveground biomass remain controversial. Using data from 197 0.5-ha plots established within a forest-savanna transition ecosystem, we determined three ecological vegetation covers via non-metric multidimensional scaling, obtained gridded climate data and calculated disturbance index from species succession guilds. We examined the consistency of the richness-biomass relationship across the vegetation covers using general linear models and further analysed the effects of disturbance and climatic conditions on this relationship using non-mixed and mixed linear models. We identified three vegetation cover types corresponding to Old-growth forests, Cocoa agroforests and Woodland savannas, suggesting a succession gradient from late-, mid-, and early-successions, respectively. Aboveground biomass consistently increased with species richness across the three vegetation cover types (i.e. positive relationship). Species richness interacts with climate humidity to increase aboveground biomass while interaction of species richness and disturbance rather decreases aboveground biomass consistently across the vegetation cover types. Our results provide insights into the relationship between diversity and ecosystem functions, having implications for ecosystem restoration and understanding ecological consequences of disturbance and climate change in the forest-savanna ecosystem.
Aim: Identifying the drivers of biological invasions is crucial to predict the risk of invasion across broad spatial scales and to devise strategies to prevent invasion impacts. Here, we explore the relative importance and synergies between two key drivers—propagule pressure and landscape disturbance—in determining the invasion of native forest remnants by dogs, one of the most abundant, widely distributed, and harmful invasive species worldwide. Location: Brazilian Atlantic Forest. Methods: Combining a camera trap dataset (96 sites in forest remnants) and censuses of populations of dogs raised by humans across 12 landscapes (2,830 ha each), we used N-mixture models that account for imperfect detection to confront alternative hypotheses of invasion drivers. We then used this empirical evidence to predict the intensity of dog invasion across the Atlantic Forest hotspot. Results: Propagule pressure (density of raised dogs, positive effect) and landscape disturbance (forest cover, negative effect) were equally important drivers of dog invasion, presenting additive rather than synergistic effects. Dogs invade forest remnants far from their homes, making the density of raised dogs the key component of propagule pressure (relative to dog spatial distribution). Forest cover was more important than either the length or density of forest edges, suggesting that both reduced area of forested barriers to long-distance movements and increased proximity of forests to edges facilitate dog access to forests. Across the Atlantic Forest, the combination of high human population density and extensive deforestation makes dog invasion an additional and widespread threat. Main conclusion: Combined with available maps of priority areas for biodiversity conservation, our spatial prediction of dog invasion can help target areas for integrated management actions. These actions should go beyond measures to control dog populations and encompass the maintenance and restoration of native forests and strategic planning of afforestation through planted forests. © 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
As Neotropical forests are increasingly converted to agriculture (especially pastures), little is known about the impacts on microbial biodiversity. To assess such impacts, I compared spore abundance and diversity of arbuscular mycorthizal fungi (AMF) in soils from lowland evergreen forests and pastures in Nicaragua and Costa Rica. Species composition, dominance-diversity curves, and Simpson's diversity indices were similar for both forest and pasture soils. Of 28 distinct fungus morphospecies, 11 produced more spores in pasture, while only 1 produced more spores in forest. According to species-accumulation curves, local AMF species richness did not significantly decline following conversion of forest to pasture. Because pastures contained a surprising abundance and diversity of AMF spores compared to native forest, a lack of mycorthizal fungi is unlikely to limit plant succession, restoration, or reforestation in the pastures studied. At the regional scale, however, species-accumulation curves showed significantly greater gamma (G) diversity of spores in forest. In addition to these trends in diversity, species that sporulated more in pasture tended to have small spores, while the one species that sporulated more in forest had the largest spores. Similarly, only largespored fungi (>300 μm) showed any seasonal variation in spore abundance, being more common in the wet season.
Afromontane landscapes are typically characterized by a mosaic of smallholder farms and the biodiversity impacts of these practices will vary in accordance to local management and landscape context. Here, we assess how tropical butterfly diversity is maintained across an agricultural landscape in the Jimma Highlands of Ethiopia. We used transect surveys to sample understory butterfly communities within degraded natural forest, semi-managed coffee forest (SMCF), exotic timber plantations, open woodland, croplands and pasture. Surveys were conducted in 29 one-hectare plots and repeated five times between January and June 2013. We found that natural forest supports higher butterfly diversity than all agricultural plots (measured with Hill's numbers). SMCF and timber plantations retain relatively high abundance and diversity, but these metrics drop off sharply in open woodland, cropland and pasture. SMCF and timber plantations share the majority of their species with natural forest and support an equivalent abundance of forest-dependent species, with no increase in widespread species. There was some incongruence in the responses of families and sub-families, notably that Lycaenidae are strongly associated with open woodland and pasture. Adult butterflies clearly utilize forested agricultural practices such as SMCF and timber plantations, but species diversity declines steeply with distance from natural forest suggesting that earlier life-stages may depend on host plants and/or microclimatic conditions that are lost under agricultural management. From a management perspective, the protection of natural forest remains a priority for tropical butterfly conservation, but understanding functioning of the wider landscape mosaic is important as SMCF and timber plantations may act as habitat corridors that facilitate movement between forest fragments. © 2017 The Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation
The relationship between ecosystem functioning and species diversity is important for conservation and restoration management of endangered ecosystems. Here we experimentally analysed the effects of tree species richness and composition on the fundamental ecosystem process of leaf litter decomposition in the Brazilian Atlantic Rainforest. We measured the decomposition rates of leaf litter of eight broad-leaved, native tree species either individually or in mixtures of two, four, or six species. Additionally, we analysed the effect of macro- and meso-invertebrate exclusion using coarse- and fine-meshed litter bags. Species composition, but not species richness, significantly influenced litter decomposition rates. Invertebrate exclusion also influenced litter decomposition, although this effect varied between species and mixtures. Overall, litter decomposition dynamics was non-additive, i.e. observed decomposition rates of litter mixtures differed from what would be expected from the decomposition rates of their component species. However, there were also differences between mixtures, which could be at least partly attributed to the varying influence of invertebrates. We conclude that the relationship between the decomposition subsystem and species diversity in the Atlantic Rainforest follows the idiosyncratic response hypothesis and not the rivet hypothesis. For conservation or reforestation management, our results emphasise the need to maintain or restore the composition of locally native tree species communities rather than to maintain only a high tree species richness. (C) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Cord-forming (CF) fungi are found worldwide; however, tropical CF fungi are poorly documented. They play an essential role in forest ecosystems by interconnecting nutrient resources and aiding in the decomposition of plant matter and woody litter. CF fungi samples were collected from two forest conservation sites in the Sabah region of Malaysian Borneo. Sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of the ribosomal rRNA gene array 18S to 28S region from cords collected placed all of the collected specimens in Agaricomycetes (Basidiomycetes), specifically within the orders Trechisporales, Phallales, Hymenochaetales, Polyporales, and Agaricales. Comparison of the cord-derived sequences against GenBank and UNITE sequence databases, as well as phylogenetic analyses, revealed they were all novel sequences types. Many of these novel lineages were found to be closely related to other basidiomycetes commonly found in tropical forests, suggesting a large undiscovered tropical fungal diversity in Borneo that has been detected independently of sampling fruiting bodies. We show how these sequence types relate to the morphologies of the cords from which they were sampled. We also highlight how rapid, small-scale sampling can be a useful tool as an easy and relatively unbiased way of collecting data on cord-forming fungi in difficult-to-access, complex forest environments, independently of locating and sampling sporophores.
Natural regeneration in tropical forests is considered an essential part of forest restoration efforts; however, it is often under-estimated where the main focus has traditionally been on tree planting. This study assessed natural regeneration and its potential for the conservation of native tree species in Sitapahar Forest Reserve, Bangladesh. We established 99 temporary plots (2 m × 2 m each) in three canopy classes, namely dense canopy (DC, 70–100% canopy coverage), moderate canopy (MC, 40–70%), and open canopy (OC, <40%). In each plot, regenerating tree species were counted, identified, and height (m), collar diameter (cm), and diameter at breast height (dbh, cm) were measured. We identified 79 regenerating tree species under 31 plant families of which 61 were found in DC areas followed by 56 and 36 in MC and OC areas, respectively. Most of the species in DC areas were late-successional, while the OC areas were dominated by early successional species. Diversity and density of regeneration were lowest in OC areas. Findings of this study suggest harnessing biodiversity conservation by promoting natural regeneration and identifying the areas with higher potential for assisted natural regeneration that will enable in situ conservation of rare and vulnerable species by protecting them from further erosion. © 2022 Taylor & Francis.
Destruction of forests for agricultural purposes is a leading cause of forest disturbance and consequently of biodiversity loss. To assess the impact of such forest disturbance on microbial diversity, we investigated the diversity of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) in the rich forests of Karbi Anglong hills of Assam, India. Three forest types viz. undisturbed forests (UF), slash-and-burn field (SBF) and monoculture forest (MF) were selected. A total of 21 isolates of AMF belonging to 4 genera were extracted and identified from rhizospheric soil. 'Species forming glomoid spores' comprised Glomus sensu lato, Rhizophagus and Claroideoglomus were the dominant genera in all the three sites. Spore density was highest in UF and lowest in MF. Shannon-Wiener index of diversity and Simpson's diversity index were almost similar in UF and SBF. Our results show that natural undisturbed forest and slash-and-burn field contained similar and a high AMF diversity compared to monoculture forest. The AMF diversity is not significantly affected by the slash-and-burn agricultural land use practices practised by the local tribes and, therefore, could be a component of a tropical forest 'conservation-agriculture matrix'. © 2014 NAAS (National Academy of Agricultural Sciences).
Conversion of pristine forests to agricultural lands is one of the leading causes of biodiversity loss worldwide. To assess the impact of such forest disturbance on microbial diversity, we investigated the diversity of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) in the rich forests of Karbi Anglong hills of Assam, a biodiversity hotspot part of Indo-Burma region. AMF spore diversity was assessed in distinct study sites with different intensities of disturbances that encompassed a pristine undisturbed forest (UF), slash-and-burn field (SBF), and monoculture forest (MF). A total of 35 arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungal species belonging to 9 genera were isolated. Species forming glomoid spores were dominant in all the three sites followed by acaulosporoid spores. Highest spore density was found in UF and lowest in MF. Multivariate analyses revealed similarity in UF and SBF. It was found that in MF, AMF diversity was significantly modified and reduced, resulting in an ecological degraded ecosystem. Our results show that natural UF and SBF contained similar and a high AM fungal diversity. The AM fungal diversity is not significantly affected by the slash-and-burn agricultural land use practices practised by the ethnic hilly tribes and, therefore, could be a component of a tropical forest “conservation-agriculture matrix.” Also because of the high generic and species diversity found, this region can be considered as AMF hotspot and a priority place for conservation. © 2014, Botanical Society of Sao Paulo.
Coral reef ecosystem is known as “tropical rainforest of the ocean” due to its high biodiversity and primary productivity. Bacteria are known to be abundant and active in different coral niches, including coral surface mucus layer, coral tissue, and surrounding reef waters. Coral-associated bacteria play important roles in resisting pathogen, cycling of nitrogen, carbon and sulfur in coral reef ecosystem. Previous studies on coral microbiology in China mainly focused on the genetic diversity of zooxanthellae and their ecological and physiological roles in corals, and so far few investigations have been made in regard to the diversity of coral-associated bacteria, especially coral-associated diazotrophic bacteria. This research aimed to elucidate the nifH gene diversity of nitrogen-fixing bacteria associated with P. damicornis, and compare the nitrogen-fixing bacteria diversity. Three samples (mucus, tissue of coral P. damicornis from Sanya Bay and tissue of coral P.damicornis from Xisha Islands) were investigated, which were named as SYN, SYZ and XSZ, respectively. The nitrogenase gene nifH diversity of three coral samples were assessed using clone library construction in combination with Polymerase Chain Reaction-restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). Different operational taxonomic unit (OTU) groups (RFLP patterns) were recovered from the different coral samples after digested by the restriction enzymes Taq I and Hae II, respectively. As a result, 23 OTUs were recovered from 155 clones of SYN, 25 OTUs were recovered from 120 clones of SYZ, while 13 OTUs were recovered from 102 clones of XSZ with clone coverage was 90.3%,87.5% and 94.1%, Shannon-Wiener index (H) was 2.28, 3.02 and 2.08, Evenness index (E) was 0.5, 0.65 and 0.56, respectively. The findings of this study showed that 1) Clone libraries demonstrated that the majority of retrieved sequences from coral mucus and tissue libraries were identified to be Chlorobia and Proteobacteria (including α-, γ-and δ-Proteobacteria). 2) Most of OTUs were related to those nifH gene sequences of uncultured bacteria from a variety of habitats in marine environments, such as coral reef, sea sponges, ocean water column and marine sediment, which indicated coral P. damicornis might harbored a large number of new diazotroph resources that had not yet been cultured. 3) The study also found two bacterial group-OTUs related to Chlorobia and Desulfovibrio, which may not be only as pathogenic bacteria as described in the previous reviews, but also played important roles in nutrient cycles, defensing of coral symbionts, they were suspected to resist coral bleaching by fixing nitrogen. 4) Shannon-Wiener index indicated that the diazotrophic diversity of SYN was lower than that of SYZ, and diazotrophic diversity associated with XSZ was lower than that of SYZ, showing that the community diversity of diazotroph assoiated with coral differed based on the geographic location and specific environment characterices of the coral. © 2014, Science Press. All rights reserved.
We investigated the distribution and resource values of liana species assessed in six hill complexes of southern Eastern Ghats, India. 143 liana species (DBH (diameter at breast height) ≥1. 5 cm) and 32,033 liana individuals were recorded from 110 transects (0. 5 ha each covering 55 ha area) in the study sites. The resource values of lianas were broadly categorized into ecological and economic importance. About 90% (129) of liana species and 96% (30,564) of liana individuals were established ecological/economic values. Fruit rewards provided by 76 species and 20,325 individuals constituted the major resource of ecological importance. 82 species and 21,457 liana individuals are of economic importance as medicine, edible fruits, edible and medicinal values, and yet others are used for different domestic purposes including furniture, fuel wood, rope making etc.. Ecologically, the prevalence of succulent diaspores in lianas of Indian Eastern Ghats indicates the animal dependence of many liana species for dispersal and underlines the need for a holistic and whole-forest conservation approach in maintaining forest biodiversity. © 2012 Northeast Forestry University and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Tree diversity and population structure were analysed in two dry tropical forest sites of the Eastern Ghats in East Godavari District, Andhra Pradesh. One-hectare area (4 plots of 0.25ha each) was selected in each study site for quantitative tree inventory. A total of 99 species (71 in the site 1 and 77 in site II) from 31 families were recorded. Of which the adults (>= 10 cm DBH) and juvenile (>= 3-<10cm DBH) population of tree species were greater in the site 1 (45 and 49) than site 11 (34 and 35) while saplings (<3 cm DBH) contribution showed a reverse trend (55 in site I and 72 in site II). The basal area ranged 20.6-29.4 m(2)/ha. The mean stem density was 506 stems/ha. Diameter class-wise distribution showed reverse "J" shaped curve. Leguminosae was most speciose family. Maximum species showed contagious distribution pattern in all the stages except for adult and juvenile populations in the site 1 where the maximum distribution was random. Xylia xylocarpa is a single dominant species in both the study sites which indicates that these forest sites were subjected to disturbances in the past. Population structure enlightens that the sites have a good regeneration potential. The present study reveals that the tropical dry forest sites in East Godavari region restore substantial tree diversity as similar to other parts Eastern Ghats and tropics. There is a variation in species richness, abundance, basal area and distribution pattern between the sites could be attributed to differences in topographical position of sites, soil moisture, microclimate, human activities, grazing and seasonal fires.
Accurate measurements of seed rain are important for understanding tree reproduction (Greene & Johnson 1994), forest regeneration (Cole et al. 2010, Cubiña & Aide 2001, Howe et al. 2010, Zahawi & Augspurger 2006), forest ecology (Muller-Landau et al. 2008, Terborgh et al. 2011) and maintenance of community diversity (Harms et al. 2000). Seed traps generally consist of a bucket or net of a fixed area suspended 0.3-1 m above the ground, and seeds are typically collected once or twice per month. An implicit assumption of all seed-rain studies is that traps do not influence seed dispersal. Should birds perch on and defecate seeds into seed traps, seed abundance will be overestimated. This behaviour could produce a directional bias if birds perch on seed traps in one habitat more than others. To our knowledge, no study has considered this potential bias. Copyright © 2012 Cambridge University Press.
In many tropical regions, soil erosion from anthropogenic activities and subsequent ecological restoration are major issues. Revegetation would be an efficient way to mitigate soil degradation. Some plant and mycorrhizal species are more useful than others for stabilizing soil aggregates and thus reducing erodibility. However, the utility of inoculating plants with mycorrhizas in tropical regions is not clear with regard to the effects on soil aggregate stability. We investigated how plant inoculation with arbuscular (AMF) and ectomycorrhizal (ECM) fungi could improve aggregate stability of ultramafic Ferralsols in New Caledonia. We performed inoculations with local AMF and ECM on three endemic plant species grown in a glasshouse: the sedge Costularia arundinacea (Sol. Ex Vahl) Kük., an AMF host, the shrub Tristaniopsis glauca Brongn. & Gris and the tree Arillastrum gummiferum (Pancher ex Brongn. & Gris) Baill., the latter species are both ECM hosts. We carried out three treatments for each plant species growing in an ultramafic topsoil, (i) control soil with no plants, (ii) non-inoculated plants and (iii) inoculated plants. Inoculation of C. arundinacea was carried out by adding to the topsoil a suspension of mixed AMF spores. T. glauca and A. gummiferum were inoculated with the ECM fungus Pisolithus microcarpus. After 9–10 months, aggregate stability, soil organic carbon, above- and below-ground dry biomass and root traits were measured. Results showed that on ultramafic topsoil, AMF and ECM inoculations significantly increased plant growth, modified roots (especially root length density) and consequently enhanced aggregate stability. Out of the non-inoculated plant species, C. arundinacea had the greatest positive effect on aggregate stability. The association of T. glauca and P. microcarpus was also found to significantly increase aggregate stability. Thus, the inoculation of native plant species with carefully selected mycorrhizal fungi could be an efficient technique to aid in the revegetation of bare slopes. © 2017 Elsevier GmbH
As secondary tropical forests grow, their canopy structure and density change. This affects the canopy storage and aerodynamic roughness, and thus the amount of water that is lost to interception. Because interception is a considerable part of total evapotranspiration, it is important to assess how interception changes as secondary forests mature, and how this is affected by forest structure. However, the effects of tropical forest regeneration, and in particular changes in forest structure, on mean throughfall are so far poorly studied. This hampers the estimation of the interception loss, and thus the water balance, for regenerating forests. Therefore, we monitored throughfall for twelve regenerating, logged-over forest plots in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo over a 7-month period to determine the effects of forest regeneration on mean throughfall and tested if inclusion of measures of forest heterogeneity improves the prediction of mean throughfall compared to estimates based on tree height or density alone. Mean throughfall varied between 74% and 89% (average: 84%) of precipitation and was lowest in regenerating forest plots with a longer time since logging. There was a significant negative relationship between mean throughfall and tree density or basal area, as well as variables reflecting forest heterogeneity (i.e., the Shannon Diversity Index and the coefficient of variation of the diameter at breast height). Nevertheless, the inclusion of these indicators of heterogeneity did not improve model performance substantially; the best model was a linear relation with tree density alone. These results suggest that in the context of logged and regenerating forests in Sabah, mean throughfall depends mainly on tree density and is not substantially affected by species diversity or structural heterogeneity. To see if mean throughfall could be estimated over larger spatial scales based on LiDAR data, we also tested the relation between mean throughfall and LiDAR-derived Top of Canopy (TCH) but this relation was not significant for our study plots. A more in-depth analysis of LiDAR-products, such as point clouds, may be needed to estimate mean throughfall over large areas in tropical rainforests. © 2023 The Author(s)
Rainforest deforestation and subsequent reforestation not only alter above-ground vegetation, but also lead to significant changes in the physical and chemical characteristics of soil and in biochemical cycles, which in turn are likely to influence the growth of rainforest plants However, little research has directly linked soil condition to seedling growth under different forms of rainforest restoration     This study compared the early growth of three rainforest pioneer species (Alphitonia excelsa, Gutoa semiglauca, Omalanthus nutans) among soils collected from three different reforestation pathways, and from reference sites in remnant rainforest and pasture in subtropical eastern Australia. The types of reforestation were tree-planting for ecological restoration purposes, autogenic regrowth dominated by the non-native tree species camphor laurel (Cinnamomum camphora), and management of this regrowth to encourage native regeneration Growth was measured in a shade-house, using soil from five sites in each site-type and three replicate plants of each species Fifteen physical and biochemical properties were also measured in soil from each site; five of which were related to carbon and eight to nitrogen-dynamics     Two-factor ANOVA of the exponential growth coefficients of seedling height and diameter showed that there was no interaction between tree species and site-type, but there were significant main effects of both these factors Seedling growth rates did not differ between pasture and rainforest soils, but were around 25% lower in soils from camphor-dominated regrowth sites than in soils from treated camphor and replanted sites Seedling growth rates were correlated with two independently-varying soil properties soil pH and plant-available nitrate-nitrogen, whose inclusion as covariates in the ANOVA largely removed the significant site-type effect. These results indicate that reforestation pathways can affect seedling growth by altering the physical and biochemical properties of soil. However, the absolute magnitude of this effect was not large. (C) 2010 Elsevier B V All rights reserved
With growing pressure on primary forests from destructive land uses, increasing the diversity of native species plantations can increase ecosystem service provision, such as timber production or carbon sequestration, thus better supporting sustainable livelihoods. Understanding the effects of tree species composition on productivity can inform plantation design and ecological restoration strategies. However, tree species composition effects have been neglected in experimental biodiversity-ecosystem function (BEF) research. This study uses a 10-yr data set from one of the first tropical planted forest experiments established with native species and designed for BEF research at scales relevant to forest management. At our site in Sardinilla, Panama, we established plots containing 6 species from a pool of 18, in four combinations, to investigate how composition affects species and plot productivity. We used basal area as a proxy for productivity through time, measured annually, and summed this at species and plot levels for analysis. We found that plots that differed in species composition appeared to differ in temporal rate of basal area increase, but did not differ in BA after 10 yr. Species were generally consistent in size between compositions, and composition performance was correlated with the size of component species, suggesting that species identities were most important in determining plot productivity. Our results suggest that species choice can be based on preferences for individual species, as species performance was consistent across composition contexts. We make recommendations for the use of particularly productive species that also provide multiple services such as Guazuma ulmifolia, Spondias mombin, and Anacardium excelsum. © 2015 Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation Inc.
Young tropical secondary forests play an important role in the local and global carbon cycles because of their large area and rapid biomass accumulation rates. This study examines how environmental conditions and forest attributes shape biomass compartments and the productivity of young tropical secondary forests. We compared 36 young secondary forest stands that differed in the time since agricultural land abandonment (2.3-3.6 years) from dry and wet regions in Ghana. We quantified biomass stocks in living and dead stems, roots, and soil, and aboveground biomass and litter productivity. We used structural equation models to evaluate how macroclimate, soil nutrients (N, P), and forest attributes (structure, diversity, and functional composition) affect ecosystem functioning. After three years of succession, tropical wet forests stored on average 115 t biomass ha-1 (the sum of aboveground living and dead biomass, belowground fine root biomass, and soil organic matter), and dry forests stored 99 t ha-1. These values represent 31% (in the wet forest) and 39% (in the dry forest) of the biomass compared with neighboring old-growth forests. The majority of forest ecosystem biomass was stored in the soil (70%) and aboveground living vegetation (25%). Macroclimate strongly shaped forest attributes, which in turn determined biomass stocks and productivity. Soil phosphorus strongly increased litter production and soil organic matter, confirming that it is a limiting element in tropical ecosystems. Tree density and species diversity increased forest biomass stocks, suggesting crown packing and complementary resource use enhance forest functioning. A more conservative trait composition (high wood density) increased biomass stocks but reduced productivity, indicating that quantity, identity, and quality of species affect ecosystem functioning.
Tropical forest disturbance contributes to global climate change from increased carbon emissions, and causes loss of biodiversity. Thus, identifying its direct causes and underlying drivers are necessary for effective land use, climate change control and conservation strategies. We integrated remote sensing forest cover data from 2000 to 2018 with georeferenced national socioeconomic and field-collected household data to determine underlying drivers behind forest cover transitions (e.g., deforestation, degradation, and recovery) in the Selva Maya (‘Mayan Forest’) of southeast Mexico. Spatial and statistical models (multinomial logistic regression, log-linear regression, and analysis of variance) and social science methods (household surveys and qualitative comparative analysis) were applied to evaluate and identify socioeconomic, institutional, and environmental drivers intervening at landscape and community scales. Forest cover transitions varied geographically, and associated drivers differed by scale of analysis. Using multiple methods improved the understanding of drivers. Population growth, poverty, and roads are major drivers influencing forest cover transitions (e.g., deforestation, degradation, and recovery) in the landscape. Community scale analysis identified more drivers and offered greater detail of causal relationships. Besides population and poverty, less off-farm employment, agriculture and cattle production, immigrant population, and private property were related to deforestation and degradation. Indigenous populations, forest dependence, off-farm employment, and common property were associated with forest conservation. Sustainable rural development should include poverty alleviation through diversification of economic activities and increased off-farm employment opportunities. Conservation measures should pursue the enhancement of forest value for local subsistence and economic benefits by strengthening community forest management and enterprises. © 2021 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Deforestation remains the most pervasive driver of biodiversity erosion across tropical forests. Understanding how species can cope with such habitat changes is particularly important along the rapidly expanding agricultural frontiers. To do so, we used a functional perspective examining small mammal responses to habitat loss, fragmentation, and degradation across the ‘Arc of Deforestation’ in the Southern Brazilian Amazon. Small mammals were surveyed using a combination of conventional and pitfall traps across 20 forest fragments—ranging from 42 to 4743 ha—in addition to two relatively continuous forest sites (> 7000 ha). These fragments lie isolated by a cattle pasture matrix of varying grazing intensity. We then analysed taxonomic and functional diversity patterns—represented by Simpson Diversity and Rao Quadratic entropy indices—in Generalised Linear Models containing local- to landscape-scale predictors of variation. Further, we used a functional trait composition approach based on community-weighted mean trait values to depict and predict small mammal functional variations across this degradation gradient. From a total of 847 individuals recorded belonging to 24 taxa, functional responses tended to follow the taxonomic diversity, both increasing with fragment area. The functional dimension further was promoted by low fire-related disturbance. Functional trait composition was mainly driven by habitat quality, represented by tree density, arthropod biomass, and fire-related disturbance. Our results reinforce that small forest fragments sustain depauperate small mammal assemblages both taxonomically and functionally. Accounting for habitat quality further allows for boosting the persistence across functional groups. Our findings can be used to improve the efficiency of management practices thereby maximising the multiple dimensions of small mammal diversity and their associated ecosystem services across tropical deforestation frontiers. © The Author(s) 2024.
Tropical forest habitat continues to decline globally, with serious negative consequences for environmental sustainability. The small mountain country of Nepal provides an excellent context in which to examine trajectories of forest-cover change. Despite having experienced large-scale forest clearing in the past, significant reforestation has taken place in recent years. The range of biophysical and ecological environments and diversity of tenure arrangements provide us with a context with sufficient variation to be able to derive insight into the impact of a range of hypothesized drivers of forest change. This article draws on a dataset of 55 forests from the middle hills and Terai plains of Nepal to examine the factors associated with forest clearing or regeneration. Results affirm the central importance of tenure regimes and local monitoring for forest regrowth. In addition, user group size per unit of forest area is an important, independent explanator of forest change. These variables also can be associated with specific practices that further influence forest change such as the management of social conflict, adoption of new technologies to reduce pressure on the forest, and involvement of users in forest maintenance activities. Such large-N, comparative studies are essential if we are to derive more complex, nuanced, yet actionable frameworks that help us to plan better policies for the management of natural resources. © 2007 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA.
Promoting natural regeneration can be a viable strategy to achieve ambitious restoration commitments, but predicting where native forest cover is likely to expand is challenging. Different biophysical and socioeconomic factors may determine the chances of native forest regrowth at different spatial and temporal scales, producing complex spatial patterns in the landscape and adding more and deeper information about potential for different forms of forest restoration. On the basis of a systematic literature review including 64 peer-reviewed articles from the global tropics and subtropics published from 1990 to 2017, we assessed the methodologies employed to remotely detect forest cover increase and to identify its biophysical and socioeconomic drivers. Automatic classification of multitemporal images and transition matrices were the most popular methods to detect areas of forest regrowth, whereas regression analysis was the most used analytical approaches to assess drivers. Forest cover increased more often on steeper slopes, close to forest remnants, inside protected areas, and far from population centers. However, the effects of most drivers varied among scales of evaluation and may be further affected by the scale of forest regrowth. The most influential biophysical and socioeconomic drivers of forest cover increase identified here can be used to develop predictive models on the likelihood of native forest regrowth to guide the implementation of cost-effective tropical forest restoration, thus contributing to the mitigation of climate change and species extinction. Current remote-sensing literature evaluating forest cover changes seems to be largely focused on deforestation dynamics, with little attention given to forest cover increase. © 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Tropical forests are fundamental ecosystems, essential for providing terrestrial primary productivity, global nutrient cycling, and biodiversity. Despite their importance, tropical forests are currently threatened by deforestation and associated activities. Moreover, tropical regions are now mostly represented by secondary forest regrowth, with half of the remaining tropical forests as secondary forest. Soil invertebrates are an important component to the functioning and biodiversity of these soil ecosystems. However, it remains unclear how these past land-use activities and subsequent secondary forest developments have altered the soil invertebrate communities and any potential ecological consequences associated with this. DNA metabarcoding offers an effective approach to rapidly monitor soil invertebrate communities under different land-use practices and within secondary forests. In this study, we used DNA metabarcoding to detect community-based patterns of soil invertebrate composition across a primary forest, a 23-year-old secondary forest, and a 33-year-old secondary forest and the associated soil environmental drivers of the soil invertebrate community structure in the Maquenque National Wildlife Refuge of Costa Rica (MNWR). We also used a species contribution analysis (SIMPER) to determine which soil invertebrate groups may be an indication of these soils reaching a pre-disturbed state such as a primary forest. We found that the soil invertebrate community composition at class, order, family, and ESV level were mostly significantly different across that habitats. We also found that the primary forest had a greater richness of soil invertebrates compared to the 23-year-old and 33-year-old secondary forest. Moreover, a redundancy analysis indicated that soil moisture influenced soil invertebrate community structure and explained up to 22% of the total variation observed in the community composition across the habitats; whereas soil invertebrate richness was structured by soil microbial biomass carbon (C) (Cmic) and explained up to 52% of the invertebrate richness across the primary and secondary forests. Lastly, the SIMPER analysis revealed that Naididae, Entomobryidae, and Elateridae could be important indicators of soil and forest recuperation in the MNWR. This study adds to the increasing evidence that soil invertebrates are intimately linked with the soil microbial biomass carbon (Cmic) and that even after 33 years of natural regrowth of a forest, these land use activities can still have persisting effects on the overall composition and richness of the soil invertebrate communities. © 2020, The Author(s).
Logged tropical forests represent a major opportunity for preserving biodiversity and sequestering carbon, playing a large role in meeting global forest restoration targets. Left alone, these ecosystems have been expected to undergo natural regeneration and succession towards old growth forests, but extreme drought events may challenge this process. While old growth forests possess a certain level of resilience, we lack understanding as to how logging may affect forest responses to drought. This study examines the drought-logging interaction in seedling dynamics within a landscape of logged and unlogged forests in Sabah Malaysia, based on 73 plots monitored before and after the 2015-16 El Niño drought. Drought increased seedling mortality in all forests, but the magnitude of this impact was modulated by logging intensity, with forests with lower canopy leaf area index and above-ground biomass experiencing greater drought induced mortality. Moreover, community traits in more heavily logged forests shifted towards being more ruderal after drought, suggesting that the trajectory of forest succession had been reversed. These results indicate that with reoccurring strong droughts under a changing climate, logged forests that have had over half of their biomass removed may suffer permanently arrested succession. Targeted management interventions may therefore be necessary to lift the vulnerable forests above the biomass threshold. © 2019 The Author(s). Published by IOP Publishing Ltd.
Cattle farming is a prominent economic activity in tropical ecosystems. However, this system can lead to biodiversity loss and decreased ecosystem functions. Due to land degradation or changes in farming practices, areas with different times after cattle grazing removal are new and common habitats in tropical landscapes. Therefore, understanding the impact of livestock grazing abandonment on the relationship between biodiversity and ecosystem function is crucial for tropical pastureland livestock production. We assessed the influence of livestock grazing abandonment (cattle removal time), local environmental conditions (herbaceous vegetation density, sand content, and soil compaction), and dung beetle community attributes (biomass and functional dispersion) on dung removal rates in pasturelands. We conducted this study at 24 natural grassland sites in the Brazilian Pantanal, a tropical landscape dominated by livestock. Our findings reveal that community attributes primarily explain the variation in dung removal rates, while the effects of local environment and cattle removal time were insignificant. The relationships between dung beetle functional diversity and ecosystem functioning may show substantial context-dependent variation. Biomass was particularly important in explaining shifts in dung removal. These results underscore the direct link between the decline of biomass of larger-bodied dung beetles and the loss of ecosystem services associated with dung removal, such as parasitic control and soil fertilization. Therefore, conserving dung beetle biomass of larger-bodied dung beetles through effective management plans is vital to sustain ecological functions in tropical livestock-dominated landscapes. © 2024
Simple Summary The use of inadequate cattle ranching practices (e.g., fire, agrochemical applications, long term extensive grazing, lack of paddock rotation in pastures) could have negative consequences on biodiversity and ecological functions. In this study, the influence of cattle ranching duration on the diversity of dung beetles and seed removal was evaluated in pastures having different times of establishment in a tropical dry forest landscape. Dung beetle species richness was similar along the gradient of grazing ages, but the diversity of common and dominant species declined with increasing grazing age. Seed removal was mainly carried out by an exotic species. Although native dung beetles persisted at low abundances along this gradient, the consequences of land use changes and inadequate practices in similar landscapes could lead to their disappearance.Abstract Cattle ranching is an economic activity responsible for the loss of large extensions of tropical dry forest around the world. Several studies have demonstrated that the use of inadequate practices of this activity in tropical forests (e.g., fire, agrochemicals, and lack of rotational grazing systems of cattle in pastures) have negative consequences on dung beetle diversity and their ecological functions. In the present study, the influence of the cattle ranching duration gradient on the diversity of dung beetles and seed removal was evaluated. This study was carried out in pastures with different times of establishment of cattle ranching (between 4 and 40 years) in a tropical dry forest of Mexico. Overall, the species richness of dung beetles was similar along the gradient of grazing ages. However, the diversity of common (q1) and dominant (q2) species decreased and was associated with an increasing abundance of exotic species and a decreasing abundance of native species. Seed removal was mainly carried out by four beetle species, among which the exotic species Digitonthophagus gazella was the most important. The results establish that the duration of cattle ranching primarily influences the composition of dung beetle communities, as reflected in changes in the structure and function of their assemblages in the pastures. Although native dung beetles persist at low abundances along this gradient, the consequences of land use changes are undeniable in other similar ecosystems where these species could definitively disappear.
This study measures the relationship and dynamic impacts of economic growth and forested area on carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions in Malaysia. Time series data over the period of 1990 to 2016 were used by employing the dynamic ordinary least squared (DOLS) approach. The results of DOLS estimation indicate that the coefficient of economic growth is positive and significant with CO2 emissions, meaning that RM1 million increase in gross domestic product (GDP) is associated with an increase in CO2 emissions of 0.931 kilo tons. Instead, the long-run coefficient of forested area found negative and significant, which implies that declining one hectare of forested area (i.e., deforestation) has an impact of three kilo tons of CO2 emissions rise in Malaysia. Our study findings indicate that economic growth and deforested area have an adverse effect on Malaysia's carbon emissions where GDP growth fosters carbon emissions at a faster rate. Thus, the effective implementation of policy measures and economic instruments including afforestation and reforestation, forest conservation, sustainable forest management, REDD+ (reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation plus) mechanism and other emission reduction mechanisms inter alia could be useful for reducing carbon emissions while decreasing deforestation and maintaining the long-term economic growth in Malaysia.
The tropical forests of Malaysia are among the most biodiverse and ecologically important on Earth. Forests provide habitats for countless species and play a key role in regulating the global climate. Preserving these ecosystems is important for maintaining biodiversity and sustaining the forest functions, particularly in the aftermath of timber harvesting operations. Effective conservation efforts and monitoring are needed to sustain forests over time. Thus, this study examined canopy closure dynamics in Compartment 43 of the Petuang Forest Reserve, Peninsular Malaysia, five years after selective logging in 2019. The research focused on the recovery of forest areas and the impact of forest roads on canopy closure, using Sentinel-2 imagery to assess changes in land cover between 2019 and 2024. The classification process distinguished forest, open areas, and cloud cover, achieving an overall accuracy of 98% for 2019 and 95% for 2024. Results showed a significant increase in forest cover, with canopy closure rising from 78.98% in 2019 to 91.78% in 2024, highlighting strong natural regeneration. However, areas along forest roads displayed slower recovery due to soil compaction and ongoing disturbances caused by the road infrastructure. This emphasizes the long-term effects of logging roads on forest structure. The study underscores the effectiveness of remote sensing in monitoring forest recovery and suggests that while natural regeneration is important in harvested areas, forest roads may require additional restoration efforts to aid in forest recovery. The findings have implications for sustainable forest management practices, particularly in minimizing road-related disturbances in future logging operations. © 2025 Forestry Department of Peninsular Malaysia. All rights reserved.
This study aimed to understand post-agricultural natural forest regeneration in the Southern Brazilian Atlantic Forest and its possible role as a cost-effective, passive approach to forest restoration. The study characterized vegetation structure, floristic composition, and the dynamics of secondary forest chronosequences. Data were collected from 159 plots (10 × 10 m each) across forest remnants in Santa Catarina State, covering forest ages that ranged from 2 to 60 years of regeneration after swidden agriculture. Only areas with no signs of degradation were sampled in order to provide a description of vegetation characteristics that could be used to identify and monitor natural regeneration. A total of 11,455 woody plants were identified and classified into 334 species representing 71 families. As the succession process unfolds, the continuous turnover of species makes forests more diverse and structurally complex. Floristic similarity among forest types is observed during the early stages of succession, but decreases over time. Pioneer species dominate young secondary forests, representing about 40% of the basal area up to 10 years of regeneration. Shade-tolerant species start colonizing the sites at early ages; however, they become more important structural elements only after 30 years of succession. The observed patterns of forest structure and species diversity largely conform to the post-agricultural succession seen in many tropical forests. The high species diversity found in this study highlights the importance of natural regeneration as a strategy to restore ecosystems. Floristic data can be used as a reference for choosing suitable species for active restoration, as well as contributing to the design of integrated restoration strategies. We herein reinforce the potential of natural regeneration as part of large-scale restoration programs, which would be particularly attractive to family farmers by the low cost of supplies and labor. © Copyright © 2021 Siminski, Zambiazi, dos Santos and Fantini.
Background and aimsUnderstanding how altered precipitation patterns affect the dynamics of phosphorus (P) fractions in both soil and foliage is crucial for predicting climate-induced changes in plant growth and community structure, especially within tropical forests with P-impoverished soils.MethodsWe conducted a nine-year precipitation experiment in a secondary tropical forest, simulating delayed (DW) and wetter wet season (WW) to reflect potential precipitation changes. We analyzed P fractions in soil (0-10 cm and 10-20 cm) and foliage of four dominant trees, and investigated the correlations among these P fractions and photosynthesis.ResultsDW treatment reduced soil P bioavailability and induced foliar P redistribution, while WW treatment increased soil pH and NH4+-N content but had little influence on soil P form. DW treatment generally reduced foliar total P levels and diminished various P fractions with notable species-specific disparities. Moreover, DW treatment variably reduced area-based photosynthetic carbon assimilation rates (Aarea), exhibiting species-specific effects, while WW treatment inconsistently elevated Aarea across species. The structural equation model revealed that Aarea was directly influenced by foliar P fractions and photosynthetic nutrient efficiency, and indirectly by precipitation treatment on soil properties and P fractions.ConclusionAltered seasonal precipitation patterns affect soil bioavailable P forms and/or soil chemical properties, and thereby influence foliar P fractions allocation and photosynthesis of dominant trees. Soil and foliar P fractions responses to precipitation treatments varied across different sampling months, underscoring the complexity of P cycle and suggesting tree acclimation and resilience. These insights improve our understanding of climate effects on nutrient cycles and resilience.
Forest dynamics in the Mexican Mesoamerican Biological Corridor (MxMBC) have been part of a land sharing system, helping maintain forest cover following semi-subsistence land-use through regeneration. Recently, mechanized cash-crop cultivation is occurring, translated in larger, permanent tracts of agriculture in place of core forest. This emerging land-use marks a potential shift in regeneration patterns, with implications for the maintenance of forest cover. We characterize MxMBC forest regeneration patterns from 2000 to 2020 to assess their relationship with the maintenance and expansion of forest cover. Classification of multi-temporal remotely sensed Landsat data reveals a decrease of 2.2% (296 km(2)) of forest area from 2000 to 2020, with regrowth making back 0.93% of forest (121 km(2)) by 2020. A spatial model identifies that 75.1% of forest regeneration in the study site occurs in four patterns ranging from permanent (89.2 km(2), 41.7%) to ephemeral (71.5 km(2), 33.4%). Analyzing the relation between landscape configuration and forest regeneration shows that regrowth occurs in small, widely dispersed forest patches. Spatial patterns of ephemeral regeneration mark two distinct land sharing contexts - ephemeral regeneration buffering core forest loss alongside semi-subsistence agriculture and agroforestry, and ephemeral regeneration masking core forest loss alongside cash crop agriculture. These cases suggest that maintaining forest cover through regeneration is impacted by land-use context, as the regeneration to core forest ratio decreases when permanent cash crop cultivation emerges.
One approach in forest restoration is to plant trees that will establish an initial canopy to promote forest recovery through the colonization of other species. The identity of the planted tree affects which species are able to recruit in its understory. Here we evaluate the phylogenetic structure of young understory plant communities recruiting beneath eleven different species planted in single species stands and relate those structures with processes affecting community assembly. We expected the presence of negative biotic interactions between closely related overstory and understory species, as well as among related understory species, to lead to phylogenetic overdispersion. However, we did not find consistent phylogenetic patterns maybe due to the young age of the understory communities at the time of sampling. Most overstories showed a higher than expected presence of close relatives due to the recruitment of conspecifics, whereas, the higher recruitment of the ancient clade of Piperaceae beneath Fabaceae trees led to overdispersion. The presence of various Asteraceae species in understories that had been invaded by the grass, Saccharum spontaneum, led to significant clustering suggesting the conservatism of traits that allow overcoming the strong competition imposed by the grass. Phylogenetic patterns among the recruiting species showed that dispersal and competition are playing a role in shaping the communities. Our results highlight the importance of choosing an adequate set of species to plant in a restoration project since they dictate the subsequent regeneration of a forest community. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Global demand for vegetable oil and high oil palm yield have driven the rapid expansion of oil palm plantations in tropical countries. The research literature widely recognizes the effects of forest cover conversion into oil palm on biodiversity, deforestation, and carbon dynamics. However, research on the ecohydrological impacts of oil palm plantations is sparse, despite studies indicating that oil palm development may reshape land-water interactions and the availability and movement of water at different spatial and temporal scales. We address this gap by conducting a systematic literature review on oil palm development and its relation to ecohydrological processes. We found 139 relevant papers up to the year 2021, addressing different ecohydrological processes related to oil palm. We reviewed their spatiotemporal scales, geographic distribution, oil palm species and age, and the effects of land conversion from forest, cropland, and pastures. We also incorporated societal aspects regarding community perceptions of water. Our review highlights the effects of oil palm plantations on three main components of the water cycle: (i) land-atmosphere, (ii) fluvial systems, and (iii) soils and groundwater. Most studies include analyses of the Indo-Malayan and Australasian biogeographical regions (113), followed by the Neotropics (49) and the Afrotropics (15). Compared to rainforests, oil palm monocultures are warmer and drier. They have higher evapotranspiration (ET) rates, lower runoff regulation and infiltration capacity, and lower soil organic carbon (SOC). Although less often implemented, alternative oil palm management practices, including oil palm agroforestry, can help to mitigate some of these effects. Forest to oil palm conversion is the most studied land transition, while conversions from croplands, pastures, and grasslands are less studied. Overall, we identify gaps in understanding the long-term effects of management on ecohydrological processes under different land conversions, especially in the Neotropics and the Afrotropics, precluding research-informed policy to manage impacts of this expanding crop.
When the goal of natural forest management is to maintain the biodiversity and ecological integrity of the forest while harvesting timber, the silvicultural systems employed must promote timber production and reduce negative impacts on nontimber resources. To foster development of such a system in a seasonally dry tropical forest in Lomerio, Bolivia, we classified tree species according to their relative timber value, importance as food for vertebrate frugivores, and vulnerability to population declines when subjected to logging. We used this classification to identify a management system appropriate for the commercial species and to evaluate the compatibility of the system with the regeneration requirements of tree species that produce important food for mammalian wildlife. About half of the tree species in the site are commercially valuable for their timber and a similar proportion are considered of value as food for wildlife. A tree species rating for vulnerability to disturbance appeared to be independent of both timber and wildlife values. A silvicultural system that includes even-aged groups of trees within an uneven-aged matrix appears more suitable to the multiple goals of management in this forest than either an even-aged or uneven-aged (single tree selection) management system.
Many studies have analyzed the ecological consequences of forest fragmentation on amazonian forests and the results of these studies are summarized here. Habitat fragmentation has extensive effects on amazon rainforests, affecting diversity and community composition in the resulting fragments, and also affecting ecological processes like pollination, nutrient cycling, and carbon fixation. The ecological changes resulting from fragmentation are generally of inverse proportional magnitude to the size of the fragment area. consequently, smaller fragments are usually less species-rich and have fewer species per area than do larger forest fragments. Forest fragments in the amazon seem to be particularly prone to edge effects. Fragmentation dramatically increases edges of tropical forests: new edges are artificial and abrupt, forming a stark boundary between the forest and the surrounding, altered landscape. one of the most striking effects is a dramatic increase in the mortality of trees, leading to increased canopy-gap formation. edge effects in the fragments also alter physical gradients and species abundances. In general, species that are most vulnerable to fragmentation tend to respond negatively to edges, have large area requirements, and/or are intolerant to the surrounding "matrix" (i.e. the mosaic of modified habitats around the fragments), whereas species that are resilient to fragmentation usually have an opposite set of characteristics.
Ecological diagnostics at a regional level is fundamental for planning processes of ecological restoration (ER), especially in poorly known and threatened ecosystems such as the Dry Tropical Forest (DTF). Based on ecological diagnostics of a DTF in the department of Huila, Colombia, strategies for its restoration were formulated and implemented, and monitoring of those strategies were initiated. For restoration scenarios barriers for natural regeneration and its enhancers were identified, also reference ecosystems were defined, and key species for restoration process were selected. Related to this information, six strategies were formulated: i) nucleation in pastureland with nuclei between 2x2 m and 32x32 m with variation in speciesnumber (3-30), individuals density (9-196), species assemblages (1-4) and soil management, ii) plantations under nurse trees in wooded pastures with 37 individuals from six species, iii) plantations under tree clusters with 57 individuals of eleven species, iv) expansion of forests and shrublands edges with strips of 10x5 m with 17 individuals of five species, v) enrichment in shrublands and forests with monospecific hexagonal modules of 7 individuals, and vi) spontaneous restoration. A total of 54 300 individuals were planted, and the greatest effort was made in nucleation strategy that was implemented in 32x32 m completing 159 replicates and 21 676 individuals. Monitoring will allow evaluation of successional trajectories development according to references, also to determine cost-effectiveness of strategies. This methodological process of ecological diagnostics, formulation, implementation and monitoring of strategies can serve as an important guide for DTF ecological restoration in other locations. © 2019, Universidad Nacional de Colombia. All rights reserved.
Aims: Across tropical regions, large forest areas have been converted to different agricultural land uses. These uses impose ecological disturbances affecting forest regeneration potential after field abandonment. Finding ways to identify those agricultural land uses limiting forest regeneration is a critical issue for conserving biodiversity in human-modified landscapes. Here, we developed a fast and inexpensive index, useful for quantifying ecological disturbance regimes associated with agricultural land uses, and tested its power to predict forest regeneration potential. Location: Municipality of Marqués de Comillas, southeast Mexico. Methods: Interviews were conducted with local farmers to quantify disturbance components (size, duration and severity) associated with agricultural land uses. The scaled values of these disturbance components were added in a simple ecological disturbance index (EDI). In each one of nine recently abandoned fields representing a wide range of EDI values, two 10-m2 plots, one close to and one far from nearby forest remnants, were established. On each plot, all woody plants of 10-100 m in height were counted, identified and measured in four 1-m2 subplots, at the time of field abandonment and 2 yr later. In addition, at each plot, 18 site condition (microclimate and soil) attributes were quantified at the time of abandonment. Plant density, biomass, species richness and species diversity were used as regeneration variables, and EDI and site condition attributes as independent ones. Results: Two years after abandonment, most regeneration variables declined exponentially with EDI. Biomass was not explained by EDI but changed positively with light availability. EDI was strongly correlated to vapour pressure deficit, which also predicted regeneration potential (except biomass). Conclusions: EDI is a cheap and easy tool for quantifying the ecological disturbance produced by a wide range of agricultural land uses. The index predicted several regeneration variables as well as or better than direct measurements of the site condition at the time of abandonment. EDI can be used to identify biodiversity-friendly agricultural land uses in human-modified landscapes. We proposed an index to quantify the ecological disturbance produced by different agricultural land uses types. This ecological disturbance index (EDI) predicts several regeneration variables as well as or better than direct measurements of the site condition at time of abandonment. EDI can be useful to identify in a fast and inexpensive way biodiversity-friendly agricultural land uses in human-modified landscapes. © 2015 International Association for Vegetation Science.
Over the past 20 years the combined effects of El Niño-induced droughts and land-use change have dramatically increased the frequency of fire in humid tropical forests. Despite the potential for rapid ecosystem alteration and the current prevalence of wildfire disturbance, the consequences of such fires for tropical forest biodiversity remain poorly understood. We provide a pan-tropical review of the current state of knowledge of these fires, and include data from a study in a seasonally dry terra firme forest of central Brazilian Amazonia. Overall, this study supports predictions that rates of tree mortality and changes in forest structure are strongly linked to burn severity. The potential consequences for biomass loss and carbon emissions are explored. Despite the paucity of data on faunal responses to tropical forest fires, some trends are becoming apparent; for example, large canopy frugivores and understorey insectivorous birds appear to be highly sensitive to changes in forest structure and composition during the first 3 years after fires. Finally, we appraise the management implications of fires and evaluate the viability of techniques and legislation that can be used to reduce forest flammability, prevent anthropogenic ignition sources from coming into contact with flammable forests and aid the post-fire recovery process.
The Bonn challenge aims at the restoration of 350 million hectares of degraded ladscapes by 2030. In Brazil, the restoration goal for 2030 is 12 million hectares. Despite the great demand for ecological restoration across the whole of Brazil, there have been no analyses of the studies carried out in different biomes. In addition, conservation efforts must cover all biomes, so that different regions can take advantage of the many benefits of restoration. Our aim was to identify advances and gaps in current restoration knowledge in order to guide future efforts in Brazil. Our bibliometric survey in the Web of Science using 23 keywords related to restoration generated a total of 530 papers, of which 291 were included in the analysis. The papers were published in 121 scientific journals between 1988 and 2018, with the largest number of papers in 2016. The Atlantic Forest was the biome with the highest number of studies, as it is one of the most threatened tropical forest regions in the world and maintains the largest number of research institutions and receives the highest level of funding support in the country. Regarding the types of studies, temporal monitoring was more frequent in the Amazon, Cerrado, Caatinga, and Pampa, while the monitoring at one point in time was more frequent in the Atlantic Forest. From the studies examined, 31% used a reference area for comparing restoration success. The most studied organisms were plants (81%), and among them, trees were the most frequent, followed by fungi, birds, invertebrates, mammals, and reptiles. The pre-restoration degradation differed among biomes, with deforestation for logging the most cited in the Amazon, agriculture, and livestock in the Atlantic Forest and Cerrado, logging and cattle ranching in Caatinga, and livestock in the Pampa and Pantanal. In general, active/assisted natural succession was the most frequent restoration process: planting seedlings more readily occurred in the Amazon, Atlantic Forest, and Caatinga, whereas natural regeneration in the Cerrado and Pantanal and sowing in Pampa. The studies varied among the age of restoration (>1 to 67 years for active restoration and >1 to 120 years for passive/unassisted natural succession), and the number of species planted (1 to 121 species). We identified an important regional knowledge gap for the Pantanal, Caatinga, and Pampa, as well as the need to include reference areas, evaluate different restoration techniques (besides planting seedlings), and the inclusion of other taxa and life forms in biodiversity studies apart from trees. We also identified the need to expand research to assess landscape metrics, prioritization, legislation, and public policies. © 2019 Elsevier B.V.
Ecological restoration can re-establish plant species populations, enhance forested habitats extension, improve landscape connectivity, and enable biodiversity persistence within a landscape. However, the potential benefits of ecological restoration on beta diversity have never been explored. Here we use field data to investigate, for the first time, if restoration plantings enhance the taxonomic and functional plant beta diversity in a fragmented landscape of the threatened Atlantic forest. Woody species were evaluated for 320 plots established in 18 forest fragments and 14 restoration plantings within a sugarcane production landscape with low forest cover, in southeastern Brazil. Diversity metrics were assessed using the multiple incidence-data version of Hill numbers and were compared among three sets of study sites: fragments, restoration plantings and the two combined. Fragments showed higher levels of alpha diversity and proportional abundance of non-pioneer and animal-dispersed species than restoration plantings. Exotic, pioneer and non-zoochoric species were more abundant in restoration plantings, an expected result considering sites still be in the early or mid-successional stages of development. Taxonomic and functional beta diversity of trees was greatest when both areas were combined. For regenerating plants, however, beta diversity results varied according to species incidence-based frequencies. Although restoration plantings do not result in full recovery of alpha diversity, they can all together complement diversity of forest fragments at the landscape level. The findings indicate two key ecological implications for biodiversity conservation: the critical importance of forest fragments as biodiversity repositories and the positive effect of restoration efforts on landscape-scale diversity in degraded regions. These novel results highlight the importance of species selection for restoration initiatives toward species and functional attributes recognized as significantly reduced or locally rare. Overall, forest fragments and restoration plantings can act synergistically to promote recovery of plant diversity in heavily deforested agricultural landscapes. © 2019 Elsevier B.V.
To test the applicability of alternate land use systems for improving soil functionality in restored ecologies, soils were sampled from 0–15, 15–30 and 30–45 cm deep layers of Leucaena leucocephala (LL), Hardwickia binata (HB), Emblica officinalis (EO), Azadiracta indica (AI)-based silviculture systems; Acacia nilotica-based silvipasture systems (AN); and natural grassland (NG). These were compared with samples from fallow land (F). They were evaluated for their carbon management index (CMI), nutrient supply capacity (NSC), soil functionality (SF), ecorestoration efficiency (ERE) and 21-day cumulative microbial respiration (CO2-21) to assess their applicability in semiarid India. Soil functionality and functional diversity as impacted by restoration have remained largely overlooked. The LL had ~12, 7 and 11% higher CMI than fallow in sampled soil layers. ERE of LL was ~ 55, 65 and 79% higher than fallow land in sampled soil layers, respectively. However, ERE in surface layer was poorer than subsequent soil layers for all systems. The LL, HB and AN improved NSC and SF by: a) ~ 2.5-, 2.2- and 1.6-times; and b) 9.3-, 5.3- and 5.1-times over fallow land in the surface soil layer. A similar trend was observed for SF in lower layers. However, the topsoil layer had >16% mean SF values than subsequent layers. LL, HB and AN systems had ~4.2-, 2.3- and 1.9-times higher CO2-21 than fallow land in the top layer. CO2-21 was positively correlated with NSC and SF but could not predict ERE well. Hence, legume tree-based restoration tactics might be useful for improving land restoration and soil functionality in semiarid regions. © 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Is active restoration the best approach to achieve ecological restoration success (the return to a reference condition, that is, old-growth forest) when compared to natural regeneration in tropical forests? Our meta-analysis of 133 studies demonstrated that natural regeneration surpasses active restoration in achieving tropical forest restoration success for all three biodiversity groups (plants, birds, and invertebrates) and five measures of vegetation structure (cover, density, litter, biomass, and height) tested. Restoration success for biodiversity and vegetation structure was 34 to 56% and 19 to 56% higher in natural regeneration than in active restoration systems, respectively, after controlling for key biotic and abiotic factors (forest cover, precipitation, time elapsed since restoration started, and past disturbance). Biodiversity responses were based primarily on ecological metrics of abundance and species richness (74%), both of which take far less time to achieve restoration success than similarity and composition. This finding challenges the widely held notion that natural forest regeneration has limited conservation value and that active restoration should be the default ecological restoration strategy. The proposition that active restoration achieves greater restoration success than natural regeneration may have arisen because previous comparisons lacked controls for biotic and abiotic factors; we also did not find any difference between active restoration and natural regeneration outcomes for vegetation structure when we did not control for these factors. Future policy priorities should align the identified patterns of biophysical and ecological conditions where each or both restoration approaches are more successful, cost-effective, and compatible with socioeconomic incentives for tropical forest restoration. Copyright © 2017 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science.
While deforestation and fragmentation can cause massive species loss in forest ecosystems, forest regeneration can also drive successional changes in species composition. Although studies have sometimes documented the effects of these compositional changes on interspecific interactions, few studies have investigated changes in the structure of plant-animal networks. We investigated how interaction networks of assemblages of rodents and tree seeds changed with forest fragmentation and succession in a subtropical region. We compared seed-rodent interactions between 14 secondary forest patches that ranged in area from 2 to 58 ha, and from 10 to at least 100 years old, representing a successional gradient. We expected that deforestation and fragmentation would reduce seed production and diversify rodent communities, resulting in higher interaction strengths and connectivity, but weak nestedness (i.e., specialists interact with subsets of the species interaction of generalists). We measured the frequency of rodents eating and removing seeds (interaction strength) in each patch during 3 successive years, using seed tagging and infrared camera trapping, and calculated the properties of the seed-rodent networks. We found that the relative abundances of seeds and rodents changed with stand age not patch size, as did seed-rodent interactions: older patches produced more seeds, contained fewer individuals and species of rodents, and had seed-rodent networks with lower connectance and interaction strength, but higher nestedness. Connectance and interaction strength decreased with metabolic per capita seed availability (as measured by seed energy value); nestedness increased with seed richness, but decreased with rodent abundance. At species level, we found stand age and patch size showed significant effects on seed or rodent abundance of a few species. We also found seed coat thickness and starch contents had significant effects on network metrics. Our results suggest that during succession after deforestation, seed-rodent interactions in these sub-tropical forests change from a state dominated by high seed removal and highly connected seed-rodent networks to a state with more seeds and highly nested networks. From a management perspective of our study region, succession age, not fragment size, and network structure should be paid more attention so as to facilitate the restoration processes of degraded forests. Rodent management should be applied to protect native forest species and exclude incursive ones from farmlands and human residences at early succession stage.
Nest predation rates critically influence avian biodiversity and evolution. In the north temperate zone, increased nest failure along edges of forest fragments is hypothesized to play a major role in the disappearance of bird species from disturbed landscapes. However, we lack comprehensive syntheses from tropical latitudes, where biodiversity is highest and increasingly threatened by habitat fragmentation and disturbance. We assembled data from five decades of field studies across the global tropics (1,112 populations of 661 species) and used phylogenetic models to evaluate proposed predictors of nest success. We found significant effects of several traits, including adult body mass and nest architecture. Contrary to results from many temperate locations, anthropogenic habitat disruption did not consistently reduce nest success; in fact, raw nest success rates were lower in large tracts of primary forest than in disturbed or fragmented landscapes. Follow-up analyses within species, using a subset of 76 species for which we had estimates of nest survival in habitats with different levels of disruption, confirmed that neither disturbance nor fragmentation significantly influenced nest success. These results suggest that nest predation alone cannot explain observed declines in avian biodiversity in tropical forest fragments, raising new questions about the demographic processes that drive extinction in the tropics. Copyright © 2024 the Author(s).
Occupying less than 7 % of Earth's land surface, tropical rain forests harbor perhaps half of the species on Earth and are ecologically, economically, and culturally crucial for issues in global food security, climate change, biodiversity, and human health. Geographically located between the latitudes 10°N and 10°S of the equator, lowland tropical rain forest ecosystems share similar physical structure but vary in geology, species composition, and anthropogenic threats across the forests of Southeast Asia, Australia, Africa, and Central and South America. Mature tropical rain forests are stratified by multiple canopy and understory layers, and physiognomic properties include evergreen broadleaf tree species, a preponderance of species with large leaves to aid with sunlight capture in the light-limited understory, and leaf properties such as entire margins and drip tips that channel water efficiently from the leaf surface. Lianas are increasing in abundance and biomass in a number of tropical rain forests. The additive effects of an increase in liana biomass are correlated with a reduction in tropical forest carbon (C) storage, a value that is currently not considered in global vegetation models. Most rain forest tree species do not grow, flower, or fruit year-round. Peaks in leaf flushing, flowering, and fruiting coincide with the high irradiance and low water stress associated with the onset of the wet season. This synchrony is common and largely driven by resource availability, though biotic explanations for synchrony include selection to attract pollinators or seed dispersers and to avoid herbivory and seed predation. With few exceptions, species richness across the tree of life is highest in equatorial tropical regions and decreases towards the poles. Tropical rain forests harbor approximately two thirds of the estimated 350,000-500,000 extant flowering plant species on Earth, with high rates of endemism and large numbers of rare species. Numerous evolutionary and ecological hypotheses to explain the origin and maintenance of high biological diversity in tropical forests have garnered support and include biogeographic history, evolutionary mechanisms of adaptation and speciation, range size and distribution constraints, and ecological mechanisms promoting species coexistence. Continental drift, climate constraints, and long-distance dispersal are responsible for some of the similarities and differences in species across tropical regions. Familial similarity among forests in Amazonia and Southeast Asia can be as high as 50 %, while independent diversification and species radiation mean that much fewer genera (around 10 %) are shared. Gradients in climate, parent material and soil age, topography and landscape stability, and atmospheric deposition result in strong heterogeneity in soil nutrient availability from local to regional scales. Soil order, which is generally correlated with soil fertility as a strong predictor of aboveground net primary productivity in tropical forests. Tropical forests account for approximately 40 % of terrestrial net primary productivity (NPP), store half of Earth's vegetative C stocks but less than 10 % of its soil C stocks. The relationships between rainfall, temperature, soil fertility, and NPP are complex and require more experimental manipulations to tease apart the interactions. Intact tropical forests are net C sinks, but the uptake of C (1.1 ± 0.3 Pg C year-1) in intact tropical forests is counteracted by the emissions from tropical biome conversion - a net C source to the atmosphere of 1.3 ± 0.2 Pg C year-1 that results in a tropical biome net C balance of approximately zero. Stronger El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) effects are increasing the frequency and severity of droughts, fires, hurricanes and cyclones, and flooding events. Recovery of aboveground biomass, species composition, and forest structure all depend on the type and severity of disturbance and its effect on soil fertility. Greater use of remote sensing imagery from satellites, airborne Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) data, and unmanned drones will allow accurate tracking of disturbance and C stocks as well as monitoring of phenology, foliar canopy chemistry, individual species identification, and biodiversity estimates from local to regional scales. The tropical biome is undergoing significant change. Understanding the drivers and impacts of these changes will require sustained advances across multiple disciplines. Ultimately as a society, we are left asking what is the capacity of our remaining and regrowing tropical rain forests to adapt to long-term anthropogenic and climate change and what can we do to moderate these effects while nourishing a healthy human population. © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014.
Mobilizing funds is a major challenge to achieve scalable Forest Landscape Restoration projects. While pure ecological restoration may not be a feasible investment from the private perspective, combining native species with non-timber forest products (NTFP) species may be a solution for reaching large scale and financially sustainable forest restoration. This study addresses potential species combinations for 12 restoration models, three models being based in pure ecological restoration and nine models being based on agroforests with NTFP, their economic costs, and benefits in tropical forests in Brazil, Peru, Cambodia, and Indonesia. A total of 12 semi-structured interviews were conducted to capture the models’ productivity and prices. As for the prices that the producers did not know, specialized stores were consulted in the cities of the collection. The starting investment to restore 01 hectare (ha−1) of tropical forest ranged between US $104 and $7736, with an average of $1963 ha−1 and a standard deviation of $2196 ha−1, considering the 12 cases evaluated in 2018 and 2019. From nine restoration models that had economic purposes, financial indicators showed a median net present value (NPV) of $1548 ha−1, and a median internal rate of return of 22%, considering a discount rate of 10%. The NPV varied between $−685 ha−1 and $55,531 ha−1. Costs of pure ecological restoration were on average 42% lower than agroforestry systems, but did not produce direct income from NTFP, therefore yielding negative NPV. The study demonstrated the economic feasibility of seven of nine models that had economic objective, showing that there are promising business cases for private investment in tropical forest restoration. © 2022 by the authors.
Incorporating locally prevalent extractive uses of a natural habitat into valuation methods may be appropriate in improving the efficacy and objectivity while justifying preservation. The consequences of a change in the marketing structure of medicinal plants caused by forest clearance for a multipurpose hydroelectric project across the river Narmada in the state of Madhya Pradesh was evaluated. Major loss of realizable pharmaceutical value in the submerged zone of a tropical dry deciduous forest upholds the relevance of sustainably managed conservation option over a development option with irreversible changes. Various costs and benefits relevant to the problem are quantified and compared. Multiplicity of benefits and economies of scale associated with in-situ preservation in a local economy offset the net benefits projected in the development option mainly due to shortfalls in targeted benefits and compensatory afforestation.
Cupuassu [Theobroma grandiflorum (Willd. ex Spreng.) K. Schum] is a promising Amazonian fruit tree of great interest for implementation in sustainable agroforestry enrichment alternative models for the Colombian Amazon. The purpose of this study was to assess the diurnal and seasonality eco-physiological behavior of two distinctive ecotypes (i.e., Eco11 and Eco4) and a control ecotype (EcoCaq) in association with rubber plantations (clone FX 4098) in growth phase in two agro-climatic zones of Caquetá in the Colombian Amazon. Cupuassu was established in a completely random design with distances of 3.0×4.0 m in double rubber corridors, and the latter in turn with distances of 4.0×2.8×10.0 m. Linear models were used to analyze the daily courses of gas exchange and water potential of the plant, micro-climatic parameters and soil water potential. A biplot genotype × environment analysis was used to analyze the adaptability and stability of the three eco-types. The highest photosynthetic rates occurred between 9:00 and 12:00 h and in times of greater precipitation (wet and transition to dry season). The plants water potential was the eco-physiological parameter that best correlated with photosynthesis, and with climatic factors, positively with relative humidity and negatively with PAR (photosynthetically active radiation), temperature and VPD (vapor pressure deficit). Eco11 presented the highest photosynthetic performance therefore representing the best option for implementation of agroforestry enrichment arrangements with rubber plantations with potential for the Colombian Amazon. © 2023 International Society for Horticultural Science. All rights reserved.
Indian forests provide a multitude of services to vast populations. Common human activities including livestock grazing, fuelwood extraction and burning have the potential to impact forest ecosystem structure and function. The effects of these activities on vegetation, ecology and soil properties were investigated in Bandipur National Park (BNP) in southern India. Data were collected from 200 sites in four watersheds within the park. Sample sites spanned a degradation gradient measured by a field disturbance index (FDI). This paper focusses on the impacts on vegetation structure, diversity and composition, and integrates impacts on soil. Shrub and tree species were inventoried and evaluated in plots 10-m in diameter. The tree layer was dominated by Anogeissus-Emblica-Tectona species. The understory was dominated by invasives Chromolaena odorata and Lantana camara, and native gymnosporia emarginata. Vegetation plot heights, canopy cover and tree diameters were negatively correlated with field disturbance resulting in stunted forest stature in degraded sites. Vegetation composition in degraded watersheds was dominated by small woody tree species and a greater diversity of shrub species. Ordination analysis was used to integrate soil data with vegetation and disturbance, revealing that deciduous forest in the park is degrading to scrub forest along with negative impacts on soil characteristics. Consequences of services currently enjoyed by local populations are discussed. Copyright (C) 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Ecosystem nutrient use efficiency-the ratio of net primary productivity to soil nutrient supply-is an integrative measure of ecosystem functioning. High productivity and nutrient retention in natural systems are frequently attributed to high species diversity, even though some single-species systems can be highly productive and effective at resource capture. We investigated the effects of both individual species and life-form diversity on ecosystem nutrient use efficiency using model tropical ecosystems comprised of monocultures of three tree species and polycultures in which each of the tree species was coplanted with species of two additional life forms. Tree species significantly influenced nutrient use efficiency by whole ecosystems in monocultures; however, in polycultures, the additional life forms interacted with the influence exerted by the dominant tree. Furthermore, the presence of the additional life forms significantly increased nutrient uptake and uptake efficiency, but in only two of the three systems and 2 of the 4 years of the study period. These results indicate that the effect of life-form diversity on ecosystem functioning is not constant and that there may be temporal shifts in the influence exerted by different components of the community. Furthermore, although species (and life forms) exerted considerable influence on ecosystem nutrient use efficiency, this efficiency was most closely related to soil nutrient availability. These findings demonstrate that ecosystem nutrient use efficiency is an outcome not only of the characteristics of the species or tife forms that comprise the system but also of factors that affect soil nutrient supply. The results argue against the simple upward scaling of nutrient use efficiency from leaves and plants to ecosystems.
Restoration status of forest rehabilitation areas can be assessed by comparing their ecosystem characteristics with those of a reference system, most often what is considered the natural climax vegetation. However, comprehensive measurements needed for a traditional vegetation description are often hard or impractical in complex (sub)tropical ecosystems. Therefore, an alternative approach is the identification of simple indicators of ecosystem integrity. The use of such indicators can speed up the availability of resource inventories and thus contribute to the accelerated implementation of successful rehabilitation practices. Thermal buffer capacity (TBC) of ecosystems has been previously proposed as an overall indicator of ecosystem integrity. In this article, sequential surface-temperature measurements are proposed as a method for TBC assessment of different land-use types. Surface temperatures of seven land units in central Tigray (northern Ethiopia), each with a uniform land-use type (degraded and bushy grazing land, enriched and non-enriched rehabilitation area, and forest), were measured with a hand-held infrared thermometer in the rainy and the dry season. Surface-temperature models were derived by means of quadratic regression. Cross-correlation functions were calculated for all possible pairs of land-unit time series data. Instantaneous heat-up rates, average TBC, and accumulated heat load were calculated. Repeated-measures analysis of variance was used to test the effect of aspect and protection status on TBC. Kruskal-Wallis one-way analysis of variance by ranks for small samples was used to test the significance of differences in heat-up rates and heat load among land-use groups. Time lags between land-unit surface temperatures are caused by differences in aspect rather than land-use type. Protection status and aspect have a significant effect on the average TBC. Results clearly demonstrate a differentiation between protected (low heat-up rate) and non-protected areas (high heat-up rate). Overall ranking suggests that the remnant forest has the highest TBC of all surveyed land-use types, followed by the enriched protected area. Results of this study show that TBC quickly responds to area closure and can therefore be used to monitor the development of protected areas. It is strongly recommended that a detailed monitoring strategy for protected areas on the basis of this technology be devised, validated, and finally transferred to the local communities. © 2004 Society for Ecological Restoration International.
Tropical forests are rich in biodiversity with great potential for carbon (C) storage. We estimated ecosystem-level C stock using data from 70 forest plots in three major forest types: tropical dry deciduous (TDD I and TDD II), tropical semi-evergreen (TSE I and TSE II) and tropical evergreen forests (TEF I, TEF II and TEF III) of Kanyakumari Wildlife Sanctuary, Western Ghats, India. The average C stock in these forests was 336.8 Mg C/ha, of which 231.3, 3.0, 2.4, 15.2 and 84.9 Mg C/ha were stored in woody vegetation, understorey, litter, deadwood and soil respectively. The live vegetation, detritus and soil contributed 65.5%, 5.5% and 29% respectively to the total ecosystem-level C stock and distributed in forest types in the order: TEF III > TEF II > TEF I > TSE I > TDD II > TSE II > TDD I. The plant diversity, structural attributes and environmental factors showed significant positive correlations with C stocks and accounted for 6.7, 77.2 and 16% of variance. These findings indicate that the tropical forests in the Western Ghats store large amount of C, and resulting data are invaluable for planning and monitoring forest conservation and management programs to enhance C storage in tropical forests. © 2020, The Author(s).
Fungi regulate key nutrient cycling processes in many forest ecosystems, but their diversity and distribution within and across ecosystems are poorly understood. Here, we examine the spatial distribution of fungi across a boreal and tropical ecosystem, focusing on ectomycorrhizal fungi. We analyzed fungal community composition across litter (organic horizons) and underlying soil horizons (0-20 cm) using 454 pyrosequencing and clone library sequencing. In both forests, we found significant clustering of fungal communities by site and soil horizons with analogous patterns detected by both sequencing technologies. Free-living saprotrophic fungi dominated the recently-shed leaf litter and ectomycorrhizal fungi dominated the underlying soil horizons. This vertical pattern of fungal segregation has also been found in temperate and European boreal forests, suggesting that these results apply broadly to ectomycorrhizal-dominated systems, including tropical rain forests. Since ectomycorrhizal and free-living saprotrophic fungi have different influences on soil carbon and nitrogen dynamics, information on the spatial distribution of these functional groups will improve our understanding of forest nutrient cycling. © 2013 McGuire et al.
Deforestation of native ecosystems causes microclimatic changes at the edge of the remaining forest fragments. This “edge effect” can modify soil attributes, although there is little information on this. Thus, this study aimed to evaluate the edge effect on soil microclimate conditions, chemical, microbiological and arthropod community attributes and their relationship with litter attributes in a fragment of Semideciduous Seasonal Forest, in Piraí, RJ, Brazil. In the middle of the dry period (June/2019), four ranges of distances parallel to each other were established from the edge of the forest fragment: Edge: 0 m; Range 1: 50 m; Range 2: 100 m; and Interior: 160 m. In each range, five sampling points were established, spaced 10 m apart, where soil samples were collected in the 0–5 cm layer and litter samples. This material was employed to determine microclimatic, chemical and biological (arthropod community and microbiological attributes) attributes of the soil; and litter stock, concentration and content of nutrients. Forest fragmentation altered litter attributes and consequently soil moisture and nutrients, the communities’ attributes of soil arthropods and microorganisms. These modifications in such aspects of nutrient cycling could compromise the forest functioning and the conservation of local biodiversity. Thus, we suggested the planting of non-pioneer native tree species in distances closest to the forest edge and installing of ecological corridors to connect the forest fragment to other remnants, in order to diminish the edge effect. © 2021 Elsevier Masson SAS
In this study, we examined the impacts of Attalea oleifera on the structure of seedling bank and discuss potential mechanisms of palm influence. Seed rain, seedling bank, and palm leaf fall were assessed beneath the canopy and in the vicinity of 16 adult palms across the edges of a large fragment (3500 ha) of the Atlantic forest. Moreover, we examined A. oleifera impacts on seed germination and seedling mortality by experimentally submitting seeds and seedlings to prolonged palm-leaf covering. As expected, seedling bank beneath the adults exhibited reduced abundance and species richness at local and habitat scale. Small to large seeds (3.1-30 mm) were underrepresented in the seed rain below adults palms, while experimental leaf covering drastically reduced both seed germination and seedling survivorship. A. oleifera leaf fall occurred over the whole year (3.6 +/- 2.7 leaves/individual/yr), which resulted in deep leaf litter mounds (10.7 +/- 9.2 cm). Finally, adult palm density (21.6 +/- 11.9 individuals/ha) correlated negatively with seedling density across Attalea clusters. Our results suggest that A. oleifera exerts negative effects on the seedling bank by reducing seedling abundance and richness as a consequence of two complementary mechanisms: impoverished and size-biased seed rain plus reduced seed germination and increased seedling mortality due to prolonged covering by fallen leaves.
The cascading effects of biodiversity loss on ecosystem functioning of forests have become more apparent. However, how edge effects shape these processes has yet to be established. We assessed how edge effects alter arthropod populations and the strength of any resultant trophic cascades on herbivory rate in tropical forests of Brazil. We established 7 paired forest edge and interior sites. Each site had a vertebrate-exclosure, procedural (exclosure framework with open walls), and control plot (total 42 plots). Forest patches were surrounded by pasture. Understory arthropods and leaf damage were sampled every 4 weeks for 11 months. We used path analysis to determine the strength of trophic cascades in the interior and edge sites. In forest interior exclosures, abundance of predaceous and herbivorous arthropods increased by 326% and 180%, respectively, compared with control plots, and there were significant cascading effects on herbivory. Edge-dwelling invertebrates responded weakly to exclusion and there was no evidence of trophic cascade. Our results suggest that the vertebrate community at forest edges controls invertebrate densities to a lesser extent than it does in the interior. Edge areas can support vertebrate communities with a smaller contingent of insectivores. This allows arthropods to flourish and indirectly accounts for higher levels of plant damage at these sites. Increased herbivory rates may have important consequences for floristic community composition and primary productivity, as well as cascading effects on nutrient cycling. By interspersing natural forest patches with agroforests, instead of pasture, abiotic edge effects can be softened and prevented from penetrating deep into the forest. This would ensure a greater proportion of forest remains habitable for sensitive species and could help retain ecosystem functions in edge zones. © 2019 Society for Conservation Biology
Understanding the patterns and intensity of anthropogenic impacts on habitats is important in the conservation of tropical ecosystems. The aim of the study was to establish the associated edge effects of anthropogenic disturbances on vegetation in western Umfurudzi Park, Zimbabwe. Three study strata were established using distance from the boundary into the park. Vegetation attributes and anthropogenic disturbance levels data were collected in 2012. Significant differences (P < 0.05) were noted on tree and shrub density, woody plant height, woody plant diversity, grass height and grass sward width across the three strata. Land clearing, livestock grazing and firewood collection were the most frequent and pronounced disturbances occurring along the park boundary. These disturbances decreased in intensity as distance from the boundary increased. We recommend the following: (i) the need to revisit the buffer zone concept and policy measures associated with ecosystem services and goods provision for communities surrounding protected areas, (ii) engaging neighbouring communities on sustainable ways of deriving ecosystem goods and services from buffer zones and protected areas and (iii) further studies on the regeneration and recovery of cleared patches along the boundary and their use by wildlife species in the park. © 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The study evaluates the effect of a 16-year-old oil palm plantation by comparing the characteristics of soil under the agro-ecosystem with that under natural forest. Soil organic matter, total N and exchangeable Mg and K were significantly lower in the 0-10 and 10-20 cm layer of the soil under the oil palm plantation. Organic matter decline indicates that the rate of humus decomposition in plantation soil is greater than that of humus addition. The decline in the nutrients is mainly due to leaching losses, nutrient immobilisation in the standing biomass, nutrient loss via harvested palm fruits and a destabilisation of the nutrient cycle due to loss of biodiversity. Measures to minimise loss of biodiversity in monocultural tree plantations are discussed. -from Authors
Fire has been an integral part of ecosystem functioning in many biomes for a long time, but the increased intensity and frequency of wildfires often affect plant diversity and carbon storage. Prescribed burning is one of the alternatives to forest fuel management where the fire is controlled and carried out under a determined set of weather conditions and objectives. The effect of prescribed burning on plant diversity and carbon (C) storage has not been studied widely. The objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of prescribed burning on plant diversity indices, biomass stocks, and soil C storage in the tropical highland forests of Southern Mexico. We assessed plant diversity and carbon stocks at 21 sampling sites: seven with prescribed burning, seven non-burning, and seven with wildfires. We calculated tree biodiversity indices, stand structural properties, and species composition among burning treatments. We quantified C stocks in vegetation biomass by using an allometric equation and forest litter by direct sampling. We analyzed 252 soil samples for soil organic C content and other properties. The results showed that the biodiversity index was higher in sites with prescribed burning (Shannon index, H = 1.26) and non-burning (H = 1.14) than in wildfire sites (H = 0.36). There was a greater similarity in plant species composition between non-burning and prescribed burning sites compared to wildfire sites. Prescribed burning showed a positive effect on soil carbon storage (183.9 Mg C ha−1) when compared to wildfire (144.3 Mg C ha−1), but the difference was not statistically significant (p > 0.05) in biomass stocks. Prescribed burning in this study conserved plant diversity as well as soil carbon stocks compared to non-burning, the opposite of what we found in wildfires. © 2022 by the authors.
Research Highlights: Seasonally flooded and terra firme forests are characteristic ecosystems of the Colombian Orinoco Basin and of great importance in the maintenance of regional biodiversity and ecosystem function. These forests have a unimodal precipitation regime that can cause a temporal effect on the seedling regeneration niche. This could partly explain the high diversity and coexistence of plant species in these forests, as well as the similarity in composition of seedlings and trees. Background and Objectives: Seedlings are a key factor in the assembly of plant communities. We evaluated the effect of flooding and rains on the dissimilarity and compositional affinity between trees and seedlings of seasonally flooded and terra firme forests. Materials and Methods: the tree community of these forests in San Martín (Meta, Colombia) was characterized and compared with their respective seedling communities before (June) and after (December) rain and flooding (during the rainy season). We evaluated plant species diversity and abundance (Shannon diversity and Pielou eveness index), as well as the compositional dissimilarities of each tree community with their corresponding seedling community sampled at the beginning and end of rains and flooding (Bray–Curtis dissimilarity). We also compared sampling site composition using a NMDS analysis. Results: We found that the terra firme forest had higher diversity compared to the flooded forest. Seedling density in the seasonally flooded forest decreased significantly after the flood but not in the terra firme forest at the end of the rainy season. The compositional dissimilarity between trees and seedlings in the seasonally inundated forest also decreased after the flood. However, this pattern was not evident in the terra firme forest. Conclusions: These results indicate that seasonal flooding generates a strong ecological filter that affects the realized niche of plants in these forests. Our results can contribute valuable information for the effective development of assisted restoration and conservation programs. © 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
In urban forestry plantations are implemented in different cities of the world for social and environmental benefits. Bauhinia retusa and Bauhinia variegata are important species and to be used as large-scale plantation programs in urban forestry which might solve or mitigate urban, social, and environmental issues such as improving the physical & mental health of residents, food and nutrition security, increasing urban biodiversity, cooling the neighboring, preventing soil erosion, flooding, and mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution. The present study was conducted with the aim of producing quality planting material for B. retusa and B. variegata in the nursery for afforestation programs. Seeds of B. retusa and B. variegata were collected from the natural habitats to assess seed germination and seedling growth. Seeds were stored in different types of containers at room temperature and later on exposed to 15, 20, and 25 °C in seed germinator. Seeds were further sown in polythene bags according to the seed size, seed coat color, seed sowing depth, the orientation of seeds, and the result of the emergence of seedlings, their growth, and biomass were estimated. A two-way analysis of variance was calculated to estimate the variation among the studied parameters. Results revealed that a constant 25 °C temperature was considered best for seed germination of both the Bauhinia species. Polybags were found the most suitable for storing the Bauhinia seeds among the storage containers. The seedling emergence and growth were maximum in yellow color and large seeds. In B. retusa, seedling emergence, and growths were the maximum in seeds sown at a horizontal position and in B. variegata at an upright position. Seedling emergence, length, and biomass were recorded the maximum when seeds of B. retusa were sown at 4 cm depth and B. variegata seeds were sown at 2 cm depth. The study recommends that the yellow color seed that has to be sown at 2 cm to 4 cm depth with upright and horizontal positions is considered best for the production of quality planting stock of both studied Bauhinia species. © 2023 by the authors.
Forest fragmentation is the main cause of biodiversity loss in the Anthropocene and it is triggering a top-down cascade effect that may influence leaf litter decomposition. However, the link between biodiversity loss and changes in ecosystem processes is not fully understood. We conducted an experiment to evaluate whether the exclusion of vertebrates affects the decomposition rates of different litter types (grass, a pioneer species and a mix of litters from a well preserved secondary forest). To answer this question, we placed litter bags inside artificial exclusion plots that were built in two types of vegetation coverage (abandoned pastureland and preserved forest) in the Atlantic forest of southeast Brazil. Our hypothesis is that vertebrate exclusion will change decomposition rates of different litter types due to the top-down cascade effect on soil invertebrates. We found out that vertebrate exclusion did not affect decomposition rates, possibly due to the overlap of ecological functions in the soil fauna responsible for the decomposition process. Furthermore, grass litter was decomposed faster (k value), possibly due to its initial nutrient content and hence litter quality which plays a significant role on decomposition rates. © 2021, International Society for Tropical Ecology.
The effectiveness of parks for forest conservation is widely debated in Africa, where increasing human pressure, insufficient funding, and lack of management capacity frequently place significant demands on forests. Tropical forests house a substantial portion of the world's remaining biodiversity and are heavily affected by anthropogenic activity. We analyzed park effectiveness at the individual (224 parks) and national (23 countries) level across Africa by comparing the extent of forest loss (as a proxy for deforestation) inside parks to matched unprotected control sites. Although significant geographical variation existed among parks, the majority of African parks had significantly less forest loss within their boundaries (e.g., Mahale Park had 34 times less forest loss within its boundary) than control sites. Accessibility was a significant driver of forest loss. Relatively inaccessible areas had a higher probability (odds ratio >1, p < 0.001) of forest loss but only in ineffective parks, and relatively accessible areas had a higher probability of forest loss but only in effective parks. Smaller parks less effectively prevented forest loss inside park boundaries than larger parks (T = −2.32, p < 0.05), and older parks less effectively prevented forest loss inside park boundaries than younger parks (F2,154 = −4.11, p < 0.001). Our analyses, the first individual and national assessment of park effectiveness across Africa, demonstrated the complexity of factors (such as geographical variation, accessibility, and park size and age) influencing the ability of a park to curb forest loss within its boundaries. © 2016 Society for Conservation Biology
Since the severe 1982-1983 El Niño drought, recurrent burning has been reported inside tropical protected areas (TPAs). Despite the key role of fire in habitat degradation, little is known about the effectiveness of TPAs in mitigating fire incidence and burned areas. We used a GPS fire database (1995-2005) (n = 3590 forest fires) obtained from the National Forest Commission to compare fire incidence (number of fires) and burned areas inside TPAs and their surrounding adjacent buffer areas in Southern Mexico (Chiapas). Burned areas inside parks ranged from 2% (Palenque) to 45% (Lagunas de Montebello) of a park's area, and the amount burned was influenced by two severe El Niño events (1998 and 2003). These two years together resulted in 67% and 46% of the total area burned in TPAs and buffers, respectively during the period under analysis. Larger burned areas in TPAs than in their buffers were exclusively related to the extent of natural habitats (flammable area excluding agrarian and pasture lands). Higher fuel loads together with access and extinction difficulties were likely behind this trend. A higher incidence of fire in TPAs than in their buffers was exclusively related to anthropogenic factors such as higher road densities and agrarian extensions. Our results suggest that TPAs are failing to mitigate fire impacts, with both fire incidence and total burned areas being significantly higher in the reserves than in adjacent buffer areas. Management plans should consider those factors that facilitate fires in TPAs: anthropogenic origin of fires, sensitivity of TPAs to El Niño-droughts, large fuel loads and fuel continuity inside parks, and limited financial resources. Consideration of these factors favors lines of action such as alternatives to the use of fire (e.g., mucuna-maize system), climatic prediction to follow the evolution of El Niño, fuel management strategies that favor extinction practices, and the strengthening of local communities and ecotourism. ©2006 Society for Conservation Biology.
We report the effects of an invasive tree (Syzygium jambos, Myrtaceace) on species composition, plant diversity patterns, and forest regeneration in primary and secondary forest in the Luquillo Mountains of northeastern Puerto Rico, including the area in and around the Caribbean National Forest (CNF) and the Luquillo Long Term Ecological Research site (Luquillo LTER). Land use history was reconstructed using aerial photographs from 1936 to 1989 and study sites were categorized into four groups that corresponded to their status in 1936: unforested, young secondary, mature secondary, and primary forests. In randomly selected forest stands in each forest type, we measured the abundance of invasive and native tree species, seedling recruitment for S. jambos as well as soil nutrient pools and tested for the effects of land use history on S. jambos density and diversity. A partial Mantel test was used to control for historical and elevational differences across study sites. The results indicate that S. jambos density was highest in habitats classified in 1936 as unforested, young, or mature secondary forests. Compared to all other forest classes, species diversity was significantly higher in primary forests. However, there was no statistically significant difference between observed and estimated species richness across the four forest types. S. jambos density and species diversity were strongly negatively correlated, even after controlling for land use history and elevation. There was significantly higher S. jambos seedling recruitment in areas that were either unforested or had young secondary forests in 1936. The results also indicate that S. jambos is able to establish viable populations in habitats with different soil nutrient status. S. jambos has also altered vegetation composition and diversity patterns in habitats where it is the dominant tree species. After nearly 185 years since its introduction to the island, S. jambos is not only well established within 30 m of stream channels, its presence does not appear to be limited by topographic, soil nutrient, or elevational conditions. This study suggests that land use change and subsequent plant invasions have produced a new vegetation assemblage that has led to potentially long-term changes in community structure, species composition, and successional trajectory in regenerating secondary forests in the Luquillo Mountains. © 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Background: Bromelia pinguin (Bromeliaceae) is a terrestrial bromeliad commonly found under forest stands throughout the Neotropics that has been shown to have antifungal activity in vitro. We have hypothesized that this bromeliad would also have an effect on the fungal populations in nearby soil by decreasing fungaldiversity and negatively impacting C and N cycle-related activities. A previous study in the lowland forest of Costa Rica showed the soil beneath these bromeliads had decreased fungal ITS DNA and differences in C and N levels compared to adjacent primary forest soils.     Results: In this follow-up study, we found that the bromeliad soils had lower rates of C and N biomass development and lower phenol oxidase activity (suggesting less decreased fungal decomposition activity). The results of T-RFLP and cloning-based taxonomic analyses showed the community level diversity and abundance of fungal ITS DNA was less in bromeliad soils. Sequence analysis of fungal ITS DNA clones showed marked differences in fungal community structure between habitats of Basidiomycota (Tremellales, Agricales, Thelephorales), Ascomycota (Helotiales), and Zycomycota populations.     Conclusions: The data show there to be differences in the soil nutrient dynamics and fungal community structure and activity associated with these bromeliads, as compared to the adjacent primary forest. This suggests the possibility that the anti-fungal activity of the bromeliad extends into the soil. The bromeliad-dense regions of these primary forest habitats provide a unique natural micro-habitat within the forests and the opportunity to better identify the role of fungal communities in the C and N cycles in tropical soils.
Changing land use in the tropics has resulted in vast areas of damaged and degraded lands where biodiversity has been reduced. The majority of research on biodiversity has been focused on population and community dynamics and has rarely considered the ecosystem processes that are intimately related. We present a framework for examining the effects of changes in biodiversity on ecosystem function in natural, managed, and damaged tropical forests. Using a whole-ecosystem approach, the framework identifies key nutrient and energy cycling processes and critical junctures or pathways, termed interfaces, where resources are concentrated and transferred between the biotic and abiotic components of the ecosystem. Processes occurring at these interfaces, and the organisms or attributes participating in these processes, exert a strong influence on ecosystem structure. We use examples from Puerto Rico, Southern China, Dominica, and Nicaragua to illustrate how the functional diversity framework can be applied to critically examine the effects of changes in biodiversity on ecosystem function, and the relative success or failure of rehabilitation strategies. The few available data suggest that functional diversity, and not just species richness, is important in maintaining the integrity of nutrient and energy fluxes. High species richness, however, may increase ecosystem resiliency following disturbance by increasing the number of alternative pathways for the flow of resources. We suggest ways in which the framework of functional diversity can be used to design research to examine the effects of changes in biodiversity on ecosystem processes and in the design and evaluation of ecosystem management and land rehabilitation projects in the tropics.
Anthropogenic disturbance and climate change might negatively affect the ecosystem services provided by mutualistic networks. However, the effects of such forces remain poorly characterized. They may be especially important in dry forests, which (1) experience chronic anthropogenic disturbances (CADs) as human populations exploit forest resources, and (2) are predicted to face a 22% decline in rainfall under climate change. In this study, we investigated the separate and combined effects of CADs and rainfall levels on the specialization of mutualistic networks in the Caatinga, a seasonally dry tropical forest typical of north-eastern Brazil. More specifically, we examined interactions between plants bearing extrafloral nectaries (EFNs) and ants. We analysed whether differences in network specialization could arise from environmentally mediated variation in the species composition, namely via the replacement of specialist by generalist species. We characterized these ant–plant networks in 15 plots (20 × 20 m) that varied in CAD intensity and mean annual rainfall. We quantified CAD intensity by calculating three indices related to the main sources of disturbance in the Caatinga: livestock grazing (LG), wood extraction (WE) and miscellaneous resource use (MU). We determined the degree of ant–plant network specialization using four metrics: generality, vulnerability, interaction evenness and H2′. Our results indicate that CADs differentially influenced network specialization: we observed positive, negative, and neutral responses along LG, MU and WE gradients, respectively. The pattern was most pronounced with LG. Rainfall also shaped network specialization, markedly increasing it. While LG and rainfall were associated with changes in network species composition, this trend was not related to the degree of species specialization. This result suggests that shifts in network specialization might be related to changes in species behaviour, not species composition. Our study highlights the vulnerability of such dry forest ant–plant networks to climate change. Moreover, dry forests experience highly heterogeneous anthropogenic disturbances, creating a geographic mosaic of selective forces that may shape the co-evolution of interactions between ants and EFN-bearing plants. © 2018 The Authors. Journal of Animal Ecology © 2018 British Ecological Society
This study evaluated the effects of three different land use types: mango orchards, maize fields and communal grazing lands on termite species distribution in the Vhembe District, Limpopo Province, South Africa. The main objective was to identify the termite species found in the area and investigate the effect of land use on termite species. Termites were collected from six study sites using a standardized transect sampling protocol and baiting methods in a transect of 2 x 100 m during the dry and wet seasons. A total of 18 termite species from 2 families (Termitidae and Rhinotermitidae), 5 subfamilies (Macrotermitinae, Amitermitinae, Apicotermitinae, Nasutitermitinae and Cubitermitinae) and 11 genera (Allodontotermes, Ancistrotermes, Macrotermes, Microtermes, Odontotermes, Microcerotermes, Rhadinotermes, Trinervitermes, Psammotermes, Schedorhinotermes and Cubitermes) were recorded. A higher species diversity index was observed for the wet season. Communal grazing resulted in a higher Shannon diversity index (H ') of 2.23 and Simpson diversity index (1-D) of 0.84 followed by mango orchard (H ' = 1.41, 1-D = 0.68), while maize field recorded the lowest (H ' = 1.07, 1-D = 0.48). Macrotermitinae constituted 77% of the total number of species recorded across all the land use types. Edible termite species recorded are important in rural communities to supplement human protein requirements and they provide ecosystem services thus, there is a need for studies that quantify the trade-off between costs (crop damage) and benefits of maintaining termites in agricultural landscapes.
Responses of understory plant diversity to nitrogen (N) additions were investigated in reforested forests of contrasting disturbance regimes in southern China from 2003 to 2008: disturbed forest (with harvesting of understory vegetation and litter) and rehabilitated forest (without harvesting). Experimental additions of N were administered as the following treatments: Control, 50 kg N ha -1 yr -1, and 100 kg N ha -1 yr -1. Nitrogen additions did not significantly affect understory plant richness, density, and cover in the disturbed forest. Similarly, no significant response was found for canopy closure in this forest. In the rehabilitated forest, species richness and density showed no significant response to N additions; however, understory cover decreased significantly in the N-treated plots, largely a function of a significant increase in canopy closure. Our results suggest that responses of plant diversity to N deposition may vary with different land-use history, and rehabilitated forests may be more sensitive to N deposition. © 2010 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Previous research has indicated that a substantial portion of native flora and fauna may persist in agricultural mosaics in the Neotropics. However, understanding the relative importance of different habitat factors and management practices at different scales for sustaining this biodiversity has proven somewhat elusive. In addition, most such research has taken place in only a few fairly well-studied landscapes, thus limiting our ability to infer broader patterns that might be transferred to unstudied locales. This study expands the geographic breadth of prior research by evaluating bird and butterfly assemblages in an agricultural landscape in the Rio Copan watershed of western Honduras. The study also provides a systematic assessment of the relative influence of categorical and continuous habitat variables across a range of scales likely to be significant for birds and butterflies. Overall, we recorded 145 tree species, 139 bird species, and 119 butterfly species. Birds and butterflies displayed contrasting responses to land cover: birds were most strongly associated with dense vegetation in broadleaf forests, forest fallows, shade-grown coffee farms, and live fences, while butterflies were most abundant in live fences, pastures, and riparian forests. Bird assemblages were heavily skewed toward common and non-forest-dependent species, likely due to the young age and high disturbance level of forest plots. In contrast, butterfly assemblages contained a substantial proportion of forest-dependent species, which were observed in forests as well as pastures and live fences. Contrary to expectations, categorical land cover descriptors were more effective at explaining faunal assemblage patterns than continuous habitat descriptors related to vegetation and landscape context. In addition, plot scale (25-100 m) habitat features had a greater influence on faunal assemblages than did neighborhood scale (200-3000 m) landscape composition or structure, although differences in management intensity at the scale of the entire watershed (5-20 km) also exerted a strong influence on conservation outcomes.
Deforestation of tropical dry forest reduces soil fertility, with negative effects on future restoration intervention. To evaluate the effect of initial soil properties on three-year performance of six tree species in restoration settings, we measured C, N, and P contents in topsoils of 48 plots under minimal (exclusions of livestock grazing) and maximal (plantings of six native species) restoration intervention during two years in tropical dry forest in central Mexico. Survival and height and diameter relative growth rates were evaluated by species and by growth rank (three fast- and three slow-growing species). After two years, organic C and the C:N ratio increased early during natural succession; these increases might be related to high density of N2-fixing recruits at both intervention levels. Changes in N availability for plants (i.e., NO3- and NH4 + contents) occurred after cattle exclusion. After 40 months, the fast-growing legume Leucaena esculenta (DC.) Benth. had the highest survival (65.55%) and relative growth rate in both height (3.16%) and diameter (5.67%). Fast-growing species had higher survival and diameter growth rates than slow-growing species. Higher diameter growth rates for fast-growing species may be associated with a higher ability to forage for soil resources, whereas similar height growth rates for slow and fast-growing species suggested low competition for light due to slow natural succession at the site. Planted seedlings had higher survival possibly due to initial high NO3- content in the soil. Also, fast-growing species seem to benefit from initially higher pH in the soil. Both soil properties (i.e., pH and NO3-) may be augmented to favor the performance of fast-growing species in restoration plantings and to further accelerate soil recovery in tropical dry forests. © 2019 by the authors.
Landscape structure and configuration may affect bird body condition, with contrasting effects on resident and migratory species. There is little empirical evidence to support this hypothesis in tropical regions, where land-use change poses a major threat to biodiversity. We aimed to assess the effects of landscape structure and configuration on the body condition of neotropical migrant and resident bird species. We compiled body condition data (using the scaled mass index) of nine bird species (five resident and four migratory). We characterized landscape structure and configuration at 26 localities. We evaluated the effects of landscape metrics on bird body condition using Bayesian linear mixed models. The landscapes in our study largely varied in forest, crop, and grassland cover, as well as in landscape metrics. When we examined migrant birds, we found a positive effect of landscape connectivity and crop cover on body condition. Similarly, body condition of resident birds was positively affected by connectivity and crop cover, but also by forest patch area and capture day. Changes in landscape structure and configuration may indirectly alter the access to resources, causing additional energy expenditures, leading to a deteriorated body condition. Conversely, landscape heterogeneity may have a positive effect on bird body condition. Therefore, we recommend maintaining connectivity and complementary resources in the landscape. © 2022 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Agroforestry, often promoted as a sustainable agriculture practice, is rapidly expanding, often at the cost of primary tropical forests. While agroforestry negatively impacts amphibian diversity, its effects on population demography, microhabitat, use and body condition are relatively understudied. This information is crucial for determining and promoting amphibian-friendly land-use practices. We compared habitats, population densities, microhabitat use and body condition of two endemic species of shrub frogs (Pseudophilautus amboli and Raorchestes bombayensis) across (1) elevations (low- and high-elevation forests) and (2) land-use categories (cashew, rubber and low-elevation forests) in the northern part of the Western Ghats Biodiversity Hotspot. Using distance sampling, we demonstrated that the abundances of the two shrub frog species differed across elevation categories, with P. amboli more common in low-elevation forests and R. bombayensis more prevalent in high-elevation forests. Both species of frogs exhibited extremely skewed, male-biased sex ratios, with three females for 100 males. P. amboli had lower densities and poor recruitment and exhibited altered microhabitat use in cashew plantations compared to low-elevation forests. Although adult male P. amboli densities in rubber were similar to those in low-elevation forests, they exhibited altered microhabitat use and smaller body sizes than in forests, indicating poor body condition. We demonstrate the differential impacts of agroforestry types on shrub frogs. We also demonstrate that distance sampling can be a useful tool for population monitoring of shrub frogs, which comprise almost 25% of the anuran diversity in the Western Ghats. There is a need to identify the drivers of extremely skewed sex ratios, which make these species vulnerable to population crashes. Given the recent downlisting of the two focal species to Least Concern, we advocate for their uplisting to at least Near Threatened status considering their patchy distribution, negative impacts of rapidly expanding agroforestry plantations and extremely skewed sex ratios. © 2024 Zoological Society of London.
Exotic pine plantations, installed mainly for timber production and carbon sequestration purposes, cover an ever-expanding area of equatorial and tropical regions; however, their economic and environmental benefits are under debate due to their potential negative effects on native plant species conservation. The native understory plant species richness and cover under pine (Pinus radiata D. Don) plantations were compared with natural grasslands in the Ecuadorian Páramo. We analyzed the vegetation in four zones: Antisana (8-year-old pines), Cajas (16-year-old pines), Tisaleo (41-year-old pines) and Cotopaxi (53-year-old pines). The total understory plant cover decreased between 29% and 90% under pine plantations in all zones. The mean species richness in the pine plantations decreased by 44% in Antisana, Cajas and Tisaleo but not in Cotopaxi. Pine plantations strongly reduced the abundance of herbaceous light-demanding species (59%), except small herbs whose cover increased under pine (17.6%). Shrub cover was also negatively affected in Tisaleo and Cotopaxi (7.4%). Pine afforestation effects on Páramo vegetation depend mainly on canopy cover which changes with age and growing conditions (altitude) and secondarily on the vegetation state at the time of planting, resulting from land use history and ecological conditions. The pine effect was therefore more pronounced in the young and dense plantations of Antisana and Cajas than in the old and open stand of Cotopaxi, whose understory vegetation was more similar to that of grasslands. © 2022 by the authors.
Timber harvest is one of the main causes of degradation of Amazonian tropical forests, where bats represent important components of biodiversity. In addition, bats may represent keystone taxa in the Neotropics, as they are primary agents of pollination and seed dispersal for many pioneer plants. We assessed the impact of low harvest (18 m3/ha), reduced impact logging (RIL) on population and community characteristics of phyllostomid bats in Amazonian terra firme forest of Brazil at 20-42 months post-harvest. Based on 103,680 net-meter-hours of netting in Tapajós National Forest, 2341 phyllostomids were captured, representing 42 species, 25 genera, and 4 broad feeding guilds. Population-level responses of common phyllostomids to RIL were minor, with 10 of 15 species evincing no change in mean abundance. Of those taxa responding to RIL (mean difference in number of individuals per site), three increased (Artibeus concolor [0.46 individuals], Artibeus lituratus [3.88], and Glossophaga soricina [0.71]) and two decreased (Carollia brevicauda [0.96] and Carollia perspicillata [14.04]) in abundance. Compositional (species distributions) and structural (rank distributions) aspects of bat assemblages differed between cut and control forests. More specifically, bat assemblages in cut forest had increased diversity and decreased dominance compared to control forest. Nonetheless, the proportional abundance of the five most common species, as a group, was similar in cut (86%) and control forest (88%), and frugivores dominated assemblages in both management types. Mean abundance of frugivores decreased (10.59 individuals per site) in response to RIL; however, this response was driven by decreases in C. perspicillata, the most abundant species in terra firme forest. Although RIL had only minor effects on biodiversity in the short-term, extrapolation to a long-term prospectus should be exercised with caution when applied to conservation or policy issues. © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
To assess the impacts of a low-intensity selective timber harvest on a palm community in Belize, we mapped logging infrastructure (i.e., roads, log landings, skid trails, and stumps) and measured palm regeneration 1 year after a timber harvest carried out using reduced-impact logging (RIL) practices. We sampled palms across a gradient of increasing harvest impact severity from areas not directly affected by logging, in felling gaps, on secondary and primary skid trails, and on log landings. We used generalised linear mixed-effect models fitted in a Bayesian framework and applied a non-metric multi-dimensional scaling of the ecological distances between sites to evaluate differences in palm seedling regeneration density and species composition, respectively. The harvest of an average of 2.5 trees ha-1 caused 0.4% of the forest to be converted to log landings, 0.7% and 3.6% to roads and skid trails, and 2.3% to felling gaps, which left 93.0% of the 350 ha harvest block with no direct impacts of logging. The difference in abundance and species composition of palm regeneration in unlogged areas compared to felling gaps and skid trails was small, but log landings had markedly lower densities. These results highlight that the impacts of selective logging are minor at least where harvest intensities are low and RIL practices are employed. If further reductions in canopy opening and soil disturbance are desired, we recommend that logs be cable-yarded (i.e., winched) the final 20 m to skid trails instead of driving to the tree stumps. We estimate that implementation of this practice would reduce total skid trail coverage from 3.6% to 2.9% and overall forest disturbance from 7.0% to 6.3%. However, further reductions in disturbance might be inimical to the maintenance of palms and will certainly not favour regeneration of light-demanding commercial timber species (e.g., Swietenia macrophylla). © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Our aim was to evaluate whether the richness and composition of anurans responded to the time of forest regeneration via secondary succession. We sampled the anuran community in a mosaic of areas at three different stages of secondary succession in the Atlantic Forest, southern Brazil. The anurans were collected from nine lentic ponds and from their margins up to a 50 m radius. The late secondary forest sheltered the higher species richness, followed by the primary forest. The spatial variation in species richness was related to the forest succession stage and predominance of arboreal vegetation on the pond edge. The species composition changed throughout the succession stages, regardless of the distance among areas. Along the gradient of forest succession, environmental changes have driven species distribution, limiting the occurrence of forest species and favoring the colonization of areas at the early succession stage by opportunist species. We could observe that the secondary forest succession was a determining factor in the anuran community structure, and with the advancement of the secondary succession, both richness and composition were partly restored. Thus, the conservation of secondary forests might be an efficient strategy to preserve the biodiversity in areas of the Atlantic Forest. © 2023 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.
The success of direct seeding, as a low-cost approach to forest restoration, varies with tree species and seed characteristics. A system to predict which tree species are likely to be suitable for direct seeding would therefore be useful for improving forest restoration projects. Therefore, this study aimed to determine the effects of seed traits on the success of direct seeding to restore tropical forest in southern Thailand. Seeds of 19 indigenous lowland tropical forest tree species were collected, from both the east and west sides of the Thailand peninsular and the following parameters measured: seed size, shape, coat thickness and moisture content. Field trials were established to determine seed germination rates and to calculate a "direct seeding suitability score" for each species, which combined seedling establishment and growth rates. Seed size, shape and moisture content were associated with germination percentage. Species with higher seedling survival tended to have large or intermediate-sized seeds, round or oval seeds and seeds with low or medium moisture content. Only seed coat thickness was significantly correlated with the suitability score (r = 0.65, p < 0.01). Seed coat thickness >0.4 mm coincided with higher rank suitability score. These conditions successfully predicted the success or failure of direct seeding for 15 out of 19 species tested. Eight tree species are recommended as suitable for restoring lowland evergreen forest ecosystems in southern Thailand, by direct seeding. © 2011 Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
In this study, we determined the effects of selective logging on the abundance of the last remnant populations of two tropical timber species with a restricted distribution, Caryocar costaricense and Peltogyne purpurea. We conducted a census of adult tree densities for these species on 94 selectively logged sites located in a tropical rain forest on the Osa Peninsula, Costa Rica. We compared the abundance of juveniles and seedlings for both tree species on 11 logged and unlogged sites. In addition, we analyzed the growth and mortality rates of adult trees of P. purpurea (>10 cm dbh) in a 4 ha permanent plot that was selectively logged once in 1992. Both species presented a heterogeneous density distribution over the Osa Peninsula (166,668 ha) and the highest density of both species is located in the region of the highest logging activity. For C. costaricense, seedling (height < 50 cm) and juvenile (height > 50 cm, dbh < 2 cm) abundance was greater in unlogged areas, while trees 2-10 cm dbh were more abundant in logged areas. For P. purpurea, seedlings were more abundant in unlogged areas, but small and large juvenile abundance did not differ between selectively logged treatments. The density of P. purpurea adult trees remained constant 15 years after selective logging but the density of trees 10-30 cm dbh decreased in the same period. We predict that recurrent 15 year cutting cycles of 50% of timber trees with restricted distribution, as it is practiced by conventional logging in Costa Rica, may lead a significant reduction of the main reproductive individuals, decreasing the regeneration of the populations subjected to exploitation and fragmentation. © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. The butterfly fauna of lowland monsoon forest on Buru, Indonesia was compared in unlogged forest and forest that had been selectively logged 5 years previously.     2. Seven variables relating to vegetation structure were measured in each habitat. Tree density and percentage cover of vegetation in the canopy and understorey were significantly higher, and vegetation cover 2 m above the ground was significantly lower, in unlogged forest. There were no differences between sites in the mean heights or girths of trees, but the ranges of both heights and girths were lower in logged forest, Percentage cover of vegetation at ground level was similar at the two sites.     3. Species richness, abundance and evenness of butterflies and an index of taxonomic distinctiveness were ail significantly higher in unlogged forest. Two endemic species and a further four species with distributions restricted to Maluku Province were recorded only in unlogged forest.     4. Species abundance data for butterflies at both sites fitted a log-series distribution. Data for unlogged forest also fitted a log-normal distribution, whereas those far logged forest did not. This indicated the presence of a more complex butterfly community in unlogged forest.     5. These results indicate that the distributional pattern of species abundance of tropical butterflies may be used as an indicator of forest disturbance, and that selective logging of tropical forests in SE Asia may be associated with a significant decrease in biodiversity of butterflies, at least during the first 5 years of forest regeneration.
Bush fallowing is a common farming system in the humid zone of West and Central Africa. However, population pressures have resulted in shortened fallow periods with consequent effects on soil nutrients and biodiversity. To assess the effect of the shortened fallow period on plant species diversity, data were collected in a primary forest (forest reserve) and an adjoining 5-year-old bush fallow in Aponmu, Ondo State, Nigeria. Four plots of 25 × 25 m each were sampled from the forest reserve and one each from four abandoned fallow lands around the forest reserve. All trees with diameter at breast height greater than or equal to 5 cm were identified. A total of 0.25 ha of bush fallow and 0.25 ha of primary forest were surveyed. Ground vegetation was assessed from a subsample of 5 × 5 m in each of the sampled area. In the 0.25 ha of bush fallow surveyed, 64 individual trees were encountered (256 trees ha -1) representing 34.2% of the tree density found in 0.25 ha of primary forest, which contained 187 individual trees (748 trees ha -1). A higher value of Shannon's index (2.95) for the primary forest is an indication that it contains more variety of tree species per unit area than the bush fallow (2.37). There were slight differences in bacterial and fungal populations from the two ecosystems. This study indicated a lower number and variety of tree species under short rotation fallow. This may imply gradual loss of many of the benefits associated with trees. © Forest Research Institute Malaysia.
Fallen trees comprise an important part of forest ecosystems and serve a central role in maintaining the biodiversity and tree regeneration of forests. However, the effects of stand origin and near-natural restoration on the biomass and carbon stock of fallen trees remain unclear. Based on 60 sampling plots of field surveys of mid-subtropical forests in Jiangxi Province, we investigated the stock and structural composition of fallen trees in artificial coniferous forests (Acf), natural coniferous forests (Ncf) (e.g., different stand origins) and natural evergreen broadleaf forests (Nebf) (e.g., near-natural restoration). The following results were obtained: (1) the largest biomass and carbon stocks of fallen trees among three forest types (Nebf, Ncf and Acf) were measured for Nebf ; (2) the fallen tree biomass and carbon stock in natural Cunninghamia lanceolata forest (Nclf) were significantly larger than that in artificial Cunninghamia lanceolata forest (Aclf), and the fallen tree biomass and carbon stock in natural Pinus massoniana forest (Npf) were also significantly larger than those in artificial Pinus massoniana forest (Apf); (3) the diameter class allocation in natural forests was more uniform than that in artificial forests; (4) the biomass of fallen trees with mild decay was not significantly different among forest types within stand origin or among the stand origin within forest types; however, the biomass of fallen trees with moderate and heavy decay significantly differed among stand origin (Aclf vs. Nclf, Apf vs. Npf), but was not significant among the forest types (Aclf vs. Apf, Nclf vs. Apf) within a stand origin. Our results suggested that the large biomass and carbon stock of fallen trees in Nebf may serve a significant role in mitigating global warming and carbon cycles in mid-subtropical forests. Therefore, stand origin and near-natural restoration exert significant effects on the carbon stock and structural composition of fallen trees in mid-subtropical forests. © 2015 by the authors.
The tension between the large global demand for tropical timber, and ecological sustainability and local socioeconomic development in the fragile natural ecosystems of the Amazon region has challenged many generations. In this case study, carried out in an ecotone forest in the northern Brazilian Amazon, we seek to demonstrate how forest management can became more sustainable through silvicultural prescriptions that reduce forest degradation and soil erosion. We evaluated the effects of the sustainable forest management (SFM) on tree diversity, timber volumes, and carbon stocks. A continuous forest inventory was carried out in nine 1-ha permanent plots (900 subplots of 100 m²), distributed in three treatments with three repetitions: T1 = control without selective logging, T2 = SFM, and T3 = SFM + silvicultural treatment of thinning release by tree girdling and poisoning. SFM was carried out with an average of three commercial timber trees harvested per hectare with DBH (diameter at breast height) ≥ 50 cm, corresponding to a timber volume of 20 ± 6 m3 ha-1, equivalent to the removal of 7 ± 2 Mg C ha-1 (5% of the original C). The formation of clearings (gaps) arising from the falling of exploited trees (0.12 ± 0.09 ha) resulted in greater impacts on the forest structure than the construction of 4 m skidder trails (0.06 ± 0.04 ha), with an average of 7 ± 4 damaged trees ha-1 and 5 ± 3 dead trees ha-1. Although six trees species became locally extinct, tree diversity was little altered, and timber volumes and forest carbon volume stocks remained essentially constant at this average logging intensity. Based on our results, sustainable forest management can become an efficient model for land use in the Amazon when harvesting is carried out using this average logging intensity. However, long-term monitoring studies using permanent plots in ecotone forests in the Brazilian Amazon will still be necessary. Quantifying, evaluating, and reporting impacts related to forest management will enable the formation of an empirical basis to support sustanaible forestry practices and for updating environmental legislation, contributing to local socioeconomic development, and maintaining the environmental services provided globally by tropical forests. © 2022
The restoration of tropical forests is greatly in demand but is limited by the lack of feasible technologies. Forest restoration can be associated with a temporary, productive herbaceous layer. Here, we compared the use of temporary agroforestry systems (tAFS) with conventional forest restoration through seedling planting. We quantified the growth estimators of native forest tree species and the effectiveness of the two methods for controlling invasive grasses. Seedlings of 20 native tree species were planted in 72 rows of 60 m each, totaling 1148 individuals. The restoration methods of planting tree seedlings only or trees coupled with herbaceous species (annual crops), along with weed control methods (mechanical and chemical), were systematically established in 12 plots (7920 m2 for conventional techniques and 7920 m2 for tAFS) per treatment (3960 m2 each) and analyzed in a nested design using generalized mixed models. The chemical control of weeds was conducted using herbicides, and the mechanical control consisted of semimechanized mowing. The tAFS showed greater relative growth in both the height and diameter of native trees in comparison with the conventional method. Within the conventional restoration technique, chemical management led to an increased height of native trees and a decreased invasive biomass, but tAFS showed no differences between the invasive control methods. tAFS was efficient in ensuring the success of the tree seedlings and diminishing the invasive biomass, concomitant with the production of annual crops in tropical forest restoration. © 2022. Australian Journal of Crop Science. All Rights Reserved.
The effects of tree guards and weed mats on establishment and growth of native tree seedlings, Thick-leaved oak (Cyclobalanopsis edithiae (Skan) Schott., Fagaceae), planted in an exposed hillside grassland in Hong Kong, were investigated. The natural regeneration of C. edithiae is poor due to a lack of seed dispersal agents and high seed predation, and therefore, this species is often targeted for forest restoration. The experiment lasted for 3.5 years during which the height, basal diameter, and crown diameter of individual seedlings were measured and survivorship recorded. The use of weed mats alone did not have a significant effect, but a combination of tree guards and weed mats led to a significant improvement in establishment, survivorship and growth of the seedlings during the experimental period. Initially, the guards promoted rapid height growth of the seedlings, although lateral growth and secondary stem thickening were compromised. After the seedlings grew over the tree guards, the basal diameter and crown diameter increased at a notably faster rate. The combined effect of the tree guard and weed mat on the seedling growth pattern was found to be beneficial and contributed to the high survivorship of the seedlings. Comparing the survivorship data and the costs of various treatments, the use of tree guards in combination with the weed mats was demonstrated to be more cost-effective than planting the seedlings without tree guards or weed mats. The potential for applying the technique in afforestation programs with native tree species for forest restoration in Hong Kong and other tropical regions is discussed. © 2005 Society for Ecological Restoration International.
The Eastern Arc Mountains are part of the Eastern Afromontane global biodiversity hotspot with a remarkable concentration of endemic species. Wildfire is among the major threats to biodiversity of forested mountains. This study assessed the effect of forest fire on the vegetation and understory birds in the Magamba montane forest, 5 years post a major fire outbreak. Mist-net transects were used to sample understory birds. During the breeding season, active bird nests were searched using the time-constrained method in both burnt and unburnt forests. Vegetation plots were sampled along the mist-net transects, and shrubs and trees were identified and counted. The diversity of trees and shrubs, tree density per plot and canopy cover were significantly higher at unburnt than burnt sites with no difference in shrub density per plot. Bird species composition and number of nests between burnt and unburnt forests differed significantly with a considerable decline of forest interior bird specialists in burnt areas. An invasive plant species, Acacia melanoxylon, was found in dense groves within burnt sites and if not controlled, would escalate the fire regimes to further affecting plants and avian communities. Fire management, restoration and rehabilitation of burnt areas are among the immediate recommended actions.
Aims: Plant community structure and diversity patterns research is valuable for revealing the mechanism of biodiversity maintenance. The Qinling Mountains are in the transition zone at the north-south climate dividing line where the flora and fauna meet. The flora has a complex community structure with diverse vegetation types of ancient origin. This region is an important platform for studying the plant community structure and diversity distribution pattern in the transition zone. Methods: According to the Center for Tropical Forest Science (CTFS) standards at the Smithson Institute for Tropical Research, we establish ten 1 ha (100 m × 100 m) long-term positional monitoring plots from 800 m to 2,600 m in the middle part of the southern slope of the Qinling Mountains. We conduct community surveys using our plots with the Qinling Huangguan forest plot as the core. Initially, we analyze the elevation gradient pattern of the species composition, systematic characters, diameter class structure, spatial distribution of dominant species, and species diversity of woody plants with diameter at breast height (DBH) ≥ 1 cm. Results: (1) We investigate a total of 208 seed plant species belonging to 50 families and 109 genera. The genera in the northern temperate zone account for 69.7% of the total number of genera, and the temperate zone is obvious. With increasing elevation, rare and occasional species and the composition of families, genera and species of the plant community show a unimodal pattern of increasing first and then decreasing. The dominant species of the community has obvious turnover along the elevational gradient, and the middle elevation shows the transitional nature of broad-leaved oak and coniferous fir forests. (2) The overall structure of DBH size class of all woody plant individuals generally shows an inverse “J” type. In terms of elevation, except for the bimodal distribution of woody plants at 1,600 m and 2,000 m, the rest of the elevation showed an inverted “J” shape, and the community structure is generally more stable. The spatial point pattern of dominant species at different elevations shows an aggregated distribution within the 1-10 m scale, which gradually changes to random and uniform distribution as the scale increased. With increasing elevation and removal of habitat heterogeneity, the scale range of aggregated distributions decreases and the scale range of random distributions increases. (3) In increasing elevation species richness shows a significant unimodal distribution pattern with the peak occurring between 1,200 m and 1,400 m. Changes in α-diversity (Shannon-Wiener diversity index, Simpson dominance index, Pielou evenness index) along the elevational gradient shows a significant bimodal pattern, with both peaks occurring between 1,000 m and 1,200 m, and 1,900 m and 2,100 m. β diversity (Bray-Curtis index and Jaccard index) shows a unimodal trend along the elevational gradient. Conclusion: Our study forms the foundation for the construction of long-term monitoring and a basic database of forests in the subtropical-warm temperate transition zone. This research provides a theoretical basis for the conservation of biodiversity in this transition zone and for sustainable forest management. © 2024, Chinese Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Detailed interviews were conducted with 11 leading ecologists to obtain individual qualitative and quantitative estimates of the likely impact of a 2 × [CO2] climate change on minimally disturbed forest ecosystems. Results display a much richer diversity of opinion than is apparent in qualitative consensus summaries, such as those of the IPCC. Experts attach different relative importance to key factors and processes such as soil nutrients, fire, CO2 fertilization, competition, and plant-pest-predator interactions. Assumptions and uncertainties about future fire regimes are particularly crucial. Despite these differences, most of the experts believe that standing biomass in minimally disturbed Northern forests would increase and soil carbon would decrease. There is less agreement about impacts on carbon storage in tropical forests. Estimates of migration rates in northern forests displayed a range of more than four orders of magnitude. Estimates of extinction rates and dynamic response show significant variation between experts. A series of questions about research needs found consensus on the importance of expanding observational and experimental work on ecosystem processes and of expanding regional and larger-scale observational, monitoring and modeling studies. Results of the type reported here can be helpful in performing sensitivity analysis in integrated assessment models, as the basis for focused discussions of the state of current understanding and research needs, and, if repeated over time, as a quantitative measure of progress in this and other fields of global change research.
The island of Grande Comore (Comoro Islands, western Indian Ocean) has an endemic butterfly fauna threatened by rapid habitat change. Transect counts were used to assess the abundance and species richness of butterflies in different habitats, and along an elevational gradient. Species richness of non-endemic butterflies was highest in low elevation, man-modified habitats. In contrast, most endemic butterflies were confined to forest habitats, which only remain above 500 m elevation. Richness and abundance of endemic butterflies were highest at the lower elevational limits of the remaining forest. Controlling for elevation, the richness of endemic butterflies was highest in mature forest where the gross structure of the forest remained intact, lower in scrubby secondary forest, and lowest in pioneer forest on old lava flows. The survival of the majority of the endemic butterflies may depend on forest conservation measures in the rapidly diminishing areas of mature forest at mid elevations. (C) 1998 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
Aims This study was designed to determine if planting the leguminous tree Inga punctata in previously cleared former tropical premontane wet forests changed the Nitrogen (N)-fixer and Lignin Degrader community compositions resulting in increased accumulation of soil carbon (C) and N components. Methods Soils were collected near the base of old growth (> 50 years old), 4, 8 and 11-year-old I. punctata trees, and assessed for differences in various soil C and N metrics, and the mean proportion of sequences (MPS, as "relative abundance " via 16S rRNA V3, V4 sequencing), composition, stability and evenness of the N-fixer and Lignin Degrader community genera. Results The N-fixer MPS decreased, and Lignin Degraders increased, while evenness and stability of both increased in soils along the tree age gradient. The Lignin Degrader MPS were positively correlated with TN, NO3-, TOC, and Biomass C, and negatively correlated with N-fixer MPS and NH4+. The N-fixer MPS were negatively correlated with TN, NO3-, TOC, Biomass-C and Lignin Degrader MPS, and positively correlated with NH4+. Evenness, stability, and dissimilarity increased for both groups in soils along the tree age gradient. Conclusions This is the first evidence that I. punctata facilitates changes in tree-soil N-fixer and Lignin Degrader communities over time by increasing the dissimilarity, evenness and stability of both groups, and increases the accumulation of tree soil C and N. This suggests I. punctata facilitates soil recovery such that it can serve as C and N sinks and support its future use in reforestation management strategy.
The increased variety of satellite remote sensing platforms creates opportunities for estimating tropical forest diversity needed for environmental decision-making. As little as 10% of the original seasonally dry tropical forest (SDTF) remains for Ecuador, Peru, and Colombia. Remnant forests show high rates of species endemism, but experience degradation from climate change, wood-cutting, and livestock-grazing. Forest census data provide a vital resource for examining remote sensing methods to estimate diversity levels. We used spatially referenced trees ≥5 cm in diameter and simulated 0.10 ha plots measured from a 9 ha SDTF in southwestern Ecuador to compare machine learning (ML) models for six α-diversity indices. We developed 1 m tree canopy height and elevation models from stem mapped trees, at a scale conventionally derived from light detection and ranging (LiDAR). We then used an ensemble ML approach comparing single- and combined-sensor models from RapidEye, Sentinel-2 and interpolated canopy height and topography surfaces. Validation data showed that combined models often outperformed single-sensor approaches. Combined sensor and model ensembles for tree species richness, Shannon’s H, inverse Simpson’s, unbiased Simpson’s, and Fisher’s alpha indices typically showed lower root mean squared error (RMSE) and increased goodness of fit (R2). Piélou’s J, a measure of evenness, was poorly predicted. Mapped tree species richness (R2 = 0.54, F = 27.3, p = <0.001) and Shannon’s H′ (R2 = 0.54, F = 26.9, p = <0.001) showed the most favorable agreement with field validation observations (n = 25). Small-scale model experiments revealed essential relationships between dry forest tree diversity and data from multiple satellite sensors with repeated global coverage that can help guide larger-scale biodiversity mapping efforts. © 2023 by the authors.
Agroforestry systems are environment-friendly production systems which help to preserve biodiversity while providing people with a way of earning a living. Cacao is a historically important crop in Venezuela that traditionally has been produced in agroforestry systems. However, few studies have evaluated how different trees used in those systems affect the dynamics and abundance of insects. The present study evaluated the entomofauna assemblages associated with different combinations of four timber-yielding trees and four Criollo cacao cultivars established in a lowland tropical ecosystem in Venezuela. A randomized block design with two replicates was used, each block having 16 plots which included all 16 possible combinations of four native timber trees (Cordia thaisiana, Cedrela odorata, Swietenia macrophylla, and Tabebuia rosea) and four Criollo cacao cultivars (Porcelana, Guasare, Lobatera and Criollo Merideño). Insects were collected with yellow pan traps and sorted to order. Coleoptera and parasitoid Hymenoptera were determined to the family level. In total, 49,538 individuals of seven orders were collected, with Hymenoptera, Diptera, and Hemiptera being the most abundant, although only Lepidoptera and Coleoptera abundances were significantly influenced by the timber tree species. Twenty-three families of parasitoid Hymenoptera and 26 of Coleoptera were found. Significant differences in insects’ assemblages were found both in parasitoid Hymenoptera and Coleoptera families associated to every shade tree, with the families Eulophidae and Lycidae being indicators for Cordia, and Chalcididae for Swietenia. The entomofauna relationship with the cacao cultivar was barely significant, although Scydmaenidae and Scarabaeidae were indicators for Lobatera and Merideño, respectively. No significant effects were found for interaction with cacao cultivars and native trees. We concluded that the particular insect assemblages found in Cedrela odorata and Cordia thaisiana, together with their high growing rates, make these two species an optimal choice for cacao agroforestry systems. © 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Predicting the fate of tropical forests under a changing climate requires understanding species responses to climatic variability and extremes. Seedlings may be particularly vulnerable to climatic stress given low stored resources and undeveloped roots; they also portend the potential effects of climate change on future forest composition. Here we use data for ca. 50,000 tropical seedlings representing 25 woody species to assess (i) the effects of interannual variation in rainfall and solar radiation between 2007 and 2016 on seedling survival over 9 years in a subtropical forest; and (ii) how spatial heterogeneity in three environmental factors—soil moisture, understory light, and conspecific neighborhood density—modulate these responses. Community-wide seedling survival was not sensitive to interannual rainfall variability but interspecific variation in these responses was large, overwhelming the average community response. In contrast, community-wide responses to solar radiation were predominantly positive. Spatial heterogeneity in soil moisture and conspecific density were the predominant and most consistent drivers of seedling survival, with the majority of species exhibiting greater survival at low conspecific densities and positive or nonlinear responses to soil moisture. This environmental heterogeneity modulated impacts of rainfall and solar radiation. Negative conspecific effects were amplified during rainy years and at dry sites, whereas the positive effects of radiation on survival were more pronounced for seedlings existing at high understory light levels. These results demonstrate that environmental heterogeneity is not only the main driver of seedling survival in this forest but also plays a central role in buffering or exacerbating impacts of climate fluctuations on forest regeneration. Since seedlings represent a key bottleneck in the demographic cycle of trees, efforts to predict the long-term effects of a changing climate on tropical forests must take into account this environmental heterogeneity and how its effects on regeneration dynamics play out in long-term stand dynamics. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Aims: To study the prevalence and genotypes of waterborne pathogenic viruses in urban wastewaters in the tropical region. Methods and Results: Viruses in wastewaters collected at three water reclamation plants in Singapore were studied by molecular methods. Over a 6-month sampling period, adenoviruses, astroviruses and both norovirus genogroups I (GI) and II (GII) were detected in 100% of the sewage and secondary effluent. Enteroviruses and hepatitis A viruses (HAV) were found in 94 and 78% of sewage, and 89 and 28% of secondary effluent, respectively. By using quantitative real-time PCR, estimated concentrations of astrovirus in the sewage were 1-2 orders of magnitude higher than those for adenovirus, noroviruses GI and GII. Genotyping of environmental isolates revealed multiple genotypes of GI and GII noroviruses. Coxsackieviruses A, astrovirus type 1 and adenovirus type 41 were prevalent. Norovirus GII/4 and coxsackievirus A24 isolates in wastewaters were closely related to respective outbreak strains isolated previously in Singapore. Conclusions: This study showed the widespread occurrence of all tested enteric virus groups in urban wastewaters. Genetic diversity of astroviruses, enteroviruses and noroviruses in the tropical region was observed. Significance and Impact of the Study: The high prevalence and great genetic diversity of human enteric viruses in urban wastewaters strongly supports the need of further comprehensive studies for evaluating the public health risk associated with viral pathogens in water environments. © 2010 The Society for Applied Microbiology.
Cocoa is produced in a wide range of land use systems, with the traditional shaded systems in Bahia (Brazil) as the most forest-like and biodiverse. The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of different cocoa agroforestry systems (AFSs) in maintaining community structure and interactions between ants and epiphytic bromeliads. The study was conducted at four sites in the cocoa producing region of the southeastern of the state of Bahia, Brazil, and comprised a native forest and three different cocoa AFSs. We found a total of 103 ant species associated with epiphytic bromeliads, with 83% of the species occurring in native forest canopy bromeliads also occurring in cocoa AFSs. The Cocoa Cabruca System (CAB) and the Rustic-Planted Shade System (RPS) had ant community structural components of biodiversity similar to those found in the native forest environment. The alpha and gamma diversity of ants found in Monospecific-Shaded Cocoa Agroforestry System (MCA) associated with Erythrina spp. shade trees were significantly different from the diversity found in the other AFSs and native forest. The presence of epiphytic bromeliads, regardless of the system and scale, maintained ant diversity in agroforestry system canopies similar to that of native forest. Using metrics derived from graph theory, we found a high level of specialization regarding ant-bromeliad interactions in native forest, with a gradual decrease in specialization with environmental homogenization. Agroforestry systems thus represent an important strategy for maintaining the structure of canopy-associated ant communities by enabling the establishment of numerous bromeliad species, thus contributing to the maintenance of ant diversity and services in a mosaic landscape AFSs and native forest. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Invasive white leadtrees (Leucaena leucocephala (Lam.) de Wit) are contributing to the destruction of coastal ecosystems and biodiversity in humid subtropical and tropical regions. Sudden clearcutting of invasive tress can lead to substantial soil loss, which subsequently reduces the efficiency when indigenous vegetation is restored. Soil samples (n=142) were collected using the grid method to measure soil properties and to spatially analyze the soil erosion potential in the studied area after clearcutting of the invasive trees. Results indicated that the soil erosion rates ranged from 21 to 249 tons ha-1 yr-1, and the eroded soil depths ranged from 0.30 to 3.40 cm yr-1 after clearcutting. The network measurements for determining the mortality ratio of the restored indigenous vegetation demonstrated that Ficus benjamina L., Macaranga tanarius, and Scaevola taccada (Gaertner) Roxb were likely to be susceptible to damage from the substantial amount of soil loss and low SOC content. During the period between clearcutting and establishing the next stand of plants for reforestation, the network measurements for determining the soil properties and estimating the spatial heterogeneity of soil erosion potential are regarded as a major issue of concern regarding the efficiency of subsequent restoration efforts. © 2015 Shih-Hao Jien et al.
Numerous tree species can establish by vegetative means in the tropics. Many are used in agriculture as living fences and in alley cropping and could also be used in a restorational setting. However, little is known about their establishment ability. This study evaluated the establishment ability and cover development of multiple species in three separate field trials in northern Honduras. First, 11 species were evaluated for their ability to establish in a common garden experiment. Second, of the former species, Bursera simaruba and Gliricidia sepium were evaluated for 2 years for their ability to establish vegetatively and develop cover at three deforested sites. Lastly, a study examined whether greater initial stake height and diameter at breast height increased the establishment success and crown development of G. sepium stakes. First, five species, Erythrina berteroana, Erythrina fusca, Jatropha curcas, G. sepium, and B. simaruba, had high establishment success. Others showed promise but may have been planted in the wrong season. Second, establishment for G. sepium was nearly 100% at all sites, whereas B. simaruba ranged from 30-50%. Gliricidia sepium stakes developed more rapidly and attained greater cover than B. simaruba. Dry season planting may increase the establishment success of both species. Lastly, greater initial stake height and diameter at breast height each resulted in greater crown development for G. sepium. The use of living fence species as a restorational tool has been overlooked. Aside from the advantages of planting tree species vegetatively, species can act as seed recruitment foci by attracting seed dispersers and provide shade to improve microclimatic conditions for seedling establishment. The technique described is simple and could have broad application throughout tropical regions. © 2005 Society for Ecological Restoration International.
Little is known about the potential of restoration plantations to provide appropriate understory conditions to support the establishment of seeds arriving from neighboring native forests. In this article, we investigated how seedling establishment is affected in the understory of restoration sites of different ages and assessed some of the potential environmental factors controlling this ecological process. We first compared the density and richness of native tree seedlings among 10-, 22-, and 55-year-old restoration plantations within the Atlantic Forest region of southeastern Brazil. Then, we undertook a seed addition experiment in each study site, during the wet season, and compared seedling emergence, survival, and biomass on local versus old-growth forest soil (transferred from a reference ecosystem), in order to test whether local substrate could hamper seedling establishment. As expected, the oldest restoration site had higher density and richness of spontaneously regenerating seedlings. However, seedling establishment was less successful both in the oldest restoration planting and using substrate transferred from a reference ecosystem, where emergence and survival were lower, but surviving seedlings grew better. We attribute these results to lower light availability for seedlings in the understory of the oldest site and speculate that higher incidence of pathogens on old-growth forest soil may have increased seedling mortality. We conclude that the understory of young restoration plantations provides suitable microsite conditions at the early establishment phases for the spontaneous regeneration or enrichment planting of native trees. © 2016 Society for Ecological Restoration.
1. Forest landscape restoration (FLR) has gained momentum globally and guidance is needed to identify those species, sites and planting methods that increase restoration success. Incorporating native Non-Timber Forest Product (NTFP) species in FLR approaches provides an opportunity to simultaneously deliver ecological and economic benefits. The Brazil nut tree is one of the most valuable Amazonian NTFP species and could fulfil a cornerstone role in Amazon FLR. However, the factors defining establishment success within Brazil nut restoration activities remain unknown. 2. Here, we evaluate the effect of management practices, restoration site (pastures, agroforestry, secondary forest and canopy gaps in old growth forest) and environmental conditions on the establishment success (tree growth, survival and fruit production) of Brazil nut restoration projects implemented by smallholders in the Peruvian Amazon. We performed a field study at 25 restoration sites of 1-38 years in age, where we conducted measurements on 481 trees and interviewed 21 smallholders. We used mixed effect models to identify drivers of performance. 3. Twenty years after planting, diameter growth in secondary forests was 38%, 34%, and 24% higher than in canopy gaps, pastures, and agroforestry sites, respectively. Survival rate was similar for trees planted in pastures and secondary forests, but 15-20% higher there than trees planted in agroforestry sites, and 7-12% higher than in canopy gaps. Fruit production was 262% higher for reproductive trees in secondary forest sites compared to pastures, but production probability did not differ between restoration sites. These results show that secondary forests are the most suitable sites for planting Brazil nut trees. 4. In addition to restoration site effects, we also found significant effects of management practices. Survival rate increased with application of fire for clearing and weeding and economic investments and decreased with potentially inefficient herbivore protection. Fruit production was lower for trees planted further away from smallholders' homes. These results show that smallholders' management has a substantial effect on establishment success. 5. Our findings suggest a significant importance of post-planting maintenance of trees to increase success of FLR projects. Further, our study shows that evaluation of past restoration activities can guide future forest restoration in tropical landscapes.
When latex production declines after 35-40 y, clear-felling of rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) plantations is a common management practice around the world. Although clear-felling can lead to significant losses in system carbon (C), such losses have not been adequately quantified in rubber plantations in India. The objectives of this work are to (1) develop and test models for estimating rubber tree biomass and C storage in situations where diameter at breast height (D 1.3 m) cannot be measured precisely due to the tapping artefact, and (2) estimate losses in biomass C due to clear-felling of mature plantation. Five biomass estimation models were tested using a total of 54 trees destructively sampled from 35 to 40 y old plantations in North East India. Then the amount of biomass and the potential C losses following clear-felling were estimated. The tree biomass predicted by our models was within 0.2 and 5% of our measured tree biomass. The mean biomass was estimated at 376.9 and 23.9 kg per tree for above and below ground parts, respectively. On an area basis, total tree biomass was estimated at 286.1 Mg ha(-1), which was more than that under jungle rubber (147 Mg ha(-1)) but lower than the forests (384 Mg ha(-1)) in the tropical regions. According to our estimate clear-felling of mature plantation can on an average remove C at a rate of 135 Mg ha(-1), which represents most of the C stored in aboveground tree biomass. In order to conserve the biomass C and to maintain environmental integrity, we recommend selective felling of 20% of total growing stock starting from plantation age of 35 years and replanting at two year cycle.
Since the early 2000 ' s when discussions started around the concept of REDD+ , numerous studies estimated the opportunity costs often implicitly viewed as proxies for the total costs of avoided deforestation. We reviewed their methods and the stated objectives to assess their alignment, suitability and robustness. We found a lack of correspondence between methods and objectives, which include setting compensation levels, identifying costefficient activities, or assessing financial viability with respect to carbon markets. While the search for perfect accuracy is a fallacy, some major mistakes must be avoided, e.g. equating the costs of avoided deforestation to opportunity costs or including an inappropriate group of economic agents in the calculations. Best practises must be followed to ensure that estimations properly inform intervention design, decisions and policies; they refer to methods applied and their suitability for related decisions. They include: the need to first define objectives and then adapt methods because estimations can be done variously with contrasted results; to cautiously determine the scope - which stakeholders and stages of value chain are considered - while prioritising the broad picture and avoiding getting lost in estimation details; to discuss sensitivity of results and recognise uncertainties; and to consider the implications of scale in the study design. Given the urgency to preserve natural forest and mitigate climate change in the most cost-effective way, we believe that our analysis and its recommendations are a step in this direction with expected increased emissions reductions due to improved interventions.
In ecosystems with grassland-forest boundaries, tree plantations could be used to promote forest restoration. In the Humid Chaco region of central South America, fire is one of the main disturbances that shapes the landscape. As eucalypt plantations are flammable, the contribution they can make to forest restoration is questionable. We planted saplings of five native tree species in three different environments (forests, grasslands, and eucalypt plantations) and assessed microclimatic conditions likely to influence sapling survival and growth. After 1 year, accidental fires that affected much of the study area allowed us to investigate the susceptibility of different environments to fire occurrence and post-fire sapling survival. We planted 600 saplings in four plots per environment. We evaluated fire occurrence in the study area for 2 years and ask whether this factor affects sapling survival. In grasslands, microclimatic conditions were more extreme than in plantations. Plantations and forests showed high pre-fire sapling survival but growth was almost double in plantations, similar to grasslands for most species. In the study area, fire frequency was similar in plantations and grasslands, whereas forests plots never burnt during the 2-year study period. Fire reduced sapling survival in plantations, but not in grasslands where survival was low and similar in burned and unburned plots. For top-killed plants, post-fire resprouting ability was species-specific. While more firm conclusions await future studies with even larger sample sizes, our results indicate that fire management may be necessary in order to use eucalypt plantations as nurses in this fire-prone ecosystem.
The adoption of mixed plantation systems (exotic and native species) is viable and represents an important alternative in the context of forest and landscape restoration. This study evaluated whether Eucalyptus cultivation is associated with changes in native forest cover and fragment connectivity in the region from 1987 to 2017. The study region (Southeast Atlantic Forest) has been undergoing a forest transition process. Based on land use/land cover maps obtained from satellite images and a pair-wise comparison, it was detected that the dynamics in one land cover were not necessarily associated with the other one. It was verified an increase in Eucalyptus cover since 2007, possibly related to the New Forest Code that allows the use of exotic species in reforestation, provided it does not exceed 50% of the total area. An increase in the native vegetation cover was also observed, highlighting the importance of restoration actions and national regulations. In addition, forest patches were larger and less complex with Eucalyptus presence, indicating that this land cover is potentially beneficial for the landscape connectivity.
Fragmented tropical forests can be highly dynamic, with the spatial configuration of forest patches changing through time. Yet, the lack of longitudinal studies limits our understanding of how patch dynamics affect biodiversity, especially when there is a time lag in species extinctions (extinction debt). We assessed how temporal changes in patch size, shape complexity and isolation affect populations of the Mexican howler monkey (Alouatta palliata mexicana), hypothesizing that we would find an extinction debt in this relatively long-lived species. We assessed patch occupancy, subpopulation size and immature-to-female ratio in 39 forest patches from Los Tuxtlas, Mexico, in both 2001 and 2013. To identify time-lag responses to habitat disturbance, we related demographic attributes in 2013 to patch metrics in 2001 and 2013 and tested whether primate subpopulations were better predicted by current or historical patch characteristics. We also assessed how changes in patch metrics affected each demographic attribute between 2001 and 2013. Patch size and shape complexity increased over time, whereas isolation decreased. These positive spatial changes were accompanied by a 1.6-fold increase in mean subpopulation size over the same period. In addition, occupancy and immature-to-female ratio were similarly related to patch attributes in both years, suggesting that there is no extinction debt. Our findings are ‘good news’, suggesting that forest recovery over a relatively short period can promote the recovery of this Critically Endangered taxon. They also highlight the importance of preventing forest loss and promoting forest regeneration in human-modified tropical landscapes. © 2020 The Zoological Society of London
Global trends predict a continuous increase in the proportion of forest occupied by plantations up to the end of the 21st century, while a dramatic loss of biodiversity is foreseen as a result of anthropogenic exploitation and climate change. This study compares the role and performance of plantation policies in Hong Kong, with natural regeneration of secondary forest, using detailed spatio-temporal data extracted from a previous study. The study extends over a 70-year period from 1945 to 2014 using aerial photographs and satellite images of five time periods to document spatio-temporal trends in plantation forestry and natural forest succession. Field data on species richness and woody biomass at different stages of forest succession are compared with available data from plantations in the same study area. Results indicate that plantation forests support relatively few native species in the understory, with much lower species richness than naturally regenerated forest, even after 6 to 7 decades. Time-sequential maps of habitat change show that natural forest succession from barren grassy hillsides, progressed at an annual rate of 7.8%, from only 0.2% of the landscape post WWII, to over 37% today. Plantation forestry on the other hand has been less successful, and has even acted as a barrier to natural forest regeneration, as mono-cultural plantations from the late 1960s to 1980s are still plantations today, whereas other similar areas have succeeded naturally to forest. The theory of plantations acting as a nurse crop for a woody native understory is not supported, as Pinus massoniana plantations, destroyed by two deadly nematodes during the 1970s, apparently had no woody understory, as they were seen to have reverted to grassland in 1989 and are still mainly grassland today.
We reviewed the evidence on the extent and efficacy of conservation of tropical forest biodiversity for each of the classes of conservation action defined by the new International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) classification. Protected areas are the most tested conservation approach, and a number of studies show they are generally effective in slowing deforestation. There is some documentation of the extent of sustainable timber management in tropical forest, but little information on other landscape-conservation tactics. The extent and effectiveness of ex situ species conservation is quite well known. Forty-one tropical-forest species now survive only in captivity. Other single-species conservation actions are not as well documented. The potential of policy mechanisms, such as international conventions and provision of funds, to slow extinctions in tropical forests is considerable, but the effects of policy are difficult to measure. Finally, interventions to promote tropical conservation by supporting education and livelihoods, providing incentives, and furthering capacity building are all thought to be important, but their extent and effectiveness remain poorly known. For birds, the best studied taxon, the sum of such conservation actions has averted one-fifth of the extinctions that would otherwise have occurred over the last century. Clearly, tropical forest conservation works, but more is needed, as is critical assessment of what works in what circumstances, if mass extinction is to be averted. © 2009 Society for Conservation Biology.
Direct seeding is considered a feasible alternative for large-scale forest restoration, but little is known about the successional trajectory of tropical forests restored through direct seeding. To validate this method, we must understand how it changes forest structure and species richness and shapes the community trajectory as compared to the standard methods of natural regeneration and seedling planting. We evaluated restoration sites up to 10 years old in the Xingu river basin in Mato Grosso, Brazil. Our objectives were to: (i) describe changes in vegetation structure and richness in restored forests within the first decade; (ii) compare the outcome of restoration by direct seeding (broadcast seeding, sowing in rows, or placing seeds in holes) to seedling planting and natural regeneration; (iii) evaluate the influence of environmental variables (annual precipitation, soil phosphorus content, sand percentage, and soil base saturation) and the direct seeding technique on forest structure. We assessed species richness, density of individuals per size class, basal area, canopy height, aboveground biomass, and canopy cover. We sampled 72 direct-seeded sites between 1 and 10 years old, three seedling planting sites and six natural regeneration sites aged 7 to 9 years old. Community structure attributes changed over time, with the exception of the density of regenerating individuals. After four years, direct-seeded sites had formed a multi-layered canopy and were starting to be colonized by non-planted species. In general, direct-seeded sites had high aboveground biomass, but there was high variability among sites, especially after age six years. Sites with higher phosphorus content had more tree density, basal area, and biomass compared to the others. Broadcast seeding sites had higher seedling and sapling densities than sites that received other restoration methods. In conclusion, direct seeding was a successful method for the initial phase of forest restoration, promoting a structure that was more similar to resilient natural regeneration sites than to non-resilient natural regeneration sites and seedling planting sites. © 2019 Elsevier B.V.
Ecological restoration has become an important complementary practice to protect natural resources and preserve biodiversity. However, native species may be used in restoration programs in ways that do not optimize their performance. This research evaluated the survival and to model the initial growth of 15 native tree species planted in "filling" and "diversity" lines in the post-planting phase of a restoration experiment in the subtropics of the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. We measured survival rate (%) one year after planting and collar diameter (mm), total height (m), crown projection area (m(2)) and crown volume (m(3)) in the first 48 months after planting. Growth modeling for each variable and species was based on the non-linear mathematical Logistic, Gompertz, and Chapman-Richards models. Model selection for each variable/species was supported by the Akaike Information Criterion, standard error of the estimate, and coefficient of determination. The highest survival rates were reported for Cordia americana, Gochnatia polymorpha, Inga uruguensis, Peltophorum dubium, Prunus sellowii e Zanthoxylum rhoifolium (91.7%) and for Solanum mauritianum (90.3%). The species with faster growth were, by increasing order, Mimosa scabrella, Trema micrantha, Solanum mauritianum and Croton urucurana. With a better understanding of the initial developmental potential of tree species, it is possible to increase the species and functional diversity of the filling group. There was no single model capable of describing the variables analyzed and different models were needed to describe different characteristics and species.
The land use change pattern from disturbed tropical dry forests has significant impact on vegetation and soil physico-chemical properties, leading to alterations in vegetation structure and diversity. Thus, aim of this study was to better understand how disturbances affect forest vegetation and soil physico-chemical attributes under varied land uses in the deciduous forest region of Vindhyan highlands, India. Soil samples and vegetation analyses were conducted across three distinct disturbed forest sites on three land use types using the quadrate method. The study documented 45 species in the tree layer, with 37 in least disturbed, 33 in moderate disturbed, and 28 in highly disturbed stands. Shannon, Simpson, Evenness, Margalef and β-diversity indices exhibited pronounced variations among the three disturbed stands. A two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) revealed significant difference in soil physico-chemical properties (p < 0.001, p < 0.01 and p < 0.05) due to various disturbed forest stands and land use types. Micronutrients such as zinc, copper, and nickel showed significant variation, with higher concentrations in least disturbed stands. Pearson’s correlation analysis indicated strong relationships between vegetation characteristics and soil physico-chemical attributes, consistent across disturbances. Additionally, the principal component analysis indicated that the first four principal components accounted for 77.7% of the total variation in the data. The comprehensive research will add forest managers in developing long-term eco-restoration plans that will result in reduced soil loss and degradation. This study contributes to more effective forest management and conservation efforts by providing essential insights into the interactions between disturbances, vegetation, and soil properties. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2024.
Tropical deforestation is leading not only to losses of biodiversity but also to regional losses of vegetation productivity. However, in many areas the deforestation process is usually accompanied by a fast forest regeneration that produces a mosaic of forest patches in different successional stages. These successional stages have different productivities owing primarily to differences in species composition and soil nutrients. In order to assess the long-term consequences of deforestation and forest regeneration on atmospheric carbon dynamics, it is imperative to analyze the spatio-temporal patterns of forest productivity along different successional stages. This study evaluates the suitability of five different vegetation indices for assessing productivity along a tropical rain forest chronosequence located in Western Amazonia. Among the indices tested, the Red Edge Chlorophyll Index (CIRed Edge) and the Wide Dynamic Range Vegetation Index (WDRVI) proved to be the most suitable for this purpose. However, due to the current low availability of multi-spectral imagery acquired by spaceborne sensors with a band in the red edge region of the electromagnetic spectrum, the WDRVI serves as the most practical index. The dynamics of the regional productivity in the study area during the 2000s were assessed using the WDRVI and proved to be consistent with observed land cover dynamics. © 2012 Science From Israel / LPPltd., Jerusalem.
Context Habitat loss limits the dispersal of wide-ranging large mammals. It is pivotal to study the ecological and anthropogenic factors driving the habitat occupancy of large mammals for their long-term conservation and reduction of negative human-wildlife interactions.Objective To evaluate how the habitat occupancy pattern of the large mammals varies across a gradient of anthropogenic pressures.Methods We conducted ecological sign surveys across nine forest divisions including, Protected Areas (PAs) and outside PAs, along the Western and Eastern Ghats of Tamil Nadu, India. We used systematic grid-based Markovian occupancy model to study the effect of ecological and anthropogenic variables (prey abundance, habitat features, direct human disturbance and habitat fragmentation) on tiger (Panthera tigris), leopard (Panthera pardus), dhole (Cuon alpinus), elephant (Elephas maximus) and gaur (Bos gaurus) occupancy at 100 km(2) scale.Results Tiger and dhole occupancy was driven by the abundance of large and medium-sized prey. However, leopards also relied on the available small prey species and utilised fragmented forest patches. Large mammal occupancy increased in contiguous forests with water availability and decreased in landscapes with increased human disturbances and habitat fragmentation. Tiger occupancy was highly confined towards contiguous PA network while the rest of them had scattered but concentrated occupancy towards PAs.Conclusions The dependency of large mammals on contiguous forests suggests improving the quality and connectivity of forested habitats for their dispersal and reducing negative human-wildlife interactions. The low occupancy areas require urgent habitat management intervention to reduce grazing pressure and restore degraded habitats to sustain viable large mammal population at landscape-level.
Conservation of tropical forest biodiversity increasingly depends on its recovery following severe human disturbance. Our ability to measure recovery using current similarity indices suffers from two limitations: different sized individuals are treated as equal, and the indices are proportionate (a community with twice the individuals of every species as compared with the reference community would be assessed as identical). We define an alternative recovery index for trees - the Tanner index, as the mean of the quantitative Bray-Curtis similarity indices of species composition for stem density and for basal area. We used the new index to compare the original (pre-gap) and post-gap composition of five experimental gap plots (each 90-100 m2) and four control plots over 24-35 years in the Blue Mountains of Jamaica. After 24-35 years, these small gaps surrounded by undisturbed forest had recovered 68% of the sum of per species stem density and 29% of the sum of per species basal area, a recovery index of 47%. Four endemic species were especially reduced in density and basal area. With the incorporation of basal area and stem density, our index reduces over-estimations of forest recovery obtained using existing similarity indices (by 24%-41%), and thus yields more accurate estimates of forest conservation status. Finally, our study indicates that the two kinds of comparisons: 1) over time between pre-gap and post-gap composition and 2) over space between gap plots and spatial controls (space-for-time substitution) yield broadly similar results, which supports the value of using space-for-time substitutions in studying forest recovery, at least in this tropical montane forest. © 2012 Chai et al.
Helminthosis play a crucial role in small ruminant production leading to enormous economic losses particularly in areas where extensive grazing is practiced. It causes a loss of production through mortality, weight loss, reduced milk and wool production. Haemonchus contortus is a highly pathogenic small ruminant helminthes parasite, which is capable of causing acute diseases and high mortality. Therefore, there is an urgent need to seek alternative or complementary solutions to the control of parasitic nematodes of ruminants. The tropical forests concentrate the highest biodiversity in the world, particularly those located in Brazil, whose species richness is estimated to account for 20% of the total world richness and little is known about the chemical and pharmacological potentialities of Brazilian tropical forests. In this work, organic and aqueous extracts were tested on eggs and in the larval development test on Haemonchus contortus. The organic extract obtained from leaves and fruits of Trichilia sp. and the aqueous extract obtained from the aerial organs of Phyllanthus attenuates showed significant activity related to the inhibition of H. contortus egg eclosion. In vitro results suggest that both extracts, as well as eleven other active extracts, can offer alternatives in sheep worm control.
This study aimed to evaluate the viability of the litter and soil seed bank transposition as a forest restoration of degraded areas methodology. The litter and soil samples of 1 x 1 m were collected at a depth of 5.0 cm in a secondary semideciduous forest in Vicosa, MG, Brazil. The litter and soil samples were deposited in seedbeds in which the superficial soil (10 cm) was previously removed. Three treatments were performed as well as a separate control with five repetitions, totaling 20 samples. The first treatment (T1) was the litter transposition only, the second treatment (T2) was the soil seed bank only, the third treatment (T3) was the transposition of the litter together with the soil seed bank and the control (T). During a period of six months, 327 individuals of trees and shrubs and 864 herbaceous individuals were identified. Among the tree and shrub species occurring in the samples, 74% were classified as pioneers, and 26% were classified as other ecological groups. The most abundant tree species were Cecropia hololeuca with 151 individuals. Among the herbs, Oxalis corniculata was the most abundant, with 329 individuals. The differences of density and species richness between the treatments were significant, with the greatest richness in treatment T3 and the greatest densities in treatments T2 and T3. Therefore, it is concluded that the transposition of the seed bank is a promising methodology to stimulate forest restoration in degraded areas, being more efficient when the superficial soil is used with the litter.
The tropical forests of the Congo Basin and Gulf of Guinea harbor some of the greatest terrestrial and aquatic biological diversity in the world. However, our knowledge of the rich biological diversity of this region and the evolutionary processes that have shaped it remains limited, as is our understanding of the capacity for species to adapt or otherwise respond to current and projected environmental change. In this regard, research efforts are needed to increase current scientific knowledge of this region's biodiversity, identify the drivers of past diversification, evaluate the potential for species to adapt to environmental change and identify key populations for future conservation. Moreover, when evolutionary research is combined with ongoing environmental monitoring efforts, it can also provide an important set of tools for assessing and mitigating the impacts of development activities. Building on a set of recommendations developed at an international workshop held in Gabon in 2011, we highlight major areas for future evolutionary research that could be directly tied to conservation priorities for the region. These research priorities are centered around five disciplinary themes: (1) documenting and discovering biodiversity; (2) identifying drivers of evolutionary diversification; (3) monitoring environmental change; (4) understanding community and ecosystem level processes; (5) investigating the ecology and epidemiology of disease from an evolutionary perspective (evolutionary epidemiology). Furthermore, we also provide an overview of the needs and priorities for biodiversity education and training in Central Africa.     Resume Les forets tropicales du bassin du Congo et du Golfe de Guinee abritent une grande partie de la diversite terrestre et aquatique dans le monde. Pourtant, notre connaissance de la riche diversite biologique de cette region et les processus evolutifs qui l'ont faconnee demeurent encore peu compris, tout comme notre comprehension de la capacite des especes a s'adapter ou a repondre aux changements environnementaux actuels et a venir. De ce fait, des efforts de recherche sont necessaires pour ameliorer les connaissances scientifiques actuelles sur la biodiversite de cette region, determiner les causes des processus de diversifications passees, evaluer le potentiel des especes a repondre aux changements environnementaux et identifier les populations cles pour la conservation dans le futur. Par ailleurs, lorsque la recherche dans le domaine de l'evolution est combinee aux efforts de suivi continu de l'environnement, elle peut aussi fournir un ensemble d'outils importants pour l'evaluation et l'attenuation des impacts des activites de developpement. S'appuyant sur une serie de recommandations elaborees lors de l'atelier international qui s'est tenu au Gabon en 2011, nous soulignons les axes majeurs pour la recherche future dans le domaine de l'evolution qui pourraient etre lies directement aux priorites de la conservation dans la region. Ces priorites de recherche s'articulent autour de cinq thematiques: (1) l'inventaire et la decouverte de la biodiversite; (2) l'identification des causes de la diversification; (3) le suivi des changements environnementaux; (4) la comprehension des processus au niveau des communautes et des ecosystemes; (5) l'etude ecologique et epidemiologique des maladies d'un point de vue evolutif (epidemiologie evolutive). Toutefois, nous donnons egalement un apercu des besoins et des priorites en matiere d'education et de formation dans le domaine de la biodiversite en Afrique centrale.
Protected areas (PAs) are the leading forest conservation policy, so accurate evaluation of future PA impact is critical in conservation planning. Yet by necessity impact evaluations use past data. Here we argue that forward-looking plans should blend such evaluations with anticipation of shifts in threats. Applying improved methods to evaluate past impact, we provide rigorous support for that conceptual approach by showing that PAs' impacts on deforestation shifted with land use. We study the Republic of Panama, where species-dense tropical forest faces real pressure. Facing variation in deforestation pressure, the PAs' impacts varied across space and time. Thus, if shifts in pressure levels and patterns could be anticipated, that could raise impact. © 2014 IOP Publishing Ltd.
Tropical forest reserves have conservation value for terrestrial mammals and are threatened by anthropogenic pressures, especially conversion to other land-use types. To assess mammalian biodiversity of forest reserves in Sabah, Borneo, we used camera trapping data to estimate species richness, beta diversity, phylogenetic and functional diversity in nine forest reserves with different management classifications and backgrounds. Multiregional multispecies occupancy models (MSOM) were used to differentiate species occupancy in the reserves, and the estimates were transformed into biodiversity metrics. We found a significant difference in mammal composition within each forest reserve, with various functional and phylogenetic clustering or dispersion levels indicated by the standard effect of mean pairwise distances (SES MPD). Redundancy analysis (RDA) was used for both the observed data and MSOM estimates, modeling numerous environmental covariates and the forest reserves as random effects, finding that the forest reserve random effects were mainly responsible for structuring the mammal communities. Deramakot Forest Reserve was found to have overall high species richness, phylogenetic and functional diversity compared to other reserves. This reserve has been particularly successful at sustainable forest management and long-term forest certification, highlighting long-term conservation gains of sustainability programs for terrestrial mammalian diversity. Conversely, several reserves showed lower diversity scores overall than IUCN presumed extant species lists, highlighting local defaunation while still retaining high profile (critically endangered, endangered, and vulnerable) species. This study highlights the fragility of terrestrial mammal assemblages in forest reserves across the state and the need for mitigation, refaunation, and an integrated approach to forest management and biodiversity conservation to allow for comprehensive sustainable management programs to ensure long-term conservation. © 2022, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.
While there is increasing evidence concerning the detrimental effects of expanding rubber plantations on biodiversity and local water balances, their implications on regional hydrology remain uncertain. We studied a mesoscale watershed (100 km2) in the Xishuangbanna prefecture, Yunnan Province, China. The influence of land-cover change on streamflow recorded since 1992 was isolated from that of rainfall variability using cross-simulation matrices produced with the monthly lumped conceptual water balance model GR2M. Our results indicate a statistically significant reduction in wet and dry season streamflow from 1992 to 2002, followed by an insignificant increase until 2006. Analysis of satellite images from 1992, 2002, 2007, and 2010 shows a gradual increase in the areal percentage of rubber tree plantations at the watershed scale. However, there were marked heterogeneities in land conversions (between forest, farmland, grassland, and rubber tree plantations), and in their distribution across elevations and slopes, among the studied periods. Possible effects of this heterogeneity on hydrological processes, controlled mainly by infiltration and evapotranspiration, are discussed in light of the hydrological changes observed over the study period. We suggest pathways to improve the eco-hydrological functionalities of rubber tree plantations, particularly those enhancing dry-season base flow, and recommend how to monitor them. © 2019 by the authors.
Where tropical forests have been cleared and abandoned, forest regrowth is often slow. Because of the increasing extent of such degraded lands and desire for these areas to fulfill conservation and ecosystem functions, it has become important to assess mechanisms that accelerate reforestation. In situations where site conditions limit tree establishment, one option to facilitate reforestation is to establish plantations of fast-growing noninvasive trees that ameliorate site conditions and promote the growth of indigenous trees. To quantify the effect of distance and isolation from seed sources on the regeneration of indigenous trees, we evaluated tree species richness and stem density in four pine plantations surrounded by natural forest within Kibale National Park, Uganda, and one isolated pine plantation surrounded by agriculture near Kibale. Tree regeneration in these plantations was compared to that in natural forest and to an anthropogenic grassland similar to those upon which the plantations were established. Tree species richness and stem density were negatively correlated with distance to the plantation edge. The grassland had lower tree species richness and stein density than the isolated plantation, which had lower species richness and stem density than the plantations within Kibale. Leguminous species dominated tree regeneration in the isolated plantation and grassland, whereas small-seeded animal-dispersed species dominated regeneration in plantations adjacent to forest. We suggest that these differences are due to decreased seed dispersal across large distances or unfavorable habitats (e.g., grasslands) and to greater disturbance (e.g., fire) in the isolated plantation and grassland than in plantations within the National Park. This study demonstrates that forest reestablishment can be faster if plantations are established than if grasslands are left to recover without management. However, differences within and among plantations can lead to very different communities with respect to species composition, species richness, and stem density.
Reconciling conservation and livelihoods is a concern wherever forests are important in local people's lives. We plead for engaging these people in survey activities to clarify what is important to them, as a first step in conservation planning. This will help to address their priorities and gain their guidance and support for interventions. This paper presents the results of such a survey with the community of Kwerba in Mamberamo, a remote and little known part of Indonesian Papua. Views and priorities were explored through interviews, scoring exercises, community mapping and a field survey. Whereas small gardens provided most staple food, culture and livelihoods were linked to the forest. People scored primary forest highest for nearly all use categories. Primary forest was particularly highly valued as a source of construction materials, ornaments and rituals, and as a hunting place. We developed a list of the overall most important plants and animals. Many natural resources were used, but few were commercially exploited. The community had rules to control access to certain areas and resources. Taboos to restrict access to sacred places were also maintained. Our evaluation identified opportunities to achieve conservation outcomes jointly with the Kwerba people. In follow-up activities, the community presented local government with a land-use plan for their territory. The government recognized the value of our approach and requested training to implement it more widely in the region.
Global assessments demonstrate that as a conservation measure protected areas (PAs) are incomplete, and tend to be poorly documented in the international scientific literature, hindering the assessment of their scientific and policy foundations. The step from mapping priority areas for biodiversity conservation based on scientific information to formulating the practical tools for conserving biological diversity is critical; several key aspects such as legislative frameworks, multi-scale politics and socioeconomic realities must be taken into account. With the planet's human population continuing to grow, this step is all the more crucial, as the designation of PAs is increasingly being forced alongside the development frontier. This paper examines the process of reserve establishment in the case of the Allpahuayo-Mishana National Reserve (AMNR) (Peruvian Amazonia). On the basis of interviews, document analysis and media studies, a series of actions and reactions worked to shape the ultimate categorization and management plan of the AMNR. While scientific knowledge played a central role in the initial selection of the AMNR site, a number of critical aspects such as estimated environmental services, unresolved land entitlements, use values and multi-scale politics needed to be addressed in order to meet the originally set objective of biodiversity conservation. The importance of several biophysical features of the AMNR was initially emphasized as a key argument for conservation, whereas potential benefits of the AMNR (such as environmental services, particularly at the regional scale) proved to be the ultimate driving factor. Between the AMNR's official establishment in 1999 and its approved categorization and management plan in 2004 and 2005, respectively, a substantial shift in argumentation was witnessed. This change was particularly influential in that, contrary to what was initially expected, the livelihood requirements of local communities that were strongly linked to land entitlements and natural resources management came to play an essential role in both the categorization process and in the elaboration of the management plan of the Reserve. The AMNR was only effectively established because of this shift in emphasis. © 2007 Foundation for Environmental Conservation.
Tropical dry forests experience the highest deforestation rates on Earth, with major implications for the biodiversity of these ecosystems, as well as for its human occupants. Global remote sensing based forest cover data (2000 − 2012) point to the rapid loss of tropical dry forest in South America and Africa, also, if not foremost, inside formally protected areas. Here, we significantly extend the baseline of tropical dry forest loss inside a protected area in Ghana using a generalizable change detection technique. The forest cover change detection is based on the normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) derived from historical Landsat data (1984–2015). Field measurements were carried out in dry semi-deciduous forest and in the adjacent savanna and woodland. Estimates of the canopy area index and above ground woody biomass were related to NDVI derived from Landsat 8 data. The change detection indicated significant NDVI decrease in a large area initially covered by tropical dry forest, associated with deforestation. The peak in deforestation was found to have occurred between 1990 and 2002, hereafter, the conservation status of the area was improved. A combination of remote sensing data corroborated by secondary data sources provides evidence for the almost complete clearance of a tropical dry forest inside a strictly protected area, attributable to logging and land clearing for arable farming. The NDVI change detection also revealed NDVI increase in the adjacent woodlands from 2002 to 2015, demonstrating woody encroachment. Historical fire data from the MODIS burned area product indicate that the deforested area experienced a high frequency of anthropogenic burning since 2004, which may have caused further degradation and largely prevents forest regeneration. The results show the ongoing destruction of tropical ecosystems even within ostensibly protected areas and ask for the revision of protection and management strategies of such areas. © 2017 The Authors
Mangrove forests, vital for the conservation of biodiversity, protection of coastlines, and carbon capture, are decreasing globally at a rate higher than most other tropical forests. They are threatened by sea level rise, drought and storm surge, especially on low-lying islands where forests are directly exposed to the elements and have limited land area. We investigated changes in the spatial extent of mangroves on Aldabra Atoll, Seychelles – a protected area without direct human pressures, over 21 years using Landsat images. Over the 21-year study period, mean mangrove extent was 1283 ha with an overall net increase of 60 ha (0.23% year-1). The majority of extent changes were small (<2 ha) and contiguous to the existing mangrove extent. We then assessed the relation of mangrove cover change along the lagoon coastline with wave power (rate of energy transfer by waves), using fetch measures and local wind data. We found lower wave power values for stable mangrove areas than for areas that had gained or lost mangroves from 1997 to 2018. We identified wave power thresholds of 2.3 W m-1 for stable mangrove and 7.1 W m-1 for mangrove occurrence. These thresholds might be valuable for assessing threats and sites with the greatest potential for mangrove restoration across similar areas worldwide. Our results highlight the importance of quantifying mangrove extent changes at a local scale to assist with planning for the protection and restoration of this ecologically important habitat, given its vulnerability to the pressures associated with climate change. © 2021 The Author(s)
The non-native grass Megathyrsus maximus (Guinea grass) have been reported as a threat for woody species regeneration in the first years of tropical forest restoration, in some cases persisting for several years. The objective of this work was to evaluate forest restoration sites, correlating M. maximus and other ruderal species density and dry biomass with reforestation age, canopy openness, species richness, abundance of planted trees, and soil fertility. Seventeen sites reforested with native species were selected, with planting ages between 40 and 110 months, at the Capivara Reservoir, Southern Brazil. In each site, ten 10-m2 plots each with four 1-m2 subplots were installed, where soil fertility, plant abundance (M. maximus, native and ruderal species) and dry biomass (M. maximus and ruderal species only) were recorded. All sites showed high fertility soils, and the canopy openness (21.5 a 38.5 %) decreased with time. Ruderal species abundance were positively correlated with canopy openness and negatively correlated with planting age. Both dry biomass (ranging from 0 to 182 g/m²) and clump density (ranging from 0 to 2 clumps per m²) of M. maximus were not correlated with reforestation age or canopy cover. Moreover, with the exception of soil magnesium concentration, none of soil fertility variables could explain M. maximus abundance or biomass, indicating a high phenotypic plasticity in this non-native grass species. It was remarkable that almost 10 years after planting, the reforested sites did not successfully suppress Megathyrsus maximus even though canopy openness decreased © 2020. Floresta. All Rights Reserved.
Natural regeneration is an indicator of a healthy forest, hence, understanding the influence of site factors on natural regeneration is a significant concern for ecologists. This work aimed to assess the impact of site factors on natural tree regeneration at Khadimnagar National Park (KNP). Biotic factors (tree density, tree species richness, and basal area), physical factors (elevation, canopy openness), and soil properties (bulk density, moisture content, soil pH, organic matter, sand, silt, and clay) data were investigated from 71 sample plots to examine their effects on natural regeneration density and richness in KNP. Stepwise multiple linear regression analysis was done to predict both regeneration density and regeneration richness. The results showed that soil pH (p<0.001), canopy openness (p<0.001), tree species richness (p<0.01), and bulk density (p<0.01) had a significant effect on regeneration density, explaining 42% of the total variation. Regeneration richness was driven by four factors: tree species richness (p<0.01), soil pH (p<0.001), elevation (p<0.01), and canopy openness (p<0.01) with a model that explained 60% of the total variation. This study observed that soil pH, tree species richness, and canopy openness are the main controlling factors that influenced both the density and richness of regenerating species in KNP. Therefore, these findings have implications for natural resource management, especially in selecting suitable silvicultural systems in a tropical forest under protected area management where enhanced tree cover and conservation of biodiversity are needed. © 2021, Universiti Malaysia Sarawak. All rights reserved.
Tropical montane forests are threatened by human-induced fires, resulting in forest patches surrounded by disturbed habitats frequently dominated by bracken fern (Pteridium spp.). In most disturbed habitats, natural forest regeneration is principally hindered by (i) seed limitation, due to a lack of seed dispersal, and (ii) establishment limitation, due to harsh abiotic conditions or competition with grasses and weeds. To our knowledge, the combined effect of seed limitation and establishment limitation on the entire regenerating plant community has never been tested in tropical bracken-dominated habitats. We experimentally assessed the effect of bracken fronds on natural seedling establishment in different distances from a tropical montane forest of the Bolivian Andes. At ten sites, we placed 240 m-long transects ranging from the forest interior to the disturbed habitat and installed paired plots at seven distances along each transect. In one plot of each pair, we applied a repeated vegetation removal treatment to assess the effect of bracken fronds on seedling establishment. We analysed the effect of bracken removal on seedling richness, seedling survival and growth of tree and non-tree species. We additionally compared patterns in seedling density and richness from the forest interior towards the disturbed habitat with patterns in seed density and richness in the seed rain and the soil seed bank. Species richness was higher in the forest than in the disturbed habitat. Tree species corresponded to approx. 25% of the species pool in the disturbed habitat and were only present at low densities. Density and species richness of seeds and tree seedlings consistently decreased from the forest edge towards the disturbed habitat, suggesting seed limitation. Seedlings of tree species had high survival probabilities in the disturbed habitat, especially under bracken fronds, suggesting a lack of establishment limitation. Bracken removal in the disturbed habitat did not affect species richness, but significantly reduced seedling survival and growth of tree and non-tree species. Our results suggest that low seed dispersal hinders natural regeneration of bracken-dominated habitats in the tropics and that bracken fronds do not impede seedling establishment. Seed addition of tree species into the bracken vegetation may therefore be a promising strategy to accelerate forest regeneration, but long-term studies and multispecies experiments are needed for assessing the success of this restoration strategy. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Rotational swidden cultivation systems, with fallow periods long enough for the regeneration of secondary forests are capable of maintaining forest cover and plant diversity in a dynamic balance in swidden cultivation landscapes. Regeneration of secondary forests through several successional stages and by a combination of coppicing and seedling development is still poorly understood, especially the influence of different swiddening practices and the role of animals as seed dispersers. Swidden cultivators possess a vast knowledge of plants growing in swidden fallows and of fallow dynamics as well. Forest restoration in Thailand has been carried out mainly on the basis of experimental research on the potential of indigenous tree species to promote natural forest regeneration and biodiversity recovery; the so-called framework species. Another viable source of knowledge for forest restoration can be the study of the semi-natural revegetation processes in fallows and the indigenous knowledge of swiddeners of these processes. The research presented here was carried out to attain a better understanding of forest regeneration on fallow swiddens under different swiddening regimes and how it may be applied to practical forest restoration, We investigated the vegetation characteristics of from various stages of secondary succession in fallow swiddens of the Karen and Lawa ethnic groups in the Mae Chaem watershed, Chiang Mai province, northern Thailand. Indigenous knowledge on the use of species and traditional ecological processes in swiddening was recorded by questioning key informants. The data were analyzed and discussed with respect to their application in forest restoration and participatory forest management. © 2010 Elsevier B.V.
A number of empirical studies on tropical forests have focused on the issues of agricultural development and deforestation. According to these studies, deforestation is assumed to be an increasing function of agricultural yields hence implying a negative external effect. Contrary, this article presents a case which explores the trade-off between agriculture and extraction of forest products. We measure the technical efficiency of agriculture in natural forest peripheries and test the results from forest resource extraction. The study findings show that non-timber forest product extraction is a decreasing function of agricultural efficiency, hence producing a positive externality in the conversion of forest resources. This study also determines the level of efficiency improvement necessary to compensate the current income generated by non-timber forest products (NTFPs). Improving agricultural efficiency in forest peripheries should be an integral component of forest conservation policy. © 2010.
Global change pressures are jeopardizing the functioning and structure of most tropical forests and clouding the future for their biodiversity and provided services. Although the impact of direct destruction through deforestation and fragmentation is currently in the research portfolio, overgrazing, which is more diffuse and generalized but chronic, especially in the seasonal dry forests, has been by far less addressed. Overgrazing can lead to a dramatic change in natural regeneration, often triggering the collapse of dominant species. The almost monospecific dry forests of Bursera graveolens, one of the most representative forest of the Tumbesian region, are on the verge of extinction due to both direct destruction and chronic overgrazing and regeneration collapse in forest remnants. Here, we evaluated the impact of a very simple measure, the installation of fences, on the regeneration of ecological processes affecting the dominant species. We mapped and measured all Bursera individuals with a height greater than or equal to 30 cm in six 1-ha plots, 3 within and 3 outside fenced areas. Using spatial point pattern analysis, we inferred the importance of demographic and ecological processes affecting adults and juveniles in fenced and unfenced areas. The spatial structure of adults was similar in fenced and unfenced areas, varying from random to aggregated patterns, showing that fences did not interfere with ecological processes affecting adult trees. On the contrary, we found 2765 juveniles in the three fenced plots but none in free ranging areas. Juveniles showed heterogeneous clustered patterns, and their distribution and growth were negatively influenced both by the presence and the height of adult trees. On average, there was an exclusion zone of 10 m around adult trees were recruitment of juveniles was limited. Competition among juveniles appeared to be negligible. All in all, these results suggest that, in addition to recruitment, two of the main mechanisms that rule tree population dynamics in tropical forests, i.e., dispersal limitation and a Janzen-Connell-like mechanism favoring recruiting far from adult trees have been immediately restored in the fenced area. This shows that fencing is a viable tool for a fast regeneration and conservation of Bursera forests. © 2021 Elsevier B.V.
N-fixing leguminous species can reach atmospheric dinitrogen gas (N2), having an advantage under N-limited degraded environments. These N-fixers are constantly used as facilitative species. Chlorophyll a fluorescence (ChF) acknowledges how different species take up and use light energy during photosynthesis. These techniques assess stress and performance responses to photosynthesis and are used for the selection of species with potential for reforestation. Six Fabaceae species were selected for this study: three nonfixing species (Cenostigma tocantinum, Senna reticulata and Dipteryx odorata) and three N-fixing species (Clitoria fairchildiana, Inga edulis and Acacia spp.). Variations in chlorophyll fluorescence under high vs. low water and nutrient conditions were studied. Multivariate analysis was performed to detect the effects of seasonality and fertilization on dark-adapted ChF two years after the experiment was established. The correlation among ChF variables and growth, photosynthesis and foliar nutrient concentrations was evaluated. Under high water- and nutrient-availability conditions, plants exhibited an enhanced performance index on absorption basis values correlated with electron transport fluxes. Under drought and nutrient-poor conditions, most species exhibit increased energy dissipation as photoprotection. High interspecific variation was found; therefore, species-specific responses should be considered in future ChF studies. Corroborating the ability to colonize high-light environments, N-fixers showed an increased performance index correlated with electron transport and Zn and N foliar concentrations. Negative correlations were found between photosynthesis and trapped fluxes. Diameter growth was positively correlated with electron transport fluxes. Given the different responses among species, ChF is an effective technique to screen for seasonality, fertilization and species effects and should be considered for use during forest restoration. Finally, the addition of fertilization treatments may facilitate tropical forest restoration due to the importance of nutrients in physiological processes. N-fixers showed high photochemical performance and tolerance to abiotic stress in degraded areas and therefore should be included to support ecosystem biomass restoration.  © 2021 Jaquetti et al.
Soil organic carbon (SOC) storage plays a crucial role in mitigating global climate change while maintaining forests and sustaining environmental conditions. Recent studies have shown that plant species diversity increases SOC storage in experimental grasslands and natural forests. Here, we aim to show how an integrating tree-size and trait-based ecological approach leads to mechanistic insights into SOC storage that may be overlooked in previous studies. We hypothesized that tree functional diversity effects on SOC storage would change with tree -sized-based species' functional strategies driven by soil properties in natural temperate deciduous forests. We used the forest inventory data, site-specific measured traits and soil properties from 99 temperate deciduous forest plots in northwestern Iran. We investigated the joint effects of topographic factors, soil chemical prop-erties, and the functional attributes (multi-trait functional diversity indices and community-weighted trait mean indices) of big-sized trees (BsT; individual tree diameter = 50 cm) and remaining-sized trees (RsT) on topsoil (0-30 cm) SOC storage. The multiple linear regression models showed that SOC storage increased with increasing soil available phosphorus (r = 0.36), soil exchangeable potassium (r = 0.27 to 0.31) and soil total nitrogen (r = 0.27). In contrast, SOC storage declined with increasing the community-weighted mean of specific leaf area (r =-0.38 to-0.40). The structural equation model showed that SOC storage was directly driven by the positive effect of soil nutrients (i.e. a latent variable of soil total nitrogen and available phosphorus; r = 0.42) and the negative effect of the community-weighted mean of specific leaf area (r =-0.31). The topographic factors as well as the other several functional attributes of BsT and RsT showed non-significant direct and indirect effects on SOC storage in both types of statistical modelling. Our study suggests that the mass ratio and soil fertility rather than the niche complementarity effects along with the big-sized trees effect regulates SOC storage through the acquisitive trait identity of BsT species as compared to RsT species in temperate deciduous forests. We argue that maintaining high levels of species diversity with the most efficient trait identity across tree sizes is important for biodiversity conservation and multiple forest functions such as SOC storage which should be a priority for plantation management plans or silvicultural practices in natural forests.
Can democratic processes favour conservation outcomes in the tropics? This study focuses on local viewpoints within a forested landscape of high conservation significance in East Kalimantan (Indonesian Borneo). Stakeholders received posters displaying results from a previous study; these posters emphasised local priorities and views regarding local biodiversity. We assess local attitudes to this information, and consider some implications. Knowledge of, and agreement with, poster content increased among villagers, townspeople and civil servants after they received posters. All respondents appreciated the posters and all supported some form of forest conservation. All respondents agreed that biodiversity conservation and local views are vital in land-use planning. All agreed that logging companies need to be better controlled, while 80% consider them a "major environmental threat". These results bolster our belief that involving communities is not only an ethically defensible way to achieve conservation outcomes, but also a pragmatic opportunity to do so. © 2006 Springer Science+Business Media, Inc.
Bamboo dominance in tropical forests drives changes in floristic composition and vegetation structure. However, the role of bamboo dominance over ecosystem functions - including those related to forest regeneration - has received less attention. This study evaluated the fine-scale effects of the dominance of native bamboo Guadua weberbaueri Pflg. (Poaceae) on seed rain in a terra-firme forest in the southwest of the Brazilian Amazon to understand how bamboos remain a dominant element where they occur. We tested the hypothesis that bamboo dominance (i) reduces seed diversity and biomass and (ii) changes floristic composition and frequencies of seed dispersal mechanisms. For one year, we sampled seeds from seed rain in adjacent bamboo-dominated (BD) and bamboo-free (BF) environments in a forest without major anthropogenic disturbances. We found lower seed species richness in the BD environment and similar seed biomass between BD and BF. In addition, the seed species composition differed between BD and BF, with higher frequency of abiotic mechanisms to seeds dispersal in BD. We conclude that the dominance of bamboos acts as a filter for species that arrive via seed rain, modifying the floristic composition and dispersal mechanisms and, consequently, the dynamics of natural regeneration processes of terra-firme forests in the Amazon. This process can promote the permanence and expansion of the distribution area of bamboos in tropical forests.
On a global scale, fire has a key ecological role in the establishment of several regions and ecosystems. It is a strong natural and evolutionary force that controls organism characteristics, population density, species interactions, community dynamics, nutrient cycles, and ecological functions. However, as a result of global climate and land-use changes, fire regimes have changed, increasing in intensity and extent, with an increased likelihood of such events occurring in the near future. Fires can affect the availability of water and nutrients in a forest ecosystem, promoting ecophysiological responses of plants in both the short and long terms. Assessing consequences of such events on forest ecophysiology presents a substantial challenge to the community due to their complex nature, which includes the fact that they are frequently unpredictable and may have effects that are drastically disproportionate to the duration of the stress. Globally, recent studies have made significant progress in our knowledge of the physiological mechanisms that occur in trees after fires and in understanding how fire injuries might affect these disturbances in different ecosystems. However, little emphasis has been placed on the physiological systems that drive plant responses to severe events in the tropical environment. Therefore, understanding how fires affect plants is essential for tropical ecosystems because: (1) such ecosystems have been impeded by anthropogenic fires for centuries; and (2) appropriate management of these ecosystems is necessary to save terrestrial biodiversity around the globe in order to cope up with the environmental changes. Thus, the aim of the chapter is to predict how plants will respond to fire damage by exploring fire-induced ecophysiological processes, the underlying mechanisms, and adaptation strategies. Understanding physiological plant responses is essential for more accurately assessing post-fire ecosystem dynamics and interactions with climatic perturbations, especially in light of anticipated increases in fire frequency and severity caused by climate change. © 2024 selection and editorial matter, Sachchidanand Tripathi, Rahul Bhadouria, Pratap Srivastava, Rishikesh Singh, Rajkumari Sanayaima Devi; individual chapters, the contributors.
Fire is a powerful environmental disturbance with the ability to shape many biomes worldwide. However, global warming, land-use changes and other anthropogenic factors have strongly altered natural fire regimes worldwide. Despite the growing number of studies evaluating the effects of fire on biodiversity, little is understood about how burn affects certain groups that are particularly sensitive to climatic extremes, such as anurans. Here, we conducted a global and systematic literature review of studies assessing anurofauna responses to fire disturbances. We used Generalized Linear Mixed-Effects Models and theoretical information criteria to assess how fire affects anuran assemblages. We analyzed 68 studies, widely distributed in the globe, which examined the fire effects on abundance, richness and/or species behavior. In total, 191 species were considered, being Gastrophryne carolinensis and Lithobates catesbeianus the most evaluated. We reveal a lack of general anurofauna response to fire, as species and assemblages were either negatively or positively affected by burns. We observed that the fire treatments (Prescribed fire, Wildfire and without fire) and the biome where the study was conducted did not explain the variation in species abundance. Most studies were conducted in biomes classified as Temperate Forests, followed by Tropical Savannas and Tropical Forests. We highlight that future studies should consider factors associated to fire (e.g. fire treatment, fire properties), research design and species biology to explain patterns of species persistence and community structure. Although fire plays a key role in shaping several natural ecosystems, we have recently witnessed drastic changes in natural burning regimes all over the world, which imply leading to severe population reductions and even species extinctions. Given this scenario, government authorities should urgently support and invest in scientific studies that evaluate, monitor and test fire management practices in natural ecosystems and therefore establish mitigation actions to preserve the biota constantly threatened by the imbalance of this environmental disturbance. © 2021 Elsevier B.V.
Fire in tropical forests increases tree mortality, degrades forest structure, and reduces carbon stocks. Currently, there are large gaps in understanding how fire affects understory forest structure and composition, interactions with fire recurrence, and long-term impacts. Understanding these changes is critical to evaluate the present and future response of tropical forests to fire. We studied post-fire changes in understory regeneration in forests in Mato Grosso State, southern Amazonia, Brazil, aiming to answer the following questions: (i) does forest structure (basal area) and tree community composition vary with fire frequency and time since the last fire? (ii) does the response differ among strata (e.g., sapling, larger trees)? (iii) are changes in diversity associated with changes in forest structure? We surveyed trees and lianas in previously structurally intact forests that underwent selective logging, followed by different fire histories, including 5 and 16 years after once-burned, 5 years after three times burned, and unburned (control). Overall, species composition (abundance, richness, and number of families) and diversity were highest for the unburned treatment and lowest for the recurrent burned areas. Fire frequency negatively affected plant structure and basal area; basal area of small, medium, and large plants declined significantly by more than 50% in the most frequently burned areas. Richness was positively related to basal area in the three times burned sites and in the 16 years regenerating site for all strata. Our results demonstrate the negative influence of frequent fires on both the composition and structure of small trees in Amazonian forest. These changes to the cohort of small-sized trees may persist and have long-term impacts on forest structure, affecting the capacity, and direction of forest recovery. With wildfire widespread across the region and increasing in frequency, fire may negatively affect tree diversity in remaining selectively logged forests, and affect regional carbon cycling with consequences for the global vegetation carbon sink.
Several decades of frustrated attempts to prevent fires in the Brazilian Savanna (Cerrado) have led to deleterious ecological and management consequences. In 2014, the first Integrated Fire Management (IFM) programme was launched in three protected areas (PAs). The IFM programme considers local practices, ecological information, management options and aims to create landscape mosaics of different fire histories to conserve biodiversity, reduce the prevalence of late-dry season (LDS) wildfires, protect fire-sensitive vegetation and reduce conflicts between PA managers and local communities. The first 3 years of imposed fire management regimes led to 40%–57% reduction in LDS fires, improved dialogue between researchers, managers and local communities, generating fire management learning communities. Synthesis and applications. This Integrated Fire Management programme represents a major advance in Cerrado management and conservation, by actively managing fires and decreasing the proportion of areas burnt by late-dry season wildfires. It can contribute to PAs’ management in the Cerrado and other South American fire-prone ecosystems. Long-term monitoring and research are essential to understand the ecological implications and to improve fire management practices. © 2018 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology © 2018 British Ecological Society
In tropical regions, which harbour the majority of the Earth's biodiversity, land-cover change emerges as the primary driver of biodiversity loss. However, despite the propensity for many tropical biomes to experience fires, and the rapidly accelerating pace of intensification in fire regimes, the role of fire in shaping ecological communities has largely been overlooked. We examined whether and how fire regime affected the abundance of mammal species, the scale at which these putative effects operated and how fire effect interacted with land cover. Using camera traps, we studied four mammal species with different ecological traits in the Kadiwéu indigenous territory, a Cerrado-Pantanal ecotone. Specifically, we used abundance models to analyse the response of mammal species to fire frequency, spatial extent, and time since fire. Our results showed that mammals responded to fire at scales that align with the scale of responses to land cover. We found that the type of response to fire, and the scale at which fire effects operate, depended on species and possibly on their traits. The smallest species Sylvilagus brasiliensis demonstrated a clear response to fire, as well as to the mean patch area of savanna, exclusively at the smallest scale studied (i.e., within 500-m radius buffers). The abundance of this species decreased with increasing proportion of land burned in the 12 months preceding the monitoring. In contrast, larger species, including Mazama gouazoubira and Tapirus terrestris, showed no response to fire, while Pecari tajacu would exhibit a marginal response, at the larger scale of 1000 m. Our results emphasize the importance of adopting trait-based approaches that consider the multiple aspects of fire regimes, at multiple scales, to disentangle the mechanisms governing the effects of fire on biodiversity. This should promote effective and sustainable fire management compatible with systemic conservation of species and ecological traits in fire-prone biomes. © 2024 Elsevier GmbH
Extreme wildfires present an ever-increasing problem in different landscapes around the world. Here, we explore recent wildfires to prioritize recovery efforts and mitigate effects of future wildfires in the Pantanal, the largest continuous wetland in the world. Using ecological niche modeling (ENM), we categorize affected areas based on potential levels of degradation by fire and the predicted suitability for threatened and fire-sensitive plants. Based on this information, we identify key areas for fire prevention. Under land cover change scenarios predicted for 2050, approximately 25 % of the land cover under future threat will have potentially high biomass accumulation. We identified 1272 km2 in priority areas with forest formation, with restoration cost of at least US$ 576,189. This case study provides an analysis workflow that can be used to assess other wildfire-threatened parts of the world. These results can inform public policy to establish new fire brigades, conservation efforts using Integrated Fire Management, and restoration areas to mitigate biodiversity loss. © 2024 Elsevier B.V.
In order to characterize the composition and structure of the forest formations of the Commune, Pital, Buffer zone of the Machalilla National Park, the structural characterization of four localities of the equatorial dry forest belonging to two plant formations was carried out, the spiny tropical hill and the premontane spiny mountain that go from 40 to 460 msnm. For the investigation, 28 temporary sampling plots of 50 x 20 m (0.10 ha) were established, the tree species e" 10 cm of DAP were measured. A total of 1,346 individuals represented in 89 species belonging to 82 genera and 42 families were identified and evaluated. The localities were compared statistically in terms of wealth, composition, structure and diversity. High alpha and beta diversity were found; Height above sea level, basal area and density are the variables that most influence the segregation of four types of forests that differ in their composition and forest structure. Significant, promising and rare species were identified, with the most important species being Cordia alliodora, Nectandra acutifolia and Ficus velutina. The family with the most species and genera is Fabaceae. Most individuals (58%) were recorded in the 10-20 cm diameter class for all four locations. The results obtained will allow projects aimed at sustainable forest management through the application of methods for ecological restoration and conservation of these tropical forests.
Besiq Bermai Forest is part of Kalimantan forests known for vast plant diversity. The present study aimed to investigate flora diversity, composition, and ecology in Besiq Bermai Forest to support the management of biodiversity and forest conservation. Thirteen plots were established with different sizes of plots (100 m x 20 m plots for trees; 40 m x 5 m plots for saplings; and 5 m x 5 m plots for understory). Data recorded included plant species name and individual number of each plant species. Data analysed were Shannon-Wiener diversity index, Relative Density, Relative Frequency, Relative Dominance and Important Value Index. The principal component analysis (PCA) was performed to determine relationship between edaphic components and flora occurrence. The results showed that there were 93 species of trees (belonging to 48 genera and 22 families), 112 species of saplings (belonging to 62 genera and 43 families), and 48 species of understory (belonging to 28 genera and 20 families). Shannon-Wiener diversity index (H') were 6.05, 6.25 and 3.26 for tree, saplings and understory, respectively. The most common family for tree and saplings in the forest ecosystem in this area was Dipterocarpaceae (Shorea spp). Species of tree with the highest importance value index were Dillenia excelsa, Syzygium sp. and Shorea parvifolia. The highest importance value index for species of saplings were Macaranga triloba and Shorea parvifolia; and for species of understory were Phrynium jagorianum. Ecological (edaphic) factors affecting the occurence and establishment of flora in Bermai forest were total N and C/N ratio. The present study has implication for the management of biodiversity and forest conservation. © 2018, Seameo Biotrop.
Carbon is continuously being removed from the atmosphere by photosynthesis and stored in carbon pools (live, dead, and soil carbon) of forest ecosystems. However, carbon stock in dead wood and of trees with diameters at breast height (dbh) between 5 and 10 cm is often not considered in many studies carried out in the Congo Basin Forest. The relationship between tree diversity, life-forms and carbon stocks has received little attention. This study was carried out on the outskirts of Deng Deng National Park (DDNP) to determine tree diversity (dominant families, species richness and Shannon index), assess carbon stocks in the five carbon compartments (living tree, understory, fine roots, dead wood and litter) as well as to analyze the relationship between (1) carbon stocks and tree diversity; and, (2) between carbon stock and life-forms. The Shannon index of trees ≥ 10 cm dbh ranged from 2.6 in riparian forest to 4.3 in secondary forest; and for the tree between 5 and 10 cm, it ranged to 1.56 in riparian forest to 3.68 in the secondary forest. The study site housed 16 species, 7 genera and 3 families which are only found in trees of dbh between 5 and 10 cm. The average total carbon stock of the five compartments varied from 200.1 t ha−1 in forest residues to 439.1 t ha−1 in secondary forest. Dead wood carbon stock varied from 1.2 t ha−1 in riparian forests to 12.51t ha−1 in agroforests. The above ground carbon stocks for trees with diameter between 5 and 10 cm varied from 0.7 t ha−1 in young fallow fields to 5.02 t ha−1 in old secondary forests. This study reveals a low but positive correlation between species richness and total carbon stocks, as well as a significant positive relationship between life-forms and total carbon stocks. The findings highlight the need for more data concerning carbon content of dead wood, carbon of trees ≥ 5 cm < 10 cm dbh and the relationship between carbon stocks and tree diversity from other areas of the Congo Basin for a good understanding of the contribution of tropical forests to climate change mitigation. © 2018, Northeast Forestry University and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature.
The natural process of ecological regeneration in tropical regions in conjunction with local livestock management practices creates grazing environments with high floristic diversity and structural complexity. Yet, these environments are being neglected despite the opportunities and benefits for domestic herbivores. Voisin grazing (VG) is better in such highly biodiverse environments, as this management system seeks to improve forage utilization by coupling forage allowance with livestock needs for forage, using small paddocks, high stock densities over short occupation periods, and allowing plants to fully recover after grazing. Floristic diversity, biomass and stocking rate were assessed in sites having tropical dry forest secondary vegetation undergoing grazing. Six sites having extensive seasonal grazing were studied by placing 10 x 10 m(2) quadrats across sites to list woody species and nested 2 x 2 m(2) frames for listing herbaceous vegetation. The response of vegetation to Voisin grazing (VG) was evaluated in one of the six sites (split into 15 paddocks having 400-m(2) each). A total of 191 species (from all sites) including 50 potential forage species were listed. Quadrats were classified into two groups, one contained more preserved vegetation dominated by woody species, and the other a less preserved group dominated by herbaceous and shrub species. Available forage biomass across sites ranged from 1000 to 1200 kg DM ha(-1) (30-70% woody biomass), supporting low stocking rates (0.2-0.3 AU ha(-1)). In the site where VG was implemented, most of the identified species were forage (56/58). After one year of VG, the most productive paddocks (2500-3800 kg DM ha(-1)) were dominated by forbs and the least productive ones (800 2000 kg DM ha(-1)) were dominated by woody species, yielding an overall stocking rate of 1.2 AU ha(-1). Based on forage botanical composition, three groups of paddocks were identified: 1) dominated by grasses, 2) heterogeneous forage diversity, and 3) dominated by forbs and shrubs. Pastures recovered in 47-89 d during the 2017 rainy season, 50 123 d during the transition to the dry season, and 210-290 d during the 2018 dry season. Secondary vegetation provides high floristic diversity and a large number of forage plant species, but low forage yield and stocking rates. Yet, implementation of a proper grazing system such as VG gradually enhances yield and stocking rates. (C) 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Secondary forests cover large areas and are strong carbon sinks in tropical regions. They are important for ecosystem functioning, biodiversity conservation, watershed protection, and recovery of soil fertility. In this study, we used the Surface Reflectance Climate Data Record (CDR) product from 16 Thematic Mapper (TM)/Landsat-5 images (1984–2010) to continuously track the secondary succession (SS) of a forest following land abandonment in 1980. Changes in canopy structure and floristic composition were analysed using data from four field inventories (1995, 2002, 2007, and 2012). To characterize variations in brightness, greenness, spectral reflectance, and shadows with the natural regeneration of vegetation, we applied tasselled cap transformations, principal component analysis (PCA), and linear spectral mixture models to the TM datasets. Shade fractions were plotted over time and correlated with the enhanced vegetation index (EVI) and the normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI). Because image texture may reflect the variability of the successional process, eight co-occurrence-based filter metrics were calculated for selected TM bands and plotted as a function of time since abandonment. The successional forest was compared to a nearby primary reference forest (PF) and had differences in the spectral and textural means evaluated using analysis of variance (ANOVA). The results showed increases of 35% and 10.4% over time in basal area and tree height, respectively. Species richness within the assemblage of sampling units increased from 14 to 71 between 1995 and 2012, and this trend was also confirmed using an individual-based rarefaction analysis. Species richness in 2012 was still lower than that observed in the PF site, which presented greater amounts of aboveground biomass (336.4 ± 17.0 ton ha−1 for PF versus 98.5 ± 21.4 ton ha−1 for SS in 2012). Brightness and greenness tasselled cap differences between the SS and PF rapidly decreased from 1984 (SS at the age of 4 years) to 1991 (age of 11 years). Brightness also decreased from 1997 to 2003, as indicated by PC1 scores and surface reflectance of the TM bands 4 (near infrared) and 5 (shortwave infrared). Spectral mixture shade fraction increased from young to old successional stages with strata composition and canopy structure development, whereas NDVI and EVI decreased over time. Because EVI was strongly dependent on near infrared reflectance (r = + 0.96), it was also much more strongly correlated with the shade fraction (r = −0.93) than NDVI. Except for the image texture mean that decreased from young to old successional stages in TM bands 4 and 5, no clear trend was observed in the remaining texture metrics over the time period of vegetation regeneration. Overall, due to structural-floristic and spectral/textural differences with the PF, the SS site was still distinguishable using Landsat data 30 years after land abandonment. Most of the spectral metric means between PF and SS were significantly different over time at 0.01 significance level, as indicated by ANOVA. © 2014, Taylor & Francis.
Forage grasses used in cropping no-till systems in tropical regions alter soil chemical properties, but their longterm impact on soil microbial processes of the nitrogen (N) cycle and microbial community abundance, composition and structure are unknown. Here, microbial functions related to nitrogen fixation, nitrification and denitrification as well as bacterial, archaeal and fungal populations were evaluated in a long-term field experiment in which tropical forage grasses palisade grass (Urochloa brizantha (Hochst. Ex A. Rich.) R.D. Webster) and ruzigrass (U. ruziziensis (R. Germ. and C.M. Evrard) Crins) were cultivated with or without N fertilization. Uncultivated soil was used as a control. Forage grasses, especially palisade grass, increased soil bacterial and fungal abundances, whereas the archaeal population was highest in uncultivated soil. In soils cultivated with forage grasses, N fertilization favored N-cycle-related genes; however, cultivation of palisade grass increased the abundances of amoA bacteria (AOB) and amoA archaea (AOA) genes associated with soil nitrification and decreased the abundances of genes nirS, nirK and nosZ genes related to denitrification, compared to ruzigrass and control, regardless of N input. In addition, abundances of total bacteria and total fungi were associated with the N cycle and plant biomass in soils cultivated with forage grasses. Forage cultivation clearly benefitted the soil nutrient environment (S-SO42-, Mg2+, total-C and -N, N-NO3- and N-NH4+) and microbiome (bacteria and fungi) compared with uncultivated soil. In soil cultivated with palisade grass, the microbial community composition was unresponsive to N addition. The high N uptake by palisade grass supports the competitive advantage of this plant species over microorganisms for N sources. Our results suggest that palisade grass has advantages over ruzigrass for use in agriculture systems, regardless of N input.
The global area cultivated with oil palm has doubled in the past two decades, causing deforestation, land-use change, freshwater pollution, and species loss in tropical ecosystems worldwide. Despite the palm-oil industry been linked to severe deterioration of freshwater ecosystems, most studies have focused on terrestrial environments, while freshwaters have been significantly less studied. We evaluated these impacts by contrasting freshwater macroinvertebrate communities and habitat conditions in 19 streams from primary forests (7), grazing lands (6), and oil palm plantations (6). In each stream, we measured environmental characteristics, e.g., habitat composition, canopy cover, substrate, water temperature, and water quality; and we identified and quantified the assemblage of macroinvertebrates. Streams in oil palm plantations lacking riparian forest strips showed warmer and more variable temperatures, higher turbidity, lower silica content, and poorer macroinvertebrate taxon richness than primary forests. Grazing lands showed higher conductivity and temperature, and lower dissolved oxygen and macroinvertebrate taxon richness than primary forests. In contrast, streams in oil palm plantations that conserved a riparian forest, showed a substrate composition, temperature, and canopy cover more similar to the ones in primary forests. These habitat improvements by riparian forests in the plantations increased macroinvertebrate taxon richness and maintained a community resembling more the one in primary forests. Therefore, the conversion of grazing lands (instead of primary forests) to oil palm plantations can increase freshwater taxon richness only if riparian native forests are safeguarded. © 2023 The Authors
Forests contain 70-80 percent of terrestrial carbon (C) and represent a global C sink, despite of continued deforestation. On the other hand, forests and land-use change (LUC) account for the largest uncertainties within the global C balance. The future role of forests is even more uncertain within the context of global change. The question if forests will shift from C sinks to sources is fundamental for conservation and management. We aim to synthesize current knowledge on the role of the major forest biomes in the global C cycle. Furthermore, we evaluate management options, based on their potential to maximize greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation and other benefits from forest ecosystems. Whereas boreal and temperate forests currently act as net sinks, there is a potential for increased insect outbreaks, fires, and droughts. Pressure from infrastructure development and the demand for biomass fuels is increasing. Tropical forests account for the largest gross C sink, but face deforestation and degradation. The future role of tropical forests depends mostly on LUC dynamics. Uncertainties persist about deforestation rates and impacts from global change. It is clear, however, that changes in the C balance of tropical forests will affect atmospheric CO2 levels on a global scale. In managed temperate and boreal forests, aboveground carbon (AGC) can be maximized by optimizing rotation cycles in even-aged stands. Mixed-species stands may increase productivity and resilience to disturbances. Research is needed on the impacts of silvicultural activities on soil organic carbon (SOC). In the tropics, reforestation and deforestation avoidance are the most important GHG mitigation pathways. Lessons learnt from REDD (reduced emissions from deforestation and forest degradation) pilot projects may help to establish GHG mitigation strategies in the future. The majority of timber harvest in the tropics is unsustainable and could be improved by extending rotation cycles, reduced impact logging, and long-term management planning. International support is needed to ensure capacity building and strong institutions, and to create incentives for global markets. The extension of planted forests is growing worldwide. Plantations sequester important amounts of C, although afforestation may initially lead to SOC losses, and AGC storage over multiple rotation cycles is low, compared to natural forests. Conservation of old-growth forests is the most effective way to secure C storage.
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) certification promises international consumers that 'green-label' timber has been logged sustainably. However, recent research indicates that this is not true for ipê (Tabebuia spp.), currently flooding the US residential decking market, much of it logged in Brazil. Uneven or non-application of minimum technical standards for certification could undermine added value and eventually the certification process itself. We examine public summary reports by third-party certifiers describing the evaluation process for certified companies in the Brazilian Amazon to determine the extent to which standards are uniformly applied and the degree to which third-party certifier requirements for compliance are consistent among properties. Current best-practice harvest systems, combined with Brazilian legal norms for harvest levels, guarantee that no certified company or community complies with FSC criteria and indicators specifying species-level management. No guidelines indicate which criteria and indicators must be enforced, or to what degree, for certification to be conferred by third-party assessors; nor do objective guidelines exist for evaluating compliance for criteria and indicators for which adequate scientific information is not yet available to identify acceptable levels. Meanwhile, certified companies are expected to monitor the long-term impacts of logging on biodiversity in addition to conducting best-practice forest management. This burden should reside elsewhere. We recommend a clarification of 'sustained timber yield' that reflects current state of knowledge and practice in Amazonia. Quantifiable verifiers for best-practice forest management must be developed and consistently employed. These will need to be flexible to reflect the diversity in forest structure and dynamics that prevails across this vast region. We offer suggestions for how to achieve these goals. © 2008 Fauna & Flora International.
Agricultural expansion is one of the main drivers of global pollinator loss. Paradoxically, this occurs while agriculture is becoming increasingly dependent on biotic pollination, raising concerns about food production. Integrated Crop Pollination (ICP), the use of both wild and managed pollinators in crop fields, can help conserve pollinator diversity while ensuring effective pollination services for growers. However, given the context-dependent nature of this approach, there is an urgent need to evaluate its application across different landscapes and crops. We apply the ICP approach to açaí palm (Euterpe oleracea Mart.) production in the eastern Brazilian Amazon to explore effects of a native stingless bee, Scaptotrigona aff. postica (Apidae: Meliponini), and landscape-level forest conservation on yield and socioeconomic outcomes for açaí fruit growers. We assessed flower visitor assemblages and fruit production on 18 plantations across a landscape forest cover gradient, with bee colonies introduced on nine plantations. Field data were combined with information from semistructured interviews of growers to estimate yield and profit per hectare under different pollinator management scenarios. Bee colonies and forest cover enhanced flower visitor abundance on palm inflorescences, but abundance increases attributed to managed bees were associated with shifts in flower visitor evenness and diversity (species richness), due to reduced visitation of wild bees near managed colonies. Fruit production on inflorescences was positively related to bee abundance and bee diversity. Consequently, overall pollination performance was lower in plantations with bee colonies. This was repeated at the hectare scale, where yield and profit were associated with surrounding forest cover and not bee colonies. Synthesis and applications. Managed bees can increase pollinator densities and fruit production, but the increased environmental and socioeconomic risks associated with this activity means açaí growers should prioritise forest conservation to safeguard pollination services and improve overall sustainability of açaí production in the eastern Brazilian Amazon. © 2023 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology © 2023 British Ecological Society.
The concept of forest degradation tends to be addressed in broad terms, and existing definitions are difficult to apply in practice. These definitions are based on a reduction in the production of ecosystem goods and services, but fail to address how, when and to what degree this reductionwhich ultimately leads to degradation of a forestoccurs. Generally speaking, degradation is the result of a progressive decline in the structure, composition and functions upon which the vigor and RESILIENCE of a forest is based. A degraded forest is one whose structure, function, species composition, or productivity have been severely modified or permanently lost as a result of damaging human activities. So far, no guidelines have been developed for classification and evaluation of a degraded forest at the stand level, nor are there methodologies for assessing the degree of degradation found. The present work proposes stand-level guidelines for identification of a degraded forest according to a list of structural, compositional and regeneration criteria and characteristics. Emphasis is put on the need for local definitions of forest degradation, and identification of thresholds that determine the points where the processes of degradation finalize into degraded forests. Finally, the present work makes a call to move forwards in sustainable management in order to prevent degradation, and in implementation of restoration or rehabilitation practices in degraded forests.
Forest conservation has become one of the most important environmental issues currently facing humanity, as a result of widespread deforestation and forest degradation. Pressures on remaining natural forests continue to intensify, leading to high rates of biodiversity loss. Understanding how human activities influence ecological processes within forests is essential for developing effective conservation action. This book describes research methods and techniques relevant to understanding forest ecology, with a particular focus on those that are relevant to practical conservation and sustainable forest management. This information is currently disparate and difficult to locate, and the intention here is to provide a comprehensive synthesis. Methods are presented for assessing forest extent and condition, structure and composition, and forest dynamics at a variety of scales. Techniques for assessing genetic variation and reproductive ecology, and for evaluating the habitat value of forests are also described. Particular emphasis is given to state-of-the-art techniques, such as remote sensing, GIS, computer modelling, and molecular markers. However, traditional methods of forest mensuration and ecological survey are also presented. The methods and techniques described are generally applicable to all forest types, including both temperate and tropical forest ecosystems. © Oxford University Press 2007. All rights reserved.
This paper focuses on the restoration of forest ecosystems highlighting the importance of ecological features. The focus is furthermore on a global perspective, with analyses taking in the main aspects of forest degradation and restoration from both theoretical and practical standpoints. Particular emphasis is placed on environmental policy as pur- sued currently, first and foremost in regard to the main instrument of ecosystem restoration that is constituted by the United Nations’ Decade thereof, running from 2021-2030 (in accordance with UN Resolution A/Res/73/284). The article points to the linkage betwe-en policies seeking to counteract forest degradation on the one hand, and on the other to achieve the conservation of biodiversity, the protection of land, and both mitigation of and adaptation to climate change. Stress is further placed on an appropriate hierarchy of strategies seeking to improve the state of the world’s forests. While conservation, restoration and reforestation are the three main directions to Sustainable Forest Management, it is the first of the three that must always be emphasised first and foremost. The study work at the heart of this article highlights a need for worldwide acceleration of the processes restoring forest ecosystems. Following the logic of interrelations betwe-en degradation and restoration, the problem of ecosystem degradation is first turned to, with an analysis of global deforestation also incorporated. Trends as regards the loss of forest and of tree cover in general over in the last 30 years are presented, with the basis for this examination being data from the FAO’s Forest Resource Assessment and Global Forest Watch. Furthermore, forest degradation and deforestation have been proceeding to an advanced degree in recent decades. In this way major losses have afflicted tropical forests and the so-called Intact Forest Landscapes. Importantly, many international commitments have now been taken on, with ambitious targets set in regard to the need for both deterioration of forest and the loss of tree cover to be stemmed. However, as the New York Declaration on Forests and other instruments make clear, most of the targets set for 2020 were not actually achieved. In its consideration of the theoretical foundations of forest-ecosystem restoration, this paper reflects upon resilience, the recovery of native ecosystems, and the process of natural regeneration. The main contemporary paradigms to the theory and practice of forest-ecosystem restoration are here demonstrated, with the basis of the enquiry being formulae for the restoration of ecosystems elaborated by the Society of Ecological Restoration. Quite a large part of the study has been devoted to the Forest Landscape Restoration approach, with a presentation of the main FLR options as elaborated by the FLR Global Partnership. Two dominant types of FLR (‘wide-scale’ and ‘mosaic restoration’) are here integrated, while examples of challenging actions in the field of forest-ecosystem restoration have been provided, including AFR100, The Great Green Wall for the Sahara and Sahel, the 20 x 20 Initiative, and the Trillion Trees Campaign. Taking into account the importance of the latest EU activity in the field of nature protection, remarks are made in regard to the 2022 Nature Restoration Law. The discussion brings to light certain aspects of criticism vis-à-vis the pursuit of forest restoration, which are to be found in the subject literature. This signals a problem of the conservation of forests being overshadowed by careless application of activities driven by climate-change policies. As numerous scientists demonstrate (see e.g. the Kew Declaration on reforestation…, 2021), this practice frequently leads to the mass-planting of fast-gro-wing trees of exotic species, sometimes even invasive. In this way a threat may actually be posed to the ecological richness and valuable landscape features the given area possesses. Indeed, the present study underlines repeatedly the significance of natural and native ecosystems. However it also puts emphasis on the multi-purpose nature of the effort, the need for a holistic approach to be taken, and the importance of context as projects seeking the restoration of forest ecosystems are planned and implemented. © 2022, Polska Akademia Nauk. All rights reserved.
Forests in the humid tropics contribute to a wide range of globally demanded forest ecosystem services (FES) and are also beneficial to local communities, which are often highly dependent on natural resources. Approximately one-third of these forests are threatened by resource extraction, logging, and the expanding agricultural frontier. As a result of these developments, forest landscapes are shaped by a transition gradient representing areas with a high forest cover to locations resembling agricultural-forest mosaics. These transition gradients are often characterized by different types of forests and successional stages. We used inventory data from 331 plots collected in 24 landscapes in Ecuador and the Philippines, representing five forest-based land-use types. We used mixed linear effect models to analyze how the landscape transition gradient and forest type affect various forest ecosystem services. Additionally, we identified stand structure and landscape transition gradients that influence changes in these FES. Results show country and forest type specific reactions for different FES. For example, aboveground carbon, non-timber forest products, biodiversity, and timber volume in natural forests are not only affected by logging but also decline along the landscape transition gradient. This includes the risk of extinction of high conservation species and long-term depletion of timber resources. We show that tree-based secondary land-use systems may partially compensate for the loss of some FES, especially timber supply, but found evidence for increased nutrient depletion in agroforestry systems. Our results highlight the importance of connected forest landscapes and structurally diverse forest stands in early transition landscapes. We suggest conservation and restoration strategies sensitive to the transition context for FES and to make better use of the various benefits of tropical forests in a sustainable manner. © 2023 The Authors
Tropical dry forests are the most threatened of all the major tropical forest types and less than 25% of TDF currently remain worldwide. They are located mostly in South America. Parameters such as habitat loss, fragmentation and loss of connectivity have been identified as the main threats to biodiversity. This research aims to discover the forests changes, the evolution of connectivity and fragmentation of the South American tropical dry forest between 1992 and 2020. Land uses layers provided by the Copernicus program were employed, and land uses change, fragmentation and structural connectivity were analyzed in GIS systems. To calculate the functional connectivity, the Graphab software was used. The results showed a loss of forest surface, where fragmentation increased and a loss of functional connectivity between 25% and 49% occurs depended on the parameter analysed. On the other hand, some areas were recovered. Brazil is the country that recovered the most forest area and Argentina, Paraguay and Bolivia those that lost the most area. Only 31% of the area was not altered between 1992 and 2020. Human activities such as deforestation, agriculture expansion, and urbanization have led these forests to become increasingly fragmented and worse connected impacting on both ecological and socio-economic aspects. Supranational measures must be taken to mitigate the negative impacts of fragmentation and the loss of connectivity. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2024.
Urbanization and the spread of agriculture have resulted in high levels of forest loss and fragmentation in many regions of the world. The impact of this anthropogenic fragmentation on ecological functioning has been poorly studied. This chapter assesses the responses of selected plant- and animal-mediated processes to forest fragmentation. Although the number of studies concentrating on different processes is highly variable, with some processes (e.g. nutrient cycling and dung removal) being relatively better studied than others (e.g. predation and parasitism), tentative general insights from recent research include the following: (i) the severity and direction of fragmentation effects are influenced by the individual species involved, the environment and other contributory factors (e.g. surrounding matrix habitat quality); (ii) while processes heavily influenced by larger species are likely to respond negatively to fragmentation, others influenced by a wider range of biotic and abiotic factors are less predictable; (iii) trophic cascades may result in the impacts on one trophic level affecting other parts of the ecosystem; and (iv) the impacts of fragmentation are often exacerbated by synergistic effects such as interactions with the matrix and increased hunting pressures within fragments. Understanding the nature of ecosystem functioning and how functioning becomes disrupted with habitat conversion by combining spatial network models and long-term experimental studies will allow us to predict the eventual trajectories of ecosystems and determine possible remedial actions to preserve healthy functioning ecosystems.
Tropical forests are being cleared at an accelerating rate, despite being one of the most important habitats for global biodiversity. Many remaining tropical forest tracts are now highly degraded and fragmented, which presents a major problem for sensitive and threatened forest-dwelling species that depend on this habitat for survival. In this study, we assessed the impacts of forest fragmentation, and its associated edge-effects, on tree species diversity, tree size, and structural diversity within the transitional forests of north west Madagascar. Using data collected from 9,619 trees within 200 vegetation plots, we calculated species diversity indices, a range of dendrometry measurements, and Shannon-Weaver diversity indices of structure, which we compared among core and edge areas of a continuous forest and a fragmented forest. We found that species diversity, tree size, and structural diversity was significantly reduced in fragmented forest, and within forest edge areas in comparison to core, continuous forest. We also observed species diversity and structural diversity to be strongly influenced by the total size, core area size, and shape of forest fragments. Whilst we found fragmentation and edge-effects to individually impact tree species diversity, size and structural diversity, fragmentation and edge-effects are strongly correlated and affect natural forest synergistically. Our results provide evidence that forest fragmentation seriously degrades habitat quality and integrity of transitional forests, which is of great concern for the threatened species that inhabit them. Urgent conservation efforts are needed to halt ongoing forest fragmentation throughout the tropics, and reforestation and restoration efforts are required to reconnect isolated forest patches and to reduce forest edge area. © 2023, The Author(s).
Land-use change is fragmenting natural ecosystems, with major consequences for biodiversity. This paper reviews fragmentation trends - historical and current - in China, the fourth largest country on Earth, and explores its consequences. Remote sensing makes it possible to track land-use change at a global scale and monitor fragmentation of dwindling natural landscapes. Yet few studies have linked fragmentation mapped remotely with impacts on biodiversity within human-modified landscapes. Recent reforestation programs have caused substantial increases in forest cover but have not stopped fragmentation, because the new forests are mostly monocultures that further fragment China's remnant old-growth lowland forests that harbour the highest levels of biodiversity. Fragmentation - and associated biodiversity declines - is unevenly distributed in China's forests, being most problematic where agricultural expansion is occurring in the southwest and northeast, serious in the densely populated eastern regions where urbanisation and transport infrastructure are modifying landscapes, but less of a problem in other regions. Analyses of temporal trends show that the drivers of forest fragmentation are shifting from mainly agricultural expansion to urbanisation and infrastructure development. Most of China's old-growth forests persist in small, isolated fragments from which many native species have disappeared, on land unsuitable for human utilisation. Fragmentation throughout China is likely to have major consequences on biodiversity conservation, but few studies have considered these large-scale processes at the national level. Our review fills this research gap and puts forward a systematic perspective relevant to China and beyond.
The forest in the Central Argentine Chaco has been dramatically fragmented and persists only as isolated patches in an agricultural matrix. In this study, we evaluated the effects of fragmentation on total density, recruitment, and size-class structure of its dominant tree species, a key issue, although little explored, for forest conservation in the region. We particularly analyzed the effects of fragment size and forest cover at landscape level on seven of the most important tree species of the forest. Our results suggest that forest cover at landscape level is more important than fragment size to explain the population patterns of the main tree species. Fragment size was relevant in only one species, Cordia americana, whereas forest cover resulted relevant in five species. The size-class structure of Schinopsis balansae, one of the dominant species of the upper stratum, appeared to be affected in landscapes with less forest cover, showing lower densities of the smaller classes. Our results show that for the conservation of the forest it would be important to increase their protection degree against the expansion of agriculture, attempting to preserve as much of the forest as possible, to promote the forest cover at landscape level and give relevance even to the smallest fragments.
Sustainable forest management (SFM) is here considered as all practices to produce a continuous flow of desired forest goods and services without undue reduction in the forest’s inherent values and future productivity and without undue undesirable effects on the physical and social environment (according to ITTO (2006) Status of Tropical Forest Management 2005). SFM has often been regarded as a means for the salvation of the still declining tropical forests. In this chapter, I investigate under which circumstances the expectation of SFM being an option to preserve tropical forests may be true. This question is addressed in three parts, mainly based on the existing literature, but partly also through simulations. The topics addressed are: (I) the characteristics of SFM for tropical natural forests, (II) the characteristics of planted forests in the tropics, and (III) SFM embedded in a land-use model together with agricultural land-use options. The results for part I show that SFM of natural forests would basically lead to decreasing timber yield, moderately reduced carbon stocks, and only marginally disturbed biodiversity. The economic performance of SFM is relatively low and inferior compared to the economic performance of planted forests and agricultural alternatives. The planted forests, investigated in part II, promise high profitability, even in the case of some native tree species. However, simulations by means of an economically driven land-use model show that planted forests would expand their area into natural forests, if afforestation is not directed to abandoned lands and if natural forests are not preserved by means of conservation payments transferred to land users. These results lead to part III, where SFM in natural forests and afforestation of abandoned lands are considered as parts of a more comprehensive land-use portfolio, in this case designed for the example of Ecuador, considering croplands and pastures as agricultural options. The composition of the land-use portfolio is controlled by the economic yield and risk of the land-use options considered. SFM of natural forests generates little economic yield for the land users; however, because of the vast area under consideration, the necessary conservation transfers to land users may greatly be reduced if the management of natural forests is considered. The afforestation of abandoned lands also increases the profitability of the resulting land-use portfolio and sequesters additional carbon on top of that. However, the recultivation of part of the abandoned lands back to pasture turned out to be a very important option as well. It helps in producing enough food, which, and in turn, secures moderate food prices. Moderate food prices have the advantage being responsible for moderate conservation payments to compensate for the opportunity costs of the preservation of natural forests. As a result, strategies to produce enough food without additional CO2 emissions can be designed at a minimal conservation costs. The analyses show that SFM and afforestation can complement agricultural land-use portfolios. This is also shown in more detail based on a farm-level consideration. It is concluded that SFM in natural forests and planted forests is a valuable option to increase the efficiency of sustainable land-use portfolios. It is, ultimately, of utmost importance to embed these forestry options in comprehensive land-use models to avoid undue undesirable effects, which could potentially be caused by indirect land-use change. © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016.
In many tropical regions, national forests plantation programs have been promoted. Those plantations frequently contribute to habitat changes. However, the associated effects of forest plantations on habitat fragmentation and landscape connectivity are unclear. From 2008 to 2018, we examined land use changes, plantations, and deforestation of the Manabi province (Ecuador) provided by the Ecuadorian Ministry of the Environment. Four scenarios were created: (i) land uses in 2008, (ii) land uses in 2018, (iii) land uses in 2018 without deforestation, and iv) land uses in 2018 including reforestation. Fragmentation and connectivity metrics were analyzed using ArcGisPro and Graphad 2.6 software, respectively. Puma yagouaroundi was selected as the reference species. At regional scale, forest plantations had a significant effect on land uses changes and fragmentation during the study period. Forests decreased from 33.7% to 32.4% between 2008 and 2018, although other natural land uses, mostly those involving shrubs, increased by almost double (from 2.4% to 4.6%). Most of the deforestation affected native forests during this period, and most reforested areas in 2018 covered former agricultural land. Fragmentation decreased in the number of patches and increased in the average patch size. When considering reforestation, deforestation was higher than the reforested area (58 km(2) of difference), increasing the number of patches but with smaller size. Reforestation increased connectivity with a higher number of links and distance, particularly in central and extreme northeast areas of Manabi province. The scenario without deforestation also increased connectivity for Puma yagouaroundi in the west part of the Manabi province. Our findings suggest that forest plantations contribute to forest conservation by increasing the connectivity between fragmented patches.
In the tropical Andes, many montane forests have been destroyed, often through human-induced fires. To facilitate the recovery of these forests, it is important to understand the processes that drive secondary succession at deforested sites, yet studies are rare. Two important filters potentially causing a delay in the recovery of tropical forests are decreasing seed rain with distance to forest edge (seed dispersal limitation) and harsher environmental conditions at deforested sites. Moreover, successional pathways along elevation gradients can differ, yet the factors driving elevation differences are poorly understood. In the Bolivian Andes, we compared soil properties, microclimate and light availability at deforested sites with conditions in the adjacent forests and sampled woody secondary vegetation near (at 20. m distance) and away (at 80. m) from the forest edge at eight sites that had been deforested by fires ranging from 1950. m to 2500. m asl. We tested the effects of distance to forest edge and elevation on environmental conditions and on basal area, density, species richness and species composition of forest and non-forest species. Environmental conditions differed between forest interiors and deforested areas in most of the measured parameters. Woody secondary vegetation comprised more non-forest (80%) than forest species (20%), indicating that montane forest recovery was strongly hampered. Unexpectedly, basal area and species richness of both forest and non-forest species were higher away than near the forest edge. Density increased with increasing elevation in both forest and non-forest species, while species richness increased with increasing elevation only in forest species. Species composition did not change with distance to forest edge, but changed significantly with elevation. Our findings reject the hypothesis of a strong effect of seed dispersal limitation on forest recovery, but provide evidence that harsh environmental conditions, i.e., hot and dry microclimates and frequent fires, inhibit forest recovery at deforested sites. With increasing elevation, forest recovery increased, probably due to milder environmental conditions at high elevations and a different species source pool. We conclude that abiotic and biotic changes with elevation are crucial for understanding capabilities of forest recovery in mountain ecosystems and highlight that forest recovery may be further reduced in the future if maximum temperatures are going to increase in the tropical Andes. From a management perspective, we propose Myrsine coriacea, the most abundant forest species at deforested sites, to be a suitable species for montane forest restoration, due to its ability for long-distance dispersal and resprouting after fire. © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
Aim: Evaluate how large-scale forest regeneration based on a low-cost restoration method may mitigate the effects of habitat loss and fragmentation associated to future climate changes on the distribution of birds and arboreal mammals in a tropical biodiversity hotspot; find areas with different current and future potential species richness and assess how passive restoration can reduce the risk of species extinction. Location: Brazilian Atlantic Forest (BAF). Methods: We built a forest regeneration scenario via a model of seed dispersal based on the potential movement of frugivorous fauna and projected the potential distribution of 356 bird species and 21 arboreal mammals based on Species Distribution Models (SDM) which employed 79,462 occurrence records and four algorithms for different climate and landscape scenarios. SDM were based on climate and landscape predictors separately and the results were combined into maps of species richness. Finally, we assessed the species’ risk of extinction based on the species–area relationship. Results: Without considering the effects of climate change, the potential distribution area for each species increases on average by 72.5% (SD = 8%) in the scenario of potential regeneration. Climate change decreases the area of potential occurrence of 252 species, which may suffer a mean reduction of 74.4% (SD = 9.3%) in their current potential distribution areas. BAF regions with the largest amounts of forest had the greatest potential richness of species. In future climate scenario, 3.4% of species may become extinct, but we show that large-scale regeneration may prevent these extinctions. Main conclusions: Despite the possible negative impacts of climate change on the distribution of 67% of the studied species, which would increase the risk of species extinction, our analysis indicated that promoting large-scale BAF restoration based on natural regeneration may prevent biodiversity loss. © 2022 The Authors. Diversity and Distributions published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Forest transition theory bases its predictions of forest recovery in temperate regions primarily on macro-economic factors. In tropical countries, it is important to understand additional complex processes underlying forest recovery. Forest rehabilitation - meaning efforts to restore tree cover - is an important contributor to forest recovery in many tropical regions. Forest rehabilitation itself is subject to multiple factors that influence its scale, effectiveness and outcomes. This paper reviews forest rehabilitation in six countries - Brazil, China, Indonesia, Peru, Philippines and Vietnam. The cases reviewed suggest that globally, forest rehabilitation efforts can be understood in four time periods, or eras, each with distinct approaches to forest rehabilitation and outcomes. Various factors that influence forest rehabilitation outcomes evolved during these eras. Current outcomes of forest rehabilitation can only be adequately predicted if the historical processes influencing forest rehabilitation are understood. The paper suggests that forest transition in the tropics needs to be analyzed not only in terms of macro-economic factors, but also in terms of the factors that influence forest rehabilitation outcomes as well as other processes that affect forest cover increase. © 2009 by The Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation.
Forests serve as a dwelling place and source of livelihood for the people of Indonesia. This paper analyzed the forest resources and forestry in Indonesia. The forest area in Indonesia amounts to 137,090,468.18 ha consisting of 133,694,685.18 ha as terrestrial forest area and 3,395,783 ha as water area. Hard work by the Ministry of Forestry has succeeded in suppressing the average rate of forest degradation. For the purpose of enlarging the log production from natural production forest through the silvicultural system of TPTI (Indonesian Planting and Selection Cutting), an Intensive Silvicultural System has been introduced at 25 forest concessions with the total area of about 52,300 ha. On the other hand, owing to its geographical position in the Equator region between the Asian and Australian continents, Indonesian tropical forest possesses high biodiversity. Finally, to guarantee the local community’s active participation in the sustainable forest management practice, the government has empowered the local communities that live within and surrounding the forest area through various programs, such as establishing community forest, village forest, conservation forest, production center of non-wood forest products, community-based forest management and an improvement program with forest concession companies. The government also introduced the General Service Agency for financial support for communities that want to establish a forest plantation. © Ministry of National Education of Indonesia/Kementerian Pendidikan Nasional Republik Indonesia 2011.
The Global Forest Resources Assessment 2015 shows that deforestation has slowed and afforestation has increased globally during 1990-2015. Planted forests have increasingly provided goods and services hitherto derived from natural forests, and mosaic forests in agricultural landscapes are increasing. Forest gain is occurring at higher latitudes and in richer countries whilst forest loss continues in poor countries in the tropics. Some middle income tropical countries are now also transitioning to forest gain. These transition countries are characterised by reforms to forest management and improvements in agricultural practices but also by significant expansions of planted forest, which account for ~25-100% of gains. Forest-area estimates of the FRA align with satellite-derived estimates, with deviations of ≤±7% globally and ≤±17% for the tropics. Mosaics comprised of trees outside forests, remnant forest patches, and young regenerating forests constitute a modest proportion of the tropical forest estate and are seemingly well inventoried by the FRA. Extensive areas of forest experienced partial canopy cover reduction since 2000, particularly in the tropics where their area is ~6.5 times that deforested since 1990. The likelihood of the eventual loss of these forests and a decline in their capacity to provide goods and services is a matter of concern. Demand for industrial wood and fuelwood increased 35% in the tropics since 1990, principally in poorer countries, and growth in demand will accelerate into the future, particularly in the Asia-Pacific region. Notwithstanding significant increases in forests within protected areas since 1990 to 517. Mha (16.3%) globally and 379. Mha (26.6%) in the tropics, increasing demands for ecological services, forest products, and climate change mitigation is likely to be met from an expanding area of planted forests more than from the declining area of natural forests, particularly in Africa. The global rate of planted-forest expansion since 1990 is close to a target rate of 2.4% per annum necessary to replace wood supplied from natural forests in the medium term, though the expansion rate has declined to 1.5% since 2005. Multiple-use forests permitting both production and conservation account for 26% of the global forest area and 17% of the tropical forest area, and have increased by 81.8. Mha or 8.5% globally since 1990, with most gains in the tropics. Sustainable forest management in low-income and tropical countries remains modest, with only 37% low-income country forests covered by forest inventories. International support has proven effective at increasing this coverage since 2010. © 2015.
Techniques for forest restoration have been widely developed over the past decades, allowing the reestablishment of vegetation in extreme cases such as surface mining. However, there are still issues related to management and monitoring that require further understanding, especially concerning comparisons with reference ecosystems. In this study, hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC) with uncertainty estimation is proposed as a methodology for forest restoration assessment. For this purpose, analysis was made of phytosociological variables for 27 plots located in reforested closed mines and in the Amazon forest reference ecosystem. The technique grouped the reference ecosystem separately from the reclamation sites. The HAC was affected by dependency among the analyzed variables, and heterogeneity was observed for all the phytosociological parameters in the cluster groups formed by the mining locations. However, each group showed specific characteristics related to the different environmental conditions and the forest restoration performance. The results demonstrated that HAC with uncertainty estimation was more suitable for defining groups, compared to the classical approach, offering a promising methodology for evaluation of the outcomes of forest restoration and for guiding management actions in disturbed tropical forests. © 2017 Elsevier B.V.
Deforestation for the development of agricultural land is a critical driver of biodiversity loss. We examined the relationships between tree species and environments after the abandonment of a plot of land at the Mae Klong Watershed Research Station, Western Thailand. Vegetation monitoring was conducted every two years on a 16-ha permanent plot established in 2011 until 2019. All trees with diameter at breast height (DBH)≤1 cm were measured. Canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) was performed to investigate the relationships between tree species and environments. We found a total of 199 tree species in the plot, which comprised both pioneer and climax species. The high tree density and low basal area were 1,280 stem/ha and 7.30 m2/ha, respectively. During 2011-2019, the species richness and total tree density were decreased by nine species (from 206 to 197 species) and 83 stem/ha (from 1,120 to 1,037 stem/ha). In contrast, the total basal area increased from 6.41 to 7.26 stem/ha. According to the measured environmental variables, mixed deciduous species such as Pterocarpus macrocarpus and Xylia xylocarpa var. kerrii preferred higher elevations and drier sites compared to dry evergreen species such as Dipterocarpus alatus. Early colonizing species such as Trema orientalis and Ficus species exhibited rapid population decreases, whereas climax species such as Lagerstroemia tomentosa exhibited highly successful regeneration under natural conditions. Artificial reforestation efforts may be required in areas with large disturbance, including the planting of mixed tree species to promote natural regeneration and reduce the recovery period. © 2023, Faculty of Environment and Resource Studies,Mahidol University. All rights reserved.
A positive biodiversity - aboveground biomass relationship is often attributed to the niche complementarity hypothesis. This hypothesis has received much less support when based on functional trait diversity and when tested in complex natural forests. Here, we hypothesized that niche complementarity (high trait diversity) in the understorey and niche overlap (low trait diversity) in the overstorey would drive whole-community aboveground biomass. To test this hypothesis, we used multiple linear regression models to evaluate how functional trait diversity (functional richness, evenness, divergence and dispersion) of overstorey, understorey, and whole community determine aboveground biomass across 125 plots in a 5-ha subtropical forest of Eastern China. A structural equation model was used to evaluate whether the functional trait diversity of overstorey affects the relationships between understorey functional trait diversity and whole-community aboveground biomass while considering for the effect of environmental factors. We additionally considered the effects of mass ratio (i.e. community-weighted mean of trait values) and stand structural complexity. The strong negative effect of overstorey functional evenness on aboveground biomass provides support to the functional dominance and/or niche overlap rather than niche complementarity effect. The negative effect of overstorey functional evenness on aboveground biomass was also partially mediated by its direct negative effect on understorey functional evenness. The weak positive effect of understorey functional evenness on aboveground biomass provides support to the niche complementarity effect. We conclude that functional evenness of overstorey and understorey strata affect whole-community aboveground biomass differently through opposing mechanisms, regardless of the effects of mass ratio and stand structural complexity.
Astiani D, Mujiman, Rafiastanto A. 2017. Forest type diversity on carbon stocks: Cases of recent land cover conditions of tropical lowland, swamp, and peatland forests in West Kalimantan, Indonesia. Biodiversitas 18: 137-144. Tropical forests constitute for a large concentrated carbon pools, ultimately in tropical peatland forest since this forest type sink carbon both in the vegetation and its underlying peat. However, these forests recently experienced a lot of pressures from anthropogenic disturbances. A study was conducted to estimate carbon stocks of degraded tropical lowland, swamp, and peatland forests in Kayong Utara West Kalimantan. Above ground survey was conducted using stratified sampling based on the differences in spectra of Landsat 7 ETM+ according to the land cover gradation or vegetation formations. The study area was classified based on the canopy closures and forest/landcover types and grouped into low and high degraded lowland forest, low and high degraded peat forest, low and high degraded swamp forest, shrub land, and mixed agricultural land. Aboveground carbon stocks in each group was estimated by purposively assessing all carbon sources within 5-11 plots of 20 m x 100 m area. Belowground carbon was also measured on peatland. Results show that among the groups, the highest to the lowest order of aboveground carbon sink consecutively were low degraded swamp, low degraded lowland, low degraded peatland, high degraded swamp, high degraded peatland, high degraded lowland forests, mixed agricultural land, and shrub land (269.1 to 46.3 ton C/ha) plus other biomass sources recruited from belowground roots. It is demonstrated that forest degradation and land cover changes reduce amount of above ground carbon stocks and thus could result large amount of carbon loss from forests. Surprisingly, our results demonstrated that 0.5-5.2 m belowground carbon in peatland contribute to large amount of carbon Each meter depth of those fibrist to hemist peat sinked ~634 ton C/ha. It is estimated that the 22,600 ha area of overall forest types/ land covers sink ~2.5 million of aboveground and ~5,570 ha peatland area hold ~9.2 million of below ground carbon. This amount of carbon is potential sink of carbon yet could be a huge losses if peatland forest and land cover changes continued. © 2017, Society for Indonesian Biodiversity. All rights reserved.
Protected forest areas of Sulawesi are gradually being replaced by intensively used agroforestry systems and farmland, especially in lowland and sub-montane regions. Studies on the impact of these man-induced changes on biodiversity are of urgent conservation concern. We compared the fruit-feeding butterfly assemblage of a natural hill forest to that of a disturbed hill forest, representing a mosaic of old secondary forest and recently abandoned or active subsistence farms. Overall, species richness seemed highest in the disturbed site, but both abundance and diversity of endemic butterflies were significantly higher in the natural forest. Although the butterfly assemblage showed a clear vertical structure in the natural forest, vertical stratification was no longer pronounced at the disturbed site. Comparative studies based on diversity estimates from ground samples should consider not only the scale at which sampling is carried out and influences from nearby habitat patches in the surrounding landscape mosaic, but also possible behavioural changes in stratified species after forest modification. This study shows that higher overall species richness does not imply higher species distinctiveness, and indicates that the contribution of land-use systems to global biodiversity should be evaluated with caution, even when relatively high species richness estimates are found.
This special issue is divided into three sections. The first sets the scene and provides a background to policy: forestry and nature conservation - changing perspectives; measurement, monitoring and conservation of biodiversity in managed tropical forest; and the economics of forestry and conservation. The second section reviews policy development: wildlife conservation - concerns and policy development in India; conserving New Zealand's forests - evolution and revolution; evolution of conservation policies and their impact on forest policy development. The final section looks at policy implementation: FAO's programme on forest genetic resources; conservation of forest wild animals and forest protected areas; FAO assistance in the field of legislation; IUCN and forest conservation; forestry and conservation - the World Bank's experience; forestry and conservation in South Africa in the context of the changing policy framework; Mamiraua - a case study of biodiversity conservation involving local people; and forestry and nature conservation in Australia. Twelve papers are individually abstracted in Geographical Abstracts: Human Geography and International Development Abstracts. -S.R.Harris
This paper investigates the potential contribution of forestry management in meeting a CO2 stabilization policy of 550 ppmv by 2100. In order to assess the optimal response of the carbon market to forest sequestration, we couple two global models. An energy-economy-climate model for the study of climate policies is linked with a detailed forestry model through an iterative procedure to provide the optimal abatement strategy. Results show that forestry is a determinant abatement option and could lead to significantly lower policy costs if included. Linking forestry management to the carbon market has the potential to alleviate the policy burden of 50 ppmv or equivalently of frac(1, 4) {ring operator} C, and to significantly decrease the price of carbon. Biological sequestration will mostly come from avoided deforestation in tropical-forest-rich countries. The inclusion of this mitigation option is demonstrated to crowd out some of the traditional abatement in the energy sector and to lessen induced technological change in clean technologies. © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Understanding the patterns and processes driving biodiversity maintenance in fragmented tropical forests is urgently needed for conservation planning, especially in species-rich forest reserves. Of particular concern are the effects that habitat modifications at the landscape scale may have on forest regeneration and ecosystem functioning: a topic that has received limited attention. Here, we assessed the effects of landscape structure (i.e., forest cover, open area matrices, forest fragmentation, and mean inter-patch isolation distance) on understory plant assemblages in the Los Tuxtlas Biosphere Reserve, Mexico. Previous studies suggest that the demographic burst of the strong competitor palm Astrocaryum mexicanum in the core area of this reserve limits plant recruitment and imperils biodiversity conservation within this protected area. Yet, the local and landscape predictors of this palm, and its impact on tree recruitment at a regional scale are unknown. Thus, we used structural equation modeling to assess the direct and cascading effects of landscape structure on stem and species density in the understory of 20 forest sites distributed across this biodiversity hotspot. Indirect paths included the effect of landscape structure on tree basal area (a proxy of local disturbance), and the effects of these variables on A. mexicanum. Density of A. mexicanum mainly increased with decreasing both fragmentation and open areas in the matrix (matrix contrast, hereafter), and such an increase in palm density negatively affected stem and species density in the understory. The negative direct effect of matrix contrast on stem density was overridden by the indirect positive effects (i.e., through negative cascading effects on A. mexicanum), resulting in a weak effect of matrix contrast on stem density. These findings suggest that dispersal limitation and negative edge effects in more fragmented landscapes dominated by open areas prevent the proliferation of this palm species, enhancing the diversity and abundance of understory trees. This “positive” news adds to an increasing line of evidence suggesting that fragmentation may have some positive effects on biodiversity, in this case by preventing the proliferation of species that can jeopardize biodiversity conservation within tropical reserves. © 2018 by the Ecological Society of America
Aim: Forest fragmentation is among the principal causes of global biodiversity loss, yet how it affects mutualistic interactions between plants and animals at large spatial scale is poorly understood. In particular, tropical forest regeneration depends on animal-mediated seed dispersal, but the seed-dispersing animals face rapid decline due to forest fragmentation and defaunation. Here, we assess how fragmentation influences the pairwise interactions between 407 seed disperser and 1,424 tree species in a highly fragmented biodiversity hotspot. Location: Atlantic Forest, South America. Methods: We predicted interaction networks in 912 sites covering the entire biome by combining verified interaction data with co-occurrence probabilities obtained from a spatially explicit joint species distribution model. We identified keystone seed dispersers by computing a species-specific keystone index and by selecting those species belonging to the top 5% quantile. Results: We show that forest fragmentation affects seed dispersal interactions negatively, and the decreased area of functionally connected forest, rather than increased edge effects, is the main driver behind the loss of interactions. Both the seed disperser availability for the local tree communities and in particular the proportion of interactions provided by keystone seed dispersers decline with increasing degree of fragmentation. Importantly, just 21 keystone species provided >40% of all interactions. The numbers of interactions provided by keystone and non-keystone species, however, were equally negatively affected by fragmentation, suggesting that seed dispersal interactions may not be rewired under strong fragmentation effects. Conclusions: We highlight the importance of understanding the fragmentation-induced compositional shifts in seed disperser communities as they may lead to lagged and multiplicative effects on tree communities. Our results illustrate the utility of model-based prediction of interaction networks as well as model-based identification of keystone species as a tool for prioritizing conservation efforts. Similar modelling approaches could be applied to other threatened ecosystems and interaction types globally. © 2019 The Authors. Diversity and Distributions published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Brazil's rate of deforestation has declined by more than 70% since 2004, a dynamic unimaginable even a decade ago. Even the worst drought in more than 100 years (2010) produced a flat clearing profile from 2009-2010, an unexpected result, since dry periods usually have clearing spikes. While deforestation continues throughout the tropics (and Amazonia), and the recent change in Brazil's Forest Code has produced a modest increase in deforestation, there are significant processes that are slowing clearing and fostering woodland recovery. This paper outlines the multiplicities and interdisciplinarities of political ecologies, policies, politics scientific approaches and technologies that have moderated forest conversion and shaped Amazonia's unusual, and unusually effective development and conservation conjunctures in Brazil's post-authoritarian period. New institutional framings, ideologies, political decentralization, globalizations and an expanded arena for new social movements and civil society provided the context for this transformation. Changing environmental institutions, discourses and the relatively redistributive social pact that underpinned President Ignacio (Lula) da Silva's administration had a significant role in promoting more resilient land uses, monitoring, compliance and new markets, while regional social movements and national and international commodity boycotts affected more damaging ones. Finally, other forms of payment for environmental services, such as REDD (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation) and REDD+ are changing the value of standing forests. This paper describes how complex interdisciplinarities shaped the politics, policies and practices that slowed forest clearing. However, Amazonia's politics are extremely dynamic: destabilizing processes, violence and indifferent national leadership could still reverse this remarkable turnaround.
Forests are important in mitigating climate change and addressing biodiversity loss. In Poland, where forest cover has steadily increased since World War II, afforestation of agricultural land has emerged as a key strategy supported by both EU and national policies. This study evaluates the implementation of Poland’s afforestation programs under the Rural Development Programme (RDP) for the periods of 2007–2013 and 2014–2020 using data provided by the Agency for Restructuring and Modernisation of Agriculture (ARMA) and focusing on the financial incentives offered to private landowners and regional variations in their uptake. Results show that afforestation under the RDP aligned with the EU climate neutrality goals, with a total of 37,721 hectares afforested and PLN 243.5 million handed as financial support, predominantly (81%) over the first studied period. The largest afforestation efforts were observed in the Mazowieckie and Warmińsko-Mazurskie voivodeships, with Warszawa, Poland’s capital, achieving the highest municipal afforestation area across both periods. Financial considerations influenced farmer participation, but rising land prices and historical land use patterns were contributing factors. Urban afforestation and increasing demand for woody biomass further highlight the benefits of afforestation. However, conifer-dominated stands, prevalent on low-quality land, can present challenges to ecosystem stability under future climate scenarios, necessitating diversification towards deciduous species. Additionally, low uptake during the 2014–2020 period showcases the need for improved incentives to bolster participation. Still, afforestation presents significant economic and environmental opportunities, advancing long-term policy objectives while addressing critical challenges in climate. © 2025 by the authors.
Worldwide, tropical landscapes are increasingly dominated by human land use systems and natural forest cover is decreasing rapidly. We studied frugivorous butterflies and several vegetation parameters in 24 sampling stations distributed over near-primary forest (NF), secondary forest (SF), agroforestry and annual culture sites in the Northeastern part of the Korup region, SW Cameroon. As in other studies, both butterfly species richness and abundance were significantly affected by habitat modification. Butterfly richness and abundance were highest in SF and agroforestry sites and significantly lower in NF and annual crop sites. Butterfly species richness increased significantly with increasing tree density, but seemed to decrease with increasing herb diversity and density in annual crop farms. A significant negative correlation was found between butterfly geographic range and their preference for NF sites. Our results also showed that agroforestry systems, containing remnants of natural forest, can help to sustain high site richness, but appear to have low complementarity through loss of endemic species confined to more undisturbed habitats. Our study also indicated that the abundance of selected restricted-range butterflies, particularly in the family Nymphalidae, appears to be a good indicator to assess and monitor forest disturbance. © Springer 2006.
The process of domestication of tree crops has only been given limited attention. This process starts with the protection of natural forests and ends with the cultivation of domesticated tree crops. In this evolutionary process three types of human-influenced forest environments may be distinguished: (a) conserved forests, (b) modified forests, (c) transformed forests. During the process of domestication an increasing input of human energy per unit of exploited forest takes place. Accordingly three phases in the domestication of forests may be distinguished: (a) an acculturalization phase in which social measures aimed at controlling the utilization of valuable tree species or patches of forests are implemented, (b) a phase of manipulation of wild tree species in which the socially-oriented management practices are enhanced with measures aimed at enhancing the (re)productive potential of valued species, (c) a phase of cultivation of genetically modified tree crops. As a result of the co-domestication of forests and trees various types of forests and/or tree cultivation systems can be distinguished. So far more attention has been given to understanding the characteristics of the early and end phases than to the various intermediate phases represented by indigenous forest management and agroforestry systems. These are characterized by a modification of the highly diverse natural forest ecosystems to a state in which the biodiversity has been somewhat reduced, but in which a larger proportion of useful resources are present. Such systems provide interesting examples of the wide range of options for managing forest resources with varying degrees of biodiversity and productive values.
Overgrazing is the primary human-induced cause of soil degradation in the Caatinga biome, intensely threatening lands vulnerable to desertification. Grazing exclusion, a simple and cost-effective practice, could restore soils' ecological functions. However, comprehensive insights into the effects of overgrazing and grazing exclusion on Caatinga soils' multifunctionality are lacking. This study examines (i) how overgrazing impacts multiple soil indicators, functions, and overall soil health (SH) and (ii) whether natural early forest growth post-grazing exclusion enhances critical soil functions for ecosystem restoration. We compared preserved dense forests, long-term overgrazed pastures (over 30 years), and young fenced-off open forests (three years old) along a longitudinal transect in the Caatinga biome: 36°W (São Bento do Una), 37°W (Sertânia), and 40°W (Araripina). Soil samples from the 0–20 cm layer were analyzed for thirteen physical, chemical, and biological indicators for a structured SH assessment, calculating index scores based on soil functions. Forest-to-pasture transition and subsequent overgrazing consistently compacted the soils and decreased nitrogen, carbon (C), microbial biomass C, and glomalin protein, thus degrading the soil's physical, chemical, and biological functions. Regionally, this conversion depleted 14.7 Mg C ha−1 and reduced overall SH scores by 18%, severely impacting biological functions (e.g., −43% for sustaining biological activity). No significant differences in functions or SH were found between grazed pastures and open forests. SH scores and C stocks were highly interrelated (r > 0.5; p < 0.001), suggesting that C losses and SH deterioration were closely aligned. We conclude that overgrazing degrades soil multifunctionality and health across the Caatinga biome, with biological functions most severely damaged and legacies obstructing soil recovery for up to three years of grazing exclusion. Future SH studies should include open forest chronosequences with older ages and active restoration practices (e.g., planting trees or green manure) to enhance Caatinga's ecological restoration knowledge and efforts. © 2025 Elsevier Ltd
Non-timber forest products (NTFP) commercialisation usually modifies the livelihoods and economic strategies of forest people to make room for NTFP cultivation systems. This paper analyzes livelihood changes, new production techniques and future challenges of a case study in a South-eastern Mexican community where Chamaedorea palm cultivation is displacing wild harvesting. The results illustrate the fast adoption of palm plantations due to salient improvements in the economic return to effort. The change was led by richer households, although communal structures have allowed the middle income households to participate in the process. While palm producers do not tend to have beans and corn subsistence plots, landless poorer members have been left out of palm activities, basically remaining as subsistence farmers. (C) 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Frugivorous primates can play a critical role in the regeneration of degraded habitats by dispersing seeds of their food plants. We studied the diet and seed dispersal patterns of 3 groups of habituated red-ruffed lemurs (Varecia rubra) in a rain forest restoration site in Masoala National Park, Madagascar, to assess the species' seed dispersal effectiveness. Fruits accounted for 61% of the diet, with an average foraging time of 10 min per fruit patch per day. Seeds from 75% of the consumed fruit species were recovered in the collected V. rubra feces. We traced the potential parent plants of 20 dispersed- seed species to calculate a gut passage range (63-423 min; mean = 225, n = 35). The median seed dispersal distance from the potential parent plant was 48 m (mean = 83 m, range 0-568 m, n = 194). The home ranges of 2 of the 3 groups overlapped with the regenerating forest parcels. Although 92% of fecal samples with seeds were dispersed into the undisturbed forest, V. rubra fed on the fruits of the non-native pioneer shrub Clidemia hirta, while also dispersing native and non-native seed species into the regenerating forest parcels. © 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.
More than a quarter of the world’s tropical forests are exploited for timber1. Logging impacts biodiversity in these ecosystems, primarily through the creation of forest roads that facilitate hunting for wildlife over extensive areas. Forest management certification schemes such as the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) are expected to mitigate impacts on biodiversity, but so far very little is known about the effectiveness of FSC certification because of research design challenges, predominantly limited sample sizes2,3. Here we provide this evidence by using 1.3 million camera-trap photos of 55 mammal species in 14 logging concessions in western equatorial Africa. We observed higher mammal encounter rates in FSC-certified than in non-FSC logging concessions. The effect was most pronounced for species weighing more than 10 kg and for species of high conservation priority such as the critically endangered forest elephant and western lowland gorilla. Across the whole mammal community, non-FSC concessions contained proportionally more rodents and other small species than did FSC-certified concessions. The first priority for species protection should be to maintain unlogged forests with effective law enforcement, but for logged forests our findings provide convincing data that FSC-certified forest management is less damaging to the mammal community than is non-FSC forest management. This study provides strong evidence that FSC-certified forest management or equivalently stringent requirements and controlling mechanisms should become the norm for timber extraction to avoid half-empty forests dominated by rodents and other small species. © The Author(s) 2024.
Local communities who live close to protected tropical forests often depend on them for woodfuel, their main source of energy. The impacts of fuelwood extraction in humid forests are rarely studied, yet the extraction of wood for fuel can impact forest structure, function and biodiversity. We assessed the effects of fuelwood collection on the forest of Mt Elgon National Park (Uganda). We interviewed 192 households about fuelwood use and surveyed dead wood in 81 plots inside the park. Forest was the most important source of fuelwood. People collected on average between 1.1 and 2.0m3 of fuelwood per capita per year. Other activities involving wood fuel extraction from the forest included illegal commercial fuelwood harvesting and charcoal making. Quantities of dead wood were affected by fuelwood collection up to at least 1000m inside the boundary of the park. Depletion of dead wood inside the park was greater in the sites where the population was most dense. Nevertheless, people who planted more trees on their own land perceived land outside the park to be important and valued old growth forest less as a source of fuelwood. Highly-preferred tree species were most depleted, particularly when they were also valued timber trees, such as Prunus africana, Popocarpus milianjianus, Allophylus abyssinicus and Olea spp. Locally dominant species were less affected. Impacts varied among sites depending on the history of agricultural encroachment and locally-specific forest uses, e.g. harvesting of trees for poles or use of the forest land for grazing. Allowing the collection of dead wood in forests is double-edged as it creates opportunities for other activities that are more damaging. Demand for wood fuel from tropical forests is still likely to grow in the foreseeable future. Our results indicate that the forest may become more degraded as a result, with negative consequences for the people who depend on the forest and for conservation. Research into local ecological and cultural contexts and perceptions concerning costs and benefits can help devise more sustainable management options, including alternative sources of fuel. © 2015 Elsevier B.V.
This article investigates possible consequences of climate change for a hotspot of tropical biodiversity, exemplified by a comparatively small area of a neotropical mountain rain forest in the eastern range of the South Ecuadorian Andes. In the introduction, several approaches for such predictions are evaluated with respect to their applicability to the eco-region. After a short presentation of the research area and its biodiversity, climate and vegetation development during the Holocene is described showing the range of possible fluctuations between Puna-like grassland and tropical mountain forest. Data of climate dynamics during the past 50 – 60 years, covering several ENSO (El Niño Southern Oscillation) events, suggest a significant increase in temperature but no dramatic changes in the precipitation regimes of the region. Due to the altitudinal span of the area, the rise in temperature will shift the ecothermic belts by several hundred meters uphill and thus increase the distribution ranges of ectothermic organisms. To assess the consequences of this shift on biodiversity two model approaches were applied, namely the species-area-approach and the energetic-equivalence rule, using the extremely diverse insect group of moths. Combining both approaches the consequences of a climate change Teja Tscharntke, Christoph Leuschner, Edzo Veldkamp, Heiko Faust, Edi Guhardja, Arifuddin Bidin (editors): Tropical rainforests and agroforests under global change: Ecological and socio-economic valuations. Springer Berlin 2010, pp 239–268 240 J. Bendix et al. can be estimated for the various scenarios of greenhouse gas emissions published by the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC 2007). Applying the most realistic scenario A1B a reduction of moth species by 31% until the year 2100 can be predicted for the RBSF area. Due to their greater life-span, woody plants are much more resilient to climate change, especially so in a megadiverse forest with usually small population sizes. Therefore impacts of global warming on the local vegetation can only be assessed on the basis of qualitative data of the forest structure rather than of the floristic composition. The most conspicuous trait of the tropical mountain rain forest in the region is the low elevation of the upper tree-line which on average is by 1000 to 1500 m lower than in the other parts of the tropical Andes. Due to the particular orographic situation, the extreme environmental conditions (quasipermanent easterly storms carrying a tremendous load of precipitation) do not allow growth of trees in the peak regions of the mountains. Only if the prevailing trade-wind system dampened and the mountain range received less precipitation, a change of the environmental conditions could be expected resulting in a situation like in the early and mid Holocene, when a forest covered the entire mountain range. However, up to present, symptoms for such a change are lacking. A final outlook comments on the priority ranking of climate change vs. direct anthropogenic impacts with respect to conservation measures. For the investigated tropical forest ecosystem a reduction of human impact is more urgent than ever. © 2010, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Research Highlights: Functional diversity studies help to better understand how organisms respond to different environmental conditions. Conditions in tropical flooded forests are highly variable, including levels of nutrient availability, pH, and flood depth, but few studies have explored the impact of variation in these factors on plant functional diversity. Background and Objectives: In the Orinoco basin, as in the Amazon, floodplain forests have been classified into várzea (white-water rivers, with nutrient-rich soils) and igapó (black-water rivers, associated with nutrient-poor soils). We evaluated the functional diversity of plant species in várzea and igapó, as well as the influence of external and internal filters on the plant community assembly of each forest type, and compared our results with studies in the Amazon basin. Materials and Methods: Six functional traits were recorded in the várzea and igapó forests of the Colombian Orinoco basin (one-hectare plot for each forest type, with no replicates). We evaluated plant species diversity (richness, Fisher’s α, Shannon and Simpson indices), as well as functional diversity (functional richness, functional evenness, functional divergence, and functional dispersion) and the influence of external and internal filters, based on a comparison of variance at different organizational levels. Results: A high functional differentiation between várzea and igapó was found, as well as a high functional divergence within each forest type. We also observed a greater influence of internal filters on the community assembly of both forest types, compared to external filters. Functional traits such as wood density and leaf dry matter content, showed the same patterns as the várzea and igapó forests in the Amazon. Conclusions: Despite the low taxonomic and functional richness, there is high functional divergence within flooded forests. We also show that in forests under stress (e.g., from flooding), internal filters can be key in assembling communities and promote high functional divergence. Given that the functional diversity of the várzea and igapó in the Orinoco is largely unexplored, we highlight the need for more research for the effective conservation of these flooded forests. © 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Understanding community assembly patterns with regard to functional traits, which may be common to different species, allows us to compare ecological communities in a wider range of environmental and phytogeographic conditions. Moreover, a functional approach may facilitate the comprehension of the relation between biotic changes and ecosystem functions in complex systems such as tropical forests. Considering the lack of information in relation to the influence of environmental conditions on lichen functional traits, on lichen functional patterns in tropical forests and the potential usage of this approach in bioindication studies, this paper aims at (i) determining the functional structure of the lichen communities along the forest succession gradient, (ii) assessing the relation of lichen functional traits to this gradient and (iii) verifying the potential of using lichen functional traits as indicators of successional stages in tropical rainforests. Lichens were sampled in 24 sampling units of three successional stages (6-10; 12-20; and 40-60 years of recovering). The results corroborated our main hypothesis that the functional structure of the lichen communities responds to structural changes along a forest regeneration gradient. Growth forms (foliose, fruticose and crustose) as well as some reproductive trait states (lirella, isidia and perithecia) were the most suitable lichen traits to be used as indicators of forest succession in the southern edge of the Atlantic Rainforest. Lirella, fruticose and foliose were more related to earlier successional stages; isidia was more related to intermediate stages, while perithecia and crustose were more related to older stages. These results reinforce the ability of lichens to be used as bioindicators of forest conditions. (c) 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Macromycetes are important for ecosystem functioning due to their role in the nutrient cycling, and their function as pathogens and mutualists. Diversity metrics based on functional traits are robust predictors of ecosystem functionality since they incorporate an evolutionary and ecologic background. We examined diversity patterns of macrofungi using functional trait-based metrics of diversity along an altitudinal gradient in a seasonally dry tropical forest in southern Mexico. Our findings show that: (1) functional diversity varies with elevation, relating more to climatic variables than to vegetation structure; (2) functional diversity indexes exhibited contrasting patterns, so measures reflecting heterogeneity on trait abundance and niche complementarity tend to increase with elevation, whereas the measure of trait evenness decreases; and (3) functional diversity patterns depend on the type of functional trait considered and how they respond to environmental conditions. Our results indicate that functional diversity analyses help understanding of how macrofungal communities respond to environmental variation. © 2017 Elsevier Ltd and British Mycological Society
The niche complementarity hypothesis has received empirical support but species differ in functional strategies for their contribution to ecosystem function, as predicted by the mass ratio hypothesis. Our understanding of how functional identity of conservative and acquisitive strategies of trees predicts aboveground biomass across forest strata (i.e. overstorey and understorey) remains unclear. Aboveground biomass, community-weighted mean (CWM - functional identity) of trait values (6 leaf and 2 stem traits), and soil physicochemical properties were estimated for 125 plots in a 5-ha subtropical forest in Eastern China. We used multiple linear regressions models to relate aboveground biomass to CWM indices at overstorey and understorey strata separately, and whole-community level. We finally employed the structural equation model to test for the effects of overstorey on understorey strata, in addition to the effects of soil physicochemical properties. Forest strata optimal models showed that overstorey strata had high aboveground biomass when they are dominated by functional identity of tree height, whereas high aboveground biomass in understorey strata was driven by functional identity of dense wooded conservative strategy. Whole-community optimal model showed that communities dominated by functional identity of leaf dry matter content and mean leaf area had high aboveground biomass. Aboveground biomass was negatively related to soil nutrients across forest strata and whole-community level. The structural equation model showed that CWM of overstorey tree height did not affect understorey functional identity and aboveground biomass, when soil physicochemical properties were accounted. Soil nutrients had positive effect on functional identity of overstorey tree height whereas negative effect on functional identity of understorey dense-wooded strategy. This study highlights the fundamental roles of forest strata where overstorey and understorey strata contribute to their corresponding aboveground biomass with contrasting functional strategies across a range of soil nutrients. High aboveground biomass was potentially driven by functional identity of tree height through making use of plentiful soil nutrients at overstorey strata, whereas by conservative strategy at understorey strata through enduring nutrient-poor soils. To better understand the roles of functional identity of conservative and acquisitive strategies in driving ecosystem functions, it is worth to analyse forest strata separately.
One-third of all Neotropical forests are secondary forests that regrow naturally after agricultural use through secondary succession. We need to understand better how and why succession varies across environmental gradients and broad geographic scales. Here, we analyze functional recovery using community data on seven plant characteristics (traits) of 1,016 forest plots from 30 chronosequence sites across the Neotropics. By analyzing communities in terms of their traits, we enhance understanding of the mechanisms of succession, assess ecosystem recovery, and use these insights to propose successful forest restoration strategies. Wet and dry forests diverged markedly for several traits that increase growth rate in wet forests but come at the expense of reduced drought tolerance, delay, or avoidance, which is important in seasonally dry forests. Dry and wet forests showed different successional pathways for several traits. In dry forests, species turnover is driven by drought tolerance traits that are important early in succession and in wet forests by shade tolerance traits that are important later in succession. In both forests, deciduous and compound-leaved trees decreased with forest age, probably because microclimatic conditions became less hot and dry. Our results suggest that climatic water availability drives functional recovery by influencing the start and trajectory of succession, resulting in a convergence of community trait values with forest age when vegetation cover builds up. Within plots, the range in functional trait values increased with age. Based on the observed successional trait changes, we indicate the consequences for carbon and nutrient cycling and propose an ecologically sound strategy to improve forest restoration success. © 2021 National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A main question in restoration of degraded forests and forest landscapes recovering from logging and fire is what to expect from natural regeneration through surviving propagules in the soil or seed sources and associated dispersal agents from the surrounding landscape mosaic, as alternative to tree planting. Tree diversity in sec-ondary forests may be high, but based on newcomer species of low wood density and long-distance, abiotic dispersal modes. We compiled and analyzed three pairs of case studies (totaling 815 plots and 11.8 ha) of sec-ondary forests recovering from logging, fire and conversion to agroforest in Sumatra and Kalimantan (Indonesia) on mineral soils. Data on tree species diversity, wood density frequency distribution (indicative of successional status) and dispersal modes were compared with those of less disturbed comparator forests in the same land-scapes. Relatively undisturbed lowland dipterocarp forest in Kalimantan had close to 200 species of trees (>10 cm diameter) at a 1-ha sample scale (and 450 at a 10-ha scale). After repeated fires a sample area of 2 ha was needed to reach the same species richness. Regulation-based logging had little impact on tree species richness. In rubber agroforest with low-intensity management beyond rubber planting, 50 tree species were found at a 1-ha scale and close to 100 species in 3 ha. The Kalimantan forest after repeated fires had a markedly higher fraction of low-wood-density trees (40%), but otherwise, all forests sampled were similar in overall wood density profiles. Selectively logged forest managed by a local community (village forest) and rubber agroforest in Sumatra con-tained larger fractions of heavy-wood-density trees. The majority of trees (50%-70%) had birds, bats and primates as dispersal agents in all sites. Selectively logged forests had higher fractions of autochorous species (15%) compared to other sites. Anemochorous (wind-dispersed) species, especially Macaranga lowii, were most common (20%) in lowland dipterocarp forest. Comparison between secondary forests and agroforests showed the influence of farmer selection regarding what is allowed to grow beyond the pole stage. Wood density and seed dispersal profiles can be used as degradation indicators of species assemblages across various disturbance levels and types, as they reflect the habitat quality of the surrounding landscape mosaics.
Mechanistic models of community assembly state that biotic and abiotic filters constrain species establishment through selection on their functional traits. Predicting this assembly process is hampered because few studies directly incorporate environmental measurements and scale up from species to community level and because the functional traits' significance is environment dependent. We analyzed community assembly by measuring structure, environmental conditions, and species traits of secondary forests in a species-rich tropical system. We found, as hypothesized, that community structure shaped the local environment and that strong relationships existed between this environment and the traits of the most successful species of the regeneration communities. Path and multivariate analyses showed that temperature and leaf traits that regulate it were the most important factors of community differentiation. Comparisons between the trait composition of the forest's regeneration, juvenile, and adult communities showed a consistent community assembly pattern. These results allowed us to identify the major functional traits and environmental factors involved in the assembly of dry-forest communities and demonstrate that environmental filtering is a predictable and fundamental process of community assembly, even in a complex system such as a tropical forest. © 2010 by the Ecological Society of America.
This study explores the role of gender as a factor in decision making about alternative land use options and in responses to new investment opportunities, which has received little attention to date. An observational study to determine the different factors affecting male and female decisions to change land use at the individual level in a forest margin landscape in Jambi (Sumatra, Indonesia) was combined with a set of role playing games (RPGs) designed to assess participant responses in a simulated social setting of women-only and men-only groups. The RPG included simulated agents offering new opportunities to convert or conserve agroforest. In the study area, rubber (Hevea braziliensis) agroforests that support high biodiversity and carbon storage are giving way to monoculture rubber and oil palm (Elaeis guineensis) plantations. When women from both the upland and lowland villages played the RPGs, external investors proposing logging or oil palm conversion were approached very positively and the resulting land use change was more dynamic and extensive than in the equivalent men-only groups. Consequently, women outperformed men in achieving income targets. In lowland areas gender is strongly associated with land use change, while in the uplands the level of conservation awareness plays a more crucial role in the maintenance of rubber agroforests. Based on the data, and contrary to expectations and gender stereotypes, it is expected that the greater involvement of women in landscape level decision making will increase emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in the area, posing further challenges to efforts to reduce such emissions. © 2013 The Author(s).
The commercial exploitation of non-timber forest products (NTFPs) has been widely promoted to achieve both conservation and economic outcomes in the management of tropical forests by local communities, but monitoring the impacts of NTFPs harvesting is still challenging. Monitoring genetic diversity is a promising approach to assess harvesting impacts and guide best practices. Here, we evaluated the value of community-managed agroforests and secondary forests for conserving genetic structure and diversity of Euterpe edulis, an endemic palm explored for fruit and palm heart production. We used SSR markers to compare genetic diversity in populations growing in protected areas, in agroforests and in second-growth forests managed for fruit production in the coastal Atlantic Forest of Brazil. In addition, we investigated the genetic diversity of seeds extracted during pulp removal, which have been used in E. edulis reintroduction programs. Overall, high levels of genetic diversity were observed for all populations (mean allelic richness = 7.06; mean expected heterozygosity = 0.787), with no significant differences in genetic diversity among agroforests, second-growth forests and protected areas. Managed forests and protected areas had low to intermediate levels of genetic differentiation (global Fixation Index = 0.085), indicating the existence of gene flow among them. Seeds extracted during fruit pulp removal had as high genetic variability as populations growing in protected areas, thus evidencing the potential of using these seeds to recover overexploited populations. Thus, community-management of NTFPs in agroforests and second-growth forests may support genetic conservation of this threatened species, complementing the conservation role of protected areas. © 2017 Elsevier B.V.
Tropical forests, housing about two-thirds of Earth’s terrestrial biodiversity, face significant deforestation and fragmentation, leading to the loss of over half their area. Conservation and restoration efforts are crucial, especially for regions like the Brazilian Atlantic Forest, which suffers with a reduction in biomass and species diversity. The Brazilian agroforest system, typical from the region of Southern Bahia called “cabruca”, are helping to mitigate these effects by combining cocoa cultivation with forest management, enhancing both socio-economic and environmental benefits. In a study focusing on Plathymenia reticulata, a tree species native to the Atlantic Forest, we evaluated the effectiveness of the cabruca agroforest system versus the natural forest for maintaining genetic diversity and landscape connectivity. Results showed that cabruca systems, while managed, exhibit a level of genetic diversity compared to natural forests. However, forest populations remain critical for their genetic reservoirs and adaptability. The cabrucas agroforest system also showed higher inbreeding levels, emphasizing the need for effective management to reduce inbreeding risks. © 2025 by the authors.
Boswellia papyrifera is used to produce frankincense, a bark resin that has been a commodity of domestic and international trade since ancient times. It is harvested from natural forests. The tropical dry forest (Terminalia-Combretum) woodland ecosystems in which B. papyrifera is one of the dominant species, are facing anthropogenic threats. In Ethiopia B. papyrifera populations have decreased tremendously to smaller and isolated remnant patches, and many forests in the North-western and North-eastern parts of Ethiopia completely lack recruitment of saplings. This regeneration bottleneck, in combination with adult mortality, threatens the persistence of the species. Devising an effective strategy to conserve wild genetic resources needs information on the genetic diversity and the pattern of genetic differentiation across the species area. In the present study we analysed adult trees sampled in twelve populations across the growing area of the species in Ethiopia for genetic diversity and spatial genetic differentiation using 10 polymorphic microsatellite loci. The mean level of observed and expected heterozygosity were 0.669 and 0.681 respectively, and these levels were similar for trees from larger populations and those from degraded populations. A moderate level of among populations genetic differentiation (FST=0.084) was detected. Genetic distance between populations was correlated with geographic distance (r=0.663, p<0.05). STRUCTURE analysis distinguished four distinct genetic clusters corresponding to regions with different environmental conditions. In the Western populations we detected recruitment of many seedlings and saplings, which is a significant novel finding as most of the other populations are completely devoid of saplings. We conclude that currently a high level of genetic variation is still maintained in B. papyrifera adult trees across the species' range in Ethiopia including the highly degraded remnant B. papyrifera population patches scattered on farm and pasture lands. An effective conservation strategy for the species has to take into account the geographic distribution of source populations. © 2015 Elsevier B.V.
Key message: Slash and burn practices affect tropical forests. Our results showed strong introgression between Inga ingoides and Inga edulis in the species contact area. Interspecific hybridization could be sought to improve yield and tolerance to flooding and further increase the economic potential of the poorly drained Amazonian soils and minimize deforestation. Context: Inga species are important components of tropical American forests, as well as a local food source. Little is known about the genetic structure of these species; in particular the amount of introgression among species remains unknown. Aims: We assessed the degree of genetic divergence and introgression among populations of I. ingoides (Rich.) Willd. and I. edulis Mart. (Fabaceae) from three Peruvian Amazon tributary rivers. Methods: Using microsatellite markers we determined the genetic structure of populations using an analysis of molecular variance and a Bayesian analysis of population structure in areas affected by seasonal river fluctuations and in ‘terra firme’ forests. Results: Overall genetic differentiation was weak. The degree of genetic variation was similar in the two species. A putatively strong introgression was detected between the two species and an intense gene flow was identified among populations. This indicates that an intense gene flow had happened in the past, leading also to a small differentiation among populations within species. Conclusion: Selection of natural hybrids or artificial hybridization between I. edulis and I. ingoides could be applied to improve legume size and yield in the later species, while maintaining tolerance to flooding. Improved I. ingoides could be used in multipurpose agroforestry on open areas along the rivers, instead of using the usual slash and burn practice to create inland open areas. © 2016, INRA and Springer-Verlag France.
Fragmentation of tropical forests is one of the major threats to biodiversity and viable natural populations. Brazilian seasonally dry tropical forests (SDTF) are endangered because of human occupation, conversion of lands to agriculture and high deforestation rates in these fertile soils. Enterolobium contortisiliquum has been removed from SDTF natural areas due to the advance of cattle grazing and agriculture in Brazilian SDTFs. To aid conservation efforts of this species we used molecular markers to study the genetic diversity and population structure of E. contortisiliquum in Brazilian SDTF remnants. A total of 263 individuals in 13 forest patches were analyzed with 103 ISSR fragments. In spite of being found scattered among the SDTF patches, E. contortisiliquum populations exhibited high genetic diversity (mean Shannon's index of diversity=0.384; mean genetic diversity=0.280) and genetic divergence between populations was detected (ΦST=0.155, p<0.0001). UPGMA dendrogram, principal coordinate analysis and Bayesian analysis showed that E. contortisiliquum populations were clustered into three groups that were not related to geographic distance (r=0.119, p=0.197). However, these populations are spatially structured into groups distributed in the West, Central and East of the study area. This genetic structure may be related with landscape and both the Espinhaço Range and São Francisco River may act as a partial geographic barrier limiting the gene flow. Because the highest rates of genetic diversity were found outside of conservation units, we propose the creation of protected areas in different geographic regions that include E. contortisiliquum populations from different genetic clusters. © 2014 Elsevier GmbH.
Background: The impact of logging and restoration on species diversity has been well studied in tropical forests. However, little is known about their effects on genetic diversity within species.     Aims: We assess the degree of genetic diversity among dipterocarp seedlings used for enrichment planting of selectively logged forests in Sabah, Malaysia, and compare it with diversity in naturally regenerating seedlings. Methods: We sampled young leaf tissues from seedlings of Shorea leprosula and Parashorea malaanonan for DNA genotyping, using microsatellite markers.     Results: The levels of genetic diversity (expected heterozygosity and rarefied allelic richness) of naturally regenerating seedlings were statistically indistinguishable among unlogged, once logged and repeatedly logged forest areas. Enrichment-planted seedlings of P. malaanonan exhibited similar levels of genetic diversity to naturally regenerating seedlings whereas those of S. leprosula had significantly lower genetic diversity than natural seedlings. Interestingly, reduction of genetic variation was consistently observed in single-species plots relative to mixed-species plots among enrichment-planted seedlings.     Conclusions: There was no reduction of genetic variation in naturally regenerating dipterocarp seedlings in areas of selective logging. However, genetic variation of enrichment-planted seedlings was lower in single-species plots relative to mixed-species plots. This suggests that enrichment-planting strategies should adopt diverse mixtures that should promote levels of both species richness and genetic diversity within species.
The impact of fragmentation by human activities on genetic diversity of forest trees is an important concern in forest conservation, especially in tropical forests. Dysoxylum malabaricum (white cedar) is an economically important tree species, endemic to the Western Ghats, India, one of the world's eight most important biodiversity hotspots. As D. malabaricum is under pressure of disturbance and fragmentation together with overharvesting, conservation efforts are required in this species. In this study, range-wide genetic structure of twelve D. malabaricum populations was evaluated to assess the impact of human activities on genetic diversity and infer the species' evolutionary history, using both nuclear and chloroplast (cp) DNA simple sequence repeats (SSR). As genetic diversity and population structure did not differ among seedling, juvenile and adult age classes, reproductive success among the old-growth trees and long distance seed dispersal by hornbills were suggested to contribute to maintain genetic diversity. The fixation index (FIS) was significantly correlated with latitude, with a higher level of inbreeding in the northern populations, possibly reflecting a more severe ecosystem disturbance in those populations. Both nuclear and cpSSRs revealed northern and southern genetic groups with some discordance of their distributions; however, they did not correlate with any of the two geographic gaps known as genetic barriers to animals. Approximate Bayesian computation-based inference from nuclear SSRs suggested that population divergence occurred before the last glacial maximum. Finally we discussed the implications of these results, in particular the presence of a clear pattern of historical genetic subdivision, on conservation policies. © 2013 The Authors.
Geomorphic landscape features have been suggested as indicators of forest diversity. However, their explanatory power has not yet been explicitly tested at a regional scale in tropical rainforest. We used forest inventories conducted according to a stratified sampling design (3,132 plots in 111 transects at 33 sites) and holistic multi-scale geomorphological mapping derived from a Shuttle Radar Topography Mission digital elevation model to describe and explain spatial patterns in floristic composition across French Guiana (80,000 km(2)). We measured and identified 123,906 trees with DBH a parts per thousand yen20 cm and used constrained and unconstrained ordinations to analyze variations in the abundance of 221 taxa and 51 families. Variance partitioning and variograms were used to detect spatial patterns in species composition, compare the explanatory power of spatial and environmental factors, and select the variables that best explain forest composition. Strong floristic patterns corresponded to a major latitudinal gradient and significant sub-regional floristic structure. Geomorphological landscapes shaped by historic climate fluctuations and major geological events successfully captured these patterns and explained the variation in abundance of 80 taxa, corresponding to 65 % of the inventoried trees. Our findings suggest that long-term forest dynamics are under substantial "geomorphographic control". A geomorphological perspective on landscapes that incorporates current and past environmental filters and historical biogeographical processes could thus be used more systematically in tropical regions for regional planning and forest conservation.
Germplasm is required to meet the needs of national and international forest restoration programs. Delimitation of germplasm movement zones is an effective tool to address problems of maladaptation of these materials but, in Mexico, the current delimitation of seed movement zones defines very heterogeneous areas while the availability of reliable information of the current distribution of species remains insufficient. This study expands and updates the information regarding the potential distribution of eight forest species: Brosimum alicastrum, Bursera simaruba, Cedrela odorata, Cordia alliodora, Cordia dodecandra, Ochroma pyramidale, Swietenia macrophylla, and Tabebuia rosea, and redefines the germplasm movement zones in seven states of southeastern Mexico, evaluating future changes in the climatic conditions for the time horizons of 2030 and 2060 by combining species distribution modeling techniques and delimitation of germplasm movement zones. Four of the eight predictive variables used in the model construction were determinant in the distribution of all eight species. The germplasm movement zones presented in the Mexican norms and those obtained in the present study differ. The zones of the existing standard are larger and each covers several of the climatic zones proposed in this study, producing seed movement in areas with greater climatic differences. The results suggest a tendency towards an increase in the Refheldt’s aridity index of 2.6 by the year 2060 and of 1.8 °C in the mean temperature of the coldest month, as well as a contraction in the potential distributions of seven of the eight species analyzed over the period 2021–2040. © 2023, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.
In most countries, the loss of biodiversity caused by the fires is worrying. In this sense, the fires detection towers are crucial for rapid identification of fire outbreaks and can also be used in environmental inspection, biodiversity monitoring, telecommunications mechanisms, telemetry and others. Currently the methodologies for allocating fire detection towers over large areas are numerous, complex and non-standardized by government supervisory agencies. Therefore, this study proposes and evaluates different methodologies to best location of points to install fire detection towers considering the topography, risk areas, conservation units and heat spots. Were used Geographic Information Systems (GIS) techniques and unaligned stratified systematic sampling for implementing and evaluating 9 methods for allocating fire detection towers. Among the methods evaluated, the C3 method was chosen, represented by 140 fire detection towers, with coverage of: a) 67% of the study area, b) 73.97% of the areas with high risk, c) 70.41% of the areas with very high risk, d) 70.42% of the conservation units and e) 84.95% of the heat spots in 2014. The proposed methodology can be adapted to areas of other countries. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Government and international agencies have highlighted the need to focus global change research efforts on tropical ecosystems. However, no recent comprehensive review exists synthesizing humid tropical forest responses across global change factors, including warming, decreased precipitation, carbon dioxide fertilization, nitrogen deposition, and land use/land cover changes. This paper assesses research across spatial and temporal scales for the tropics, including modeling, field, and controlled laboratory studies. The review aims to (1) provide a broad understanding of how a suite of global change factors are altering humid tropical forest ecosystem properties and biogeochemical processes; (2) assess spatial variability in responses to global change factors among humid tropical regions; (3) synthesize results from across humid tropical regions to identify emergent trends in ecosystem responses; (4) identify research and management priorities for the humid tropics in the context of global change. Ecosystem responses covered here include plant growth, carbon storage, nutrient cycling, biodiversity, and disturbance regime shifts. The review demonstrates overall negative effects of global change on all ecosystem properties, with the greatest uncertainty and variability in nutrient cycling responses. Generally, all global change factors reviewed, except for carbon dioxide fertilization, demonstrate great potential to trigger positive feedbacks to global warming via greenhouse gas emissions and biogeophysical changes that cause regional warming. This assessment demonstrates that effects of decreased rainfall and deforestation on tropical forests are relatively well understood, whereas the potential effects of warming, carbon dioxide fertilization, nitrogen deposition, and plant species invasions require more cross-site, mechanistic research to predict tropical forest responses at regional and global scales. ©2016. American Geophysical Union. All Rights Reserved.
The Terai ecoregion of the Himalayan foothills is among the most fire-affected ecosystems in the Indian sub-continent. Although most of the Terai has already been lost to agriculture and urbanization, the few remaining native habitats are strictly protected due to their high biodiversity and ecological importance. The use of fires to maintain vegetation and wildlife habitat in these protected areas is an integral part of forest management. Although fires are initiated by forest managers or local people, their eventual spread and behaviour are not controlled. We hypothesize that distributions of fires are determined by several direct and indirect drivers like fuel load, fuel moisture content, presence of natural or artificial fire breaks, and climatic attributes of precipitation and temperature. Using the moderate-resolution (375m) satellite sensor-based data we studied the environmental influence on the spatial-temporal patterns of fire events over 18 years (2000-2018) in a 519 km2 protected area in northeastern India. The park has a mosaic of vegetation formations – including dry and swampy alluvial grassland, early successional woodland, and moist tropical forest. Despite high rainfall, there is an intense dry season that renders the herbaceous vegetation susceptible to fires. Using spatial and spatial-temporal Poisson regression models in a rigorous conditional autoregressive Bayesian framework, we found that net primary productivity (a proxy of vegetation type and fuel load), distance to roads (a measure of human influence), elevation (through its influence on floods and vegetation type), and river area extent (by determining the area under vegetation) had a significant influence on the spatial distributions of fires. The climatic signal on interannual variation in fires was weak, but dry season rainfall reduced fire incidence. The disproportionate distribution of fires adjacent to roads compared to the interior, and the repeated burning of some grassland patches need to be addressed in fire management. © 2021
The impact of grazing on C fluxes from pastures in subtropical and tropical regions and on the environment is uncertain, although these systems account for a substantial portion of global C storage. We investigated how cattle grazing influences net ecosystem CO2 and CH4 exchange in subtropical pastures using the eddy covariance technique. Measurements were made over several wet-dry seasonal cycles in a grazed pasture, and in an adjacent pasture during the first three years of grazer exclusion. Grazing increased soil wetness but did not affect soil temperature. By removing aboveground biomass, grazing decreased ecosystem respiration (Reco) and gross primary productivity (GPP). As the decrease in Reco was larger than the reduction in GPP, grazing consistently increased the net CO2 sink strength of subtropical pastures (55, 219 and 187 more C/m2 in 2013, 2014, and 2015). Enteric ruminant fermentation and increased soil wetness due to grazers, increased total net ecosystem CH4 emissions in grazed relative to ungrazed pasture (27-80%). Unlike temperate, arid, and semiarid pastures, where differences in CH4 emissions between grazed and ungrazed pastures are mainly driven by enteric ruminant fermentation, our results showed that the effect of grazing on soil CH4 emissions can be greater than CH4 produced by cattle. Thus, our results suggest that the interactions between grazers and soil hydrology affecting soil CH4 emissions play an important role in determining the environmental impacts of this management practice in a subtropical pasture. Although grazing increased total net ecosystem CH4 emissions and removed aboveground biomass, it increased the net storage of C and decreased the global warming potential associated with C fluxes of pasture by increasing its net CO2 sink strength. © 2017 by the Ecological Society of America.
Questions: In many arid and semi-arid regions of the world, livestock husbandry is the main land use and grazing is one of the main challenges for biodiversity conservation. This also applies to the Caatinga, a unique seasonally dry tropical forest in northeastern Brazil. It is considered one of the most threatened ecosystems of Brazil. To protect semi-arid regions from biodiversity loss, degradation, and desertification, sustainable management practices are urgently needed. However, the effect of different grazing intensities on plant diversity is not yet fully understood. In this study, we examined the effect of different grazing intensities on plant species composition, alpha and beta diversity. Location: Vicinity of the Itaparica Reservoir, northeastern Brazil. Methods: We assessed the effects of different grazing intensities (high, intermediate, no/low) on species composition, alpha and beta diversity of the tree and shrub, and the herb layer in a Caatinga area. Plant diversity of the tree and shrub layer was assessed on 45 study plots (each 20 m × 20 m), while the diversity of herbs was studied on a subset of 36 plots (four subplots, each 2 m × 2 m). Results: In total, we recorded 140 plant taxa including morphospecies. Grazing at high intensities significantly reduced almost all measures of alpha and beta diversity (tree and shrub layer) compared to areas with no or low grazing. In contrast, species composition was not significantly related to grazing but instead to altitude, which serves as an indicator of reduced anthropogenic impact such as slash-and-burn agriculture or tree harvesting. Conclusion: Overall, the study results show that the current livestock management has negative effects on plant diversity in Caatinga ecosystems. These results have been incorporated into guidelines provided to regional stakeholders including recommendations for adapted land-management practices that protect and foster the biodiversity of dry forests while sustaining local livelihoods. © 2019 International Association for Vegetation Science
Tree plantations and forest restoration are leading strategies for enhancing terrestrial carbon (C) sequestration and mitigating climate change. While it is well established that species-rich natural forests offer superior C sequestering benefits relative to short-rotation commercial monoculture plantations, differences in rates of C capture and storage between longer-lived plantations (commercial or non-commercial) and natural forests remain unclear. Using a natural experiment in the Western Ghats of India, where late-20th century conservation laws prohibited timber extraction from monodominant plantations and natural forests within nature reserves, we assessed forests and plantations for aboveground C storage and the magnitude and temporal stability of rates of photosynthetic C capture (gross primary production). Specifically, we tested the hypothesis that species-rich forests show greater temporal stability of C capture, and are more resistant to drought, than monodominant plantations. Carbon stocks in monodominant teak (Tectona grandis) and Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus spp.) plantations were 30%-50% lower than in natural evergreen forests, but differed little from moist-deciduous forests. Plantations had 4%-9% higher average C capture rates (estimated using the Enhanced Vegetation Index-EVI) than natural forests during wet seasons, but up to 29% lower C capture during dry seasons across the 2000-18 period. In both seasons, the rate of C capture by plantations was less stable across years, and decreased more during drought years (i.e. lower resistance to drought), compared to forests. Thus, even as certain monodominant plantations could match natural forests for C capture and storage potential, plantations are unlikely to match the stability-and hence reliability-of C capture exhibited by forests, particularly in the face of increasing droughts and other climatic perturbations. Promoting natural forest regeneration and/or multi-species native tree plantations instead of plantation monocultures could therefore benefit climate change mitigation efforts, while offering valuable co-benefits for biodiversity conservation and other ecosystem services. © 2020 The Author(s). Published by IOP Publishing Ltd.
Tree monocultures constitute an increasing fraction of the global tree cover and are the dominant tree-growing strategy of forest landscape restoration commitments. Their advantages to produce timber are well known, but their value for biodiversity is highly controversial and context dependent. Therefore, understanding whether, and in which conditions, they can harbor native species regeneration is crucial. Here, we conducted meta-analyses based on a global survey of the literature and on a database created with local, unpublished studies throughout Brazil to evaluate the regeneration potential of native species under tree monocultures and the way management influences this regeneration. Native woody species regeneration under tree monocultures harbors a substantial fraction of the diversity (on average 40% and 68% in the global and Brazilian surveys, respectively) and abundance (on average 25% and 60% in the global and Brazilian surveys, respectively) of regeneration observed in natural forests. Plantations with longer rotation lengths, composed of native tree species, and located adjacent to forest remnants harbor more species. Pine plantations harbor more native individuals than eucalypt plantations, and the abundance of regenerating trees is higher in sites with higher mean temperatures. Species-area curves revealed that the number of woody species under pine and eucalypt plantations in Brazil is 606 and 598 species, respectively, over an aggregated sampled area of ca. 12 ha. We highlight that the understory of tree monocultures can harbor a considerable diversity of regenerating native species at the landscape and regional scales, but this diversity strongly depends on management. Long-rotation length and favorable location are key factors for woody regeneration success under tropical tree monocultures. Therefore, tree monocultures can play a role in forest landscape restoration and conservation, but only if they are planned and managed for achieving this purpose.     In this study, we assessed the woody natural regeneration under tree monocultures reported in studies conducted in the tropical region. We found out that native tree monocultures, tree plantations adjacent to forest remnants, and longer rotation lengths harbor more species, while the abundance of regenerating trees is higher in sites with higher mean temperatures. According to our results, tree monocultures can play a role in forest landscape restoration and conservation, but only if they are planned and managed for achieving this purpose.image
Deforestation of tropical forests has been a critical issue affecting climate change mitigation and biodiversity conservation. Reforestation strives to remedy this situation, yet it is futile as long as deforestation of primary forests continues. Since deforestation is partly motivated by the demand for valuable tropical wood, reforestation should focus not only on planting native tree species, but specifically on a high diversity of native tree species with high-quality wood. However, the eco-physiological information required for growing such species is limited, and their resilience to drought events is unknown. Here, we focused on four native tropical wood tree species identified as suitable for Brazil’s Atlantic Forest reforestation. Growth, carbon assimilation, water-use and xylem hydraulics were studied in seedlings of the two legume species Dalbergia nigra and Plathymenia foliolosa and the two non-legume species Cariniana legalis and Zeyheria tuberculosa. Seedlings were monitored weekly for 9 consecutive weeks, three to five weeks of which under induced drought. Growth and carbon assimilation were 25–65 per cent higher in the legume vs. non-legume species. In turn, non-legume species mostly avoided the drought by stomatal closure, producing a 50 per cent higher water-use efficiency (WUE) compared with the legume species. The average water potential at 50 per cent stomatal conductivity (Ψgs50) for legume species was −2.6 MPa, whereas for non-legume species it was −0.85 MPa. Still, each species showed a unique set of responses, indicating different growth strategies under mesic and xeric conditions. Our results indicate a divergence among legume and non-legume species, driven by a trade-off between plant productivity (carbon assimilation and growth) and plant safety (stomatal regulation and WUE). All in all, the four species of juvenile potted plants demonstrated a high capacity for recovery from drought, which supports their potential role in future reforestation under climate change. © 2023 Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
Tropical forests, crucial for climate regulation and biodiversity, face challenges due to deforestation and climate change. Tectona grandis, a species valued for its wood, is studied to assess its growth response to local and global climatic conditions in the Peruvian Amazon. Dendrochronological methods were used to analyze the growth rings of T. grandis at two study sites, considering variables such as precipitation and temperature. The results show that, although no significant relationship with local climate was found, the growth of T. grandis is influenced by sea surface temperature anomalies in the Pacific and Atlantic oceans. Specific correlation patterns were identified, suggesting that global climatic factors affect its development. The presence of false rings, influenced by environmental variations, highlights the complexity of interpreting growth data. This study contributes to the understanding of the growth dynamics of T. grandis and its potential for reforestation in tropical contexts, highlighting the importance of sustainable forest management that integrates global climatic factors.
This work aims to evaluate alternative models in forest restorations by means of agroforestry systems, where a leguminous species is incorporated to the system. The hypothesis is that guandu bean Cajanus cajan (L.) Millsp., in combination and intercropped with native species, can promote restoration by decreasing mortality and increasing tree basal area and height. Cajanus cajan was planted in line with the forest seedlings in 2 x 4 m spacing. Four different treatments were analyzed; 1) control, with no Cajanus cajan 2) one seedling of Cajanus cajan between the forest seedlings in the plantation line; 3) two seedlings of Cajanus cajan between the forest seedlings in the plantation line; and 4) full harvest Cajanus cajan six months after plot implementation. In each treatment, 100 native trees (Fifty pioneer, and fifty non pioneer trees) were measured and evaluated in mortality rates, height, and basal diameter. Guandu planting reduced pioneer mortality, increased basal area, and tree height of all species. In spite of the mortality was not affected by guandu density, the density of one plant of guandu was associated with larger basal area and tree average height. The mortality reduction of non pioneers on the absence of guandu trees was interpreted as a response of antropic pioneers to the increased solar radiation. This result points to the differences in tree behavior between fertile gaps (on which the classification on sucessional stages was based) and degraded areas. The positive effects of guandu planting recommend its use for the ecological restoration cost reduction.
Plant habitat associations are well documented in Bornean lowland tropical forests, but few studies contrast the prevalence of associations across sites. We examined habitat associations and community composition of Dipterocarpaceae trees in two contrasting Bornean lowland mixed dipterocarp forests separated by approximately 100 similar to km: Andulau (uniform topography, lower altitudinal range, sandy soils) and Belalong (highly dissected topography, higher altitudinal range, clay-rich soils). Dipterocarpaceae trees =similar to 1 similar to cm diameter at breast height (dbh) were censused in 20-m wide belt transects established along topographic gradients at each site. Dipterocarp density, evenness, species richness, and diversity were significantly higher at Andulau than Belalong. Significant site associations (with either Andulau or Belalong) were detected for 19 (52%) of the 37 dipterocarp species tested. Dipterocarpaceae community composition at Belalong correlated with soil nutrient concentrations as well as measures of vegetation and topographic structure, but community composition at Andulau correlated with fewer habitat variables. Within each site, dipterocarp density, species richness, and diversity were consistently higher on ridges than in slopes and valleys. Significant within-site associations to topographic habitats were less common at Andulau (10% of species tested) than at Belalong (15%). We conclude that edaphic and other environmental factors influence dipterocarp community composition at a local scale, and are more important drivers of community structure in the more variable environment at Belalong. Species richness and diversity of dipterocarps on small plots, however, were higher at Andulau, suggesting that factors other than environmental heterogeneity contribute to contrasts in dipterocarp tree species richness at small scales.
Changes in moonlight intensity can affect predation risk and induce changes in habitat use and activity of nocturnal species. However, the effect of moonlight on animal activity is rarely evaluated in human-modified landscapes and can be of vital importance to understand possible changes in ecosystem services provided by light-sensitive taxa, such as insectivorous bats. Fragmentation changes forest structure and affects light penetration across the landscape. In this case, the effects of fragmentation on bat activity can be modulated by cyclical variations of moonlight intensity. We acoustically quantified the activity of nine aerial insectivorous bat species in relation to moonlight at the Biological Dynamics of Forest Fragments Project, Central Amazonia. We aimed to understand species-level variation in activity across habitats (continuous forest, fragments and secondary forest) at different temporal scales: lunar cycle, dark vs. bright nights and within nights. Amazonian aerial insectivorous bats responded more to habitat type than to moonlight, with two and six species showing reduced activity in fragments and secondary forest, respectively, compared to continuous forest. The lower activity in secondary forest suggests that despite c. 30 years of secondary forest regeneration, it is still less attractive as foraging habitat. An interactive effect of habitat type and moonlight on bat activity was most evident when contrasting dark and bright nights. Our results indicate that fragments have reduced bat activity on extremely bright nights, probably due to higher predation risk in small fragments. Species that emit constant-frequency calls (Pteronotus spp.) were the ones that most modulated their responses to habitat disturbance and moonlight. Otherwise, moonlight had little effect on hourly activity levels, irrespective of habitat type. Moonlight is capable of modulating the responses of some bat species in disturbed habitats, particularly in fragments. © 2021 The Zoological Society of London
Conservation programs need improved tools to measure the recovery of animal diversity across restoration gradients. We used soundscapes and expert identifications of bird species to calculate niche position (i.e., mean of environmental conditions across all areas a species occupies) and niche breadth (i.e., the standard deviation of the species distribution) along a recovery gradient; from agriculture to early (up to 20 yrs) and late (up to 38 yrs) recovery, to old-growth forests. Our survey included 323 bird species and was conducted in 66 plots in the lowland Chocoan tropical rainforest in Ecuador where less than 11% of the forest remains intact, and large areas are currently undergoing regeneration post-abandonment. First, we validated our niche metrics by contrasting them against independent global categories of forest density dependency. We then explained the niche metrics of the bird species with different ecological traits, gathered from the literature, reflecting species-specific primary diet, morphology and distribution, and accounting for the phylogenetic relatedness of species. Finally, we explored the phylogenetic signal present in bird species’ ecological traits and recovery niche metrics. Niche position and breadth across the recovery gradient closely followed global categories of forest density dependency. However, our approach provided a more fine-scaled sorting of bird species in forest plots categorized as late recovery and old-growth. Granivorous birds occupied niche positions in active cacao and pasture plots and were replaced by frugivorous birds in older regeneration plots. Along the recovery gradient, tail length and handwing index decreased with niche position, supporting previous observations that birds in old-growth forests are less mobile. Birds in old-growth forests had smaller global distribution ranges than birds in agricultural plots. Finally, the latitudinal distribution of birds in the study area averaged south of the equator, with birds in old-growth plots averaging latitudinal centroids in wet forests north of the equator, whereas birds in agriculture plots averaged latitudinal centroids further south of the country, towards the dry and open Tumbesian forest. Frugivores, invertivores and vertivores had broader niche breadths, but these decreased (marginally) with tail length. We suggest these recovery niche metrics as a potentially powerful tool for the rapid assessment of the recovery process, which might support conservation strategies such as biodiversity credits, compensation payments, and strategic land purchases. With the increasing availability of information-intensive models for bird species identification, such as deep learning artificial intelligence, our new niche metrics open the avenue for rapid assessment of tropical biodiversity and new conservation areas at larger scales. © 2024 The Author(s)
Tropical forests are experiencing an increase in the proportion of secondary forests as a result of the balance between the widespread harvesting of old-growth forests and the regeneration in abandoned areas. The impacts of such a process on biodiversity are poorly known and intensely debated. Recent reviews and multi-taxa studies indicate that species replacement in wildlife assemblages is a consistent pattern, sometimes stronger than changes in diversity, with a replacement from habitat generalists to old-growth specialists being commonly observed during tropical forest regeneration. However, the ecological drivers of such compositional changes are rarely investigated, despite its importance in assessing the conservation value of secondary forests, and to support and guide management techniques for restoration. By sampling 28 sites in a continuous Atlantic forest area in Southeastern Brazil, we assessed how important aspects of habitat structure and food resources for wildlife change across successional stages, and point out hypotheses on the implications of these changes for wildlife recovery. Old-growth areas presented a more complex structure at ground level (deeper leaf litter, and higher woody debris volume) and higher fruit availability from an understorey palm, whereas vegetation connectivity, ground-dwelling arthropod biomass, and total fruit availability were higher in earlier successional stages. From these results we hypothetize that generalist species adapted to fast population growth in resource-rich environments should proliferate and dominate earlier successional stages, while species with higher competitive ability in resource-limited environments, or those that depend on resources such as palm fruits, on higher complexity at the ground level, or on open space for flying, should dominate older-growth forests. Since the identification of the drivers of wildlife recovery is crucial for restoration strategies, it is important that future work test and further develop the proposed hypotheses. We also found structural and functional differences between old-growth forests and secondary forests with more than 80. years of regeneration, suggesting that restoration strategies may be crucial to recover structural and functional aspects expected to be important for wildlife in much altered ecosystems, such as the Brazilian Atlantic forest. © 2012 Elsevier B.V..
Despite the importance of considering arthropods in monitoring programs and conservation planning given their diversity in terrestrial ecosystems and potential in revealing environmental disturbances, most studies on the effects of habitat disturbances in tropical forests focused on vertebrates, plants and a few arthropod groups. By sampling 16 sites evenly distributed in four habitat categories (continuous mature and secondary forest and large and small secondary forest fragments), we investigated how harvestmen (Opiliones), which represent the third largest order of arachnids and have been poorly studied in tropical forests, are affected by habitat quality and quantity. Richness and abundance of rare species were strongly affected by habitat quality.(first axis of principal component analysis on forest structure), increasing in less disturbed/mature forests. Richness, total abundance, abundance of rare species and of one of the three common species were higher in continuous forest, while only total abundance differed between large and small fragments. Detrended correspondence analysis revealed that just one species increased in abundance in fragments, while several others were associated with continuous and/or mature forest and that harvestman composition did not vary between large and small fragments. Our results suggest that harvestmen (1) are strongly affected by habitat quality and quantity, probably because, compared to other arthropod groups, they are relatively uniform in some relevant biological aspects (nocturnal predators dependent on microclimatic conditions that present low vagility); (2) are probably more indicative of intermediate-level disturbances, given the absence of species associated with highly-disturbed areas.     (C) 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Tropical forests are becoming increasingly alien-dominated through the establishment of timber plantations and secondary forests. Despite widespread recognition that afforestation results in increased evapotranspiration and lower catchment yields, little is known of the impacts of timber plantations on water balance relative to native forest. Native forest trees have been claimed to use water conservatively and enhance groundwater recharge relative to faster-growing alien species, and this argument should motivate native forest preservation and restoration. However, data have been available primarily for leaf-level gas exchange rather than for whole-plant and stand levels. We measured sap flow of dominant tree and tree fern species over eight weeks in native Metrosideros polymorpha forest and adjacent alien timber plantations on the island of Hawai'i and estimated total stand transpiration. Metrosideros polymorpha had the lowest values of sap flux density and whole-tree water use (200 kgm-2 sapwood·d-1, or 8 kg/d for trees of 35 cm mean diameter at breast height, D), substantially less than timber species Eucalyptus saligna or Fraxinus uhdei (33 and 34 kg/d for trees of 73 and 30 cm mean D, respectively). At the stand level, E. saligna and F. uhdei trees had three- and ninefold higher water use, respectively, than native M. polymorpha trees. Understory Cibotium tree ferns were most abundant in M. polymorpha-dominated forest where they accounted for 70% of water use. Overall, F. uhdei plantation had the highest water use at 1.8 mm/d, more than twice that of either E. saligna plantation or M. polymorpha forest. Forest water use was influenced by species composition, stem density, tree size, sapwood allocation, and understory contributions. Transpiration varied strongly among forest types even within the same wet tropical climate, and in this case, native forest had strikingly conservative water use. Comparisons of vegetation cover in water use should provide additional resolution to ecosystem valuation and land management decisions. © 2009 by the Ecological Society of America.
Dry tropical vegetation is under major pressure of degradation due to various anthropogenic interferences and is characterized by the patches of forest, savanna and grassland systems. These adjacent systems may represent a gradient of various ecological attributes which can be better understood by studying these in a continuum approach to recognise changes at grassroots level. The herbaceous vegetation, a dynamic layer of an ecosystem, acts as an indicator of the environmental changes. The present study is designed to assess the herbaceous plant diversity and soil attributes along the dry deciduous forest-savanna-grassland continuum. A total of nine sites equally distributed in forest, savanna and grassland systems of Vindhyan region were selected. Soil moisture, water holding capacity, carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and species richness, evenness, diversity and plant biomass were measured at each site. The results showed significant changes in soil attributes and herbaceous species composition, diversity and biomass along the continuum. Forest exhibited higher soil moisture, carbon and nitrogen contents than the savanna and grassland, while the herbaceous species diversity and biomass were higher in grassland vegetation. Savanna revealed intermediate levels of soil water availability, soil nutrients, community composition and species diversity of the herbs. The results showed that the herbaceous diversity was maximum in the grassland followed by savanna and forest. Moreover, a change in community composition and plant functional attributes was also observed. Evolvulus nummularius-Justicia simplex, Justicia simplex-Evolvulus nummularius and Cynodon dactylon-Cyperus compressus communities characterised the forest, savanna and grassland vegetation, respectively. Fabaceae was the most dominant family having the highest number of species in grassland followed by savanna and forest vegetation. Correlation analysis revealed a significant interaction between soil water and nutrient availability with vegetation parameters. Overall, heterogeneity of soil attributes maintaining the community structure and species diversity are essential components for understanding the ecology of herbaceous vegetation in dry tropical ecosystems. The findings of this study may contribute to the holistic understanding and development of ecological management tools for such a continuum. © 2017 Elsevier B.V.
During domestication, the selection of cultivated plants often reduces microbiota diversity compared with their wild ancestors. Microbiota in compartments such as the phyllosphere or rhizosphere can promote fruit tree health, growth, and development. Cordia dodecandra is a deciduous tree used by Maya people for its fruit and wood, growing, to date, in remnant forest fragments and homegardens (traditional agroforestry systems) in Yucatdn. In this work, we evaluated the microbiota's alpha and beta diversity per compartment (phyllosphere and rhizosphere) and per population (forest and homegarden) in the Northeast and Southwest Yucatdn regions. Eight composite DNA samples (per compartment/population/region combination) were amplified for 16S-RNA (bacteria) and ITS1-2 (fungi) and sequenced by Illumina MiSeq. Bioinformatic analyses were performed with QIIME and phyloseq. For bacteria and fungi, from 107,947 and 128,786 assembled sequences, 618 and 1092 operating taxonomic units (OTUs) were assigned, respectively. The alpha diversity of bacteria and fungi was highly variable among samples and was similar among compartments and populations. A significant species turnover among populations and regions was observed in the rhizosphere. The core microbiota from the phyllosphere was similar among populations and regions. Forests and homegarden populations are reservoirs of the C. dodecandra phyllosphere core microbiome and significant rhizosphere biodiversity.
Background: About an eighth of the earth's land surface is in protected areas (hereafter "PAs''), most created during the 20(th) century. Natural landscapes are critical for species persistence and PAs can play a major role in conservation and in climate policy. Such contributions may be harder than expected to implement if new PAs are constrained to the same kinds of locations that PAs currently occupy.     Methodology/Principal Findings: Quantitatively extending the perception that PAs occupy "rock and ice'', we show that across 147 nations PA networks are biased towards places that are unlikely to face land conversion pressures even in the absence of protection. We test each country's PA network for bias in elevation, slope, distances to roads and cities, and suitability for agriculture. Further, within each country's set of PAs, we also ask if the level of protection is biased in these ways. We find that the significant majority of national PA networks are biased to higher elevations, steeper slopes and greater distances to roads and cities. Also, within a country, PAs with higher protection status are more biased than are the PAs with lower protection statuses.     Conclusions/Significance: In sum, PAs are biased towards where they can least prevent land conversion (even if they offer perfect protection). These globally comprehensive results extend findings from nation-level analyses. They imply that siting rules such as the Convention on Biological Diversity's 2010 Target [to protect 10% of all ecoregions] might raise PA impacts if applied at the country level. In light of the potential for global carbon-based payments for avoided deforestation or REDD, these results suggest that attention to threat could improve outcomes from the creation and management of PAs.
The United Nation’s Decade on Ecosystem Restoration 2021–2030 aims to halt ecosystem degradation to achieve Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030. In Malaysia, the concept of sustainable forest management (SFM) has been practiced since 1901. In this study, we evaluated the genetic diversity of the native dipterocarp timber tree Shorea acuminata in a rehabilitated area at Kenaboi Forest Reserve (Kenaboi FR). The rehabilitated area was formerly a degraded forest managed with the taungya restoration system for 50 years. All trees with diameter at breast height (DBH) of 5 cm and over were measured, tagged and identified in a one-hectare study plot. A total of 132 inner bark samples were collected for DNA extraction. Four SSR markers (Sle280, Sle392, Sle475 and Sle566) and two EST-SSR markers (SleE07 and SleE16) were used to analyse 95 good-quality DNA samples. Genetic diversity parameters including maternal contribution were determined for 75 samples. The genetic diversity of big trees (He = 0.656 ± 0.19) and small trees (He = 0.652 ± 0.17) were high and both were in genetic equilibrium, with Fis values of the big trees being 0.035 and small trees being 0.164. Clustering analysis based on Jaccard’s similarity values (at 95% confidence level) confirmed that big trees in the Kenaboi FR rehabilitated area had originated from genetically diverse seed trees of the Sungai Menyala Forest Reserve which were used as the planting stock for the taungya restoration system. Maternal contribution showed that the allele contribution of the small trees came from the planted S. acuminata trees within the study area. The high genetic diversity of small trees in this study provides strong evidence that the existing big trees would be suitable for a genetically diverse seed collection to rehabilitate other degraded forests. Sustainable forest management must emphasise genetic diversity in order to ensure the resilience of rehabilitated forest ecosystems. © 2021 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Because forest plantations cover an extensive area worldwide, they play an important role shaping current biodiversity conservation policies. This study evaluated plant species richness in the regenerating forest community beneath five 35-year-old homogeneous forest stands consisting of indigenous terra-firme species (Simarouba amara, Dipteryx odorata, Bagassa guianensis, Jacaranda copaia and Dinizia excelsa). These data were compared to adjacent primary forests in the Manaus region, Amazonas state, Brazil. These plantations are among the oldest native tree plantations of the Brazilian Amazon. All studied stands showed species richness near that of the primary forest, with the single exception being J. copaia. The relationship between species composition and the environmental variables was studied by canonical correspondence analysis (CCA). The CCA yielded correlations that were validated by a permutation test between species composition and canopy openness, nitrogen content, pH, base saturation and soil aluminum content. Our results showed that long standing homogenous plantation stands can provide high levels of density and species richness of the understory, comparable to those found in the surrounding primary forest. This finding reinforces the value of anthropogenic landscapes for conserving biodiversity. © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
Termites are very abundant in tropical ecosystems and have active roles in nutrient cycling and soil formation, but few studies of their assemblages have been undertaken in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. The present study analyzed the composition of termite assemblages in a fragment of Atlantic Forest embedded within an urban matrix in northeastern Brazil. Five standardized sampling protocols of termites were applied, with a total sampling effort of 1500m(2). We encountered 45 species of termites belonging to 25 genera and three families. The soil-feeders group demonstrated the greatest species richness, while wood-feeders species were the most abundant. The species richness of termite in the study area was the greatest yet recorded for an Atlantic forest site in Brazil, indicating the importance of urban fragments for conserving tropical biodiversity.
We studied the home range and habitat use of paca (Cuniculus paca) in a rural agricultural community in the Alto Beni region, in La Paz department, Bolivia, where game meat is the main source of protein for a large portion of local inhabitants. We captured and radio collared five individual paca (4 females and 1 male), which were followed for six months in 2012 to estimate home range of the individuals and assess their habitat use and selection. The total mean home range (95% Minimum Convex Polygon) was 2.26 ha (SD = 0.80), and ranged from 1.5 to 2.96 ha. The mean female home range (2.04 ha) was smaller than the male's (2.95 ha). Pacas used two (crops and fallows) of the three available habitats (secondary forest patches), and appeared to positively select crops over the other two. The importance of crops may be linked to the type of agriculture conducted in the area (i.e. mainly cacao in agroforestry systems), which may offer more food and shelter for pacas. Given that, the importance of habitats may change seasonally; this topic should be examined in future studies. Our results suggest that agroforestry systems may be important for the species since they offer a variety of food resources throughout the year.
This study evaluates anthropogenic and ecological dimensions of secondary forest succession in Mexico's southern Yucatan peninsular region, a hotspot of biodiversity and tropical deforestation. Secondary succession in particular constitutes an ecologically and economically important process, driven by and strongly influencing land management and local ecosystem structure and dynamics. As agents of local land management, smallholding farmers in communal, i.e., ejido lands affect rates of forest change, biodiversity, and sustainability within and beyond their land parcels. This research uses household surveys and land parcel mapping in two ejidos located along the buffer of the Calakmul Biosphere Reserve to analyze how household socioeconomics and policy institutions drive allocations to successional forests in traditional crop fallows and in enriched fallows. Results indicate that household tenancy, livestock holdings, labor-consumer ratios, and receipts of agricultural subsidies are the strongest determinants of traditional fallow areas. Whereas the latter two factors also influence enriched successions, local agroforestry and reforestation programs were the strongest drivers of fallow enrichment. Additionally, the study conducts field vegetation sampling in a nested design within traditional and enriched fallow sites to comparatively assess biodiversity consequences of fallow management. Although enriched fallows display greater species richness in 10x10 m plots and 2x2 m quadrats, plot-scale data reveal no significant differences in Shannon-Wiener or Simpson's diversity indices. Traditional fallows display greater species heterogeneity at the quadrat scale, however, indicating a complex relationship of diversity to fallow management over time. The article discusses the implications of the social and ecological analyses for land change research and conservation policies.
Background: Agroforestry systems have enhanced diversity of cultivated plants compared to monocultures, and are expected to affect associated biodiversity. Despite a growing body of literature on the importance of soil fauna, the known effects of different agroforestry types on soil fauna communities and functions have not yet been synthesized. Scope: We scanned publications on soil fauna in agroforestry systems. Our aim was to give an overview of strengths and weaknesses of the existing data, in terms of spatial coverage and representation of diverse agroforestry types and soil fauna groups and functions. Conclusions: Our database includes sixty-seven articles, mostly focusing on tropical regions and perennial crop agroforestry systems. Soil macrofauna are the most studied fauna group. The most common question addressed is the comparison of the effect of land use types on communities. Effects on fauna abundance and diversity are mainly positive when agroforestry is compared to cropland, and neutral or negative when compared to forests. Few publications actually measure soil fauna functions, or characterize their interactions and evolution in time and space depending on system design and management. Further work on soil fauna in agroforestry should harness ecological theory and address questions of spatial structure and scale, temporal dynamics and ecological interaction networks and how they determine ecosystem functioning. © 2019, Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
Tropical forests are posited to hold up to one-third of the solution to slow climate change. It is estimated that over two-hundred million "forest peoples"-including indigenous peoples and local communities-live within and depend upon tropical forests. To successfully mitigate climate change, we must find new forms of collaboration that meet the goals of forest-dependent communities for secure land rights, equitable participation in decision-making, and dignified livelihoods in conjunction with meeting commitments to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. In 2018, 34 subnational governments and 18 indigenous and local community organizations announced their endorsement of the "Guiding Principles for Collaboration between Subnational Governments, Indigenous Peoples, and Local Communities." The Guiding Principles of Collaboration (GPC) are a set of 13 universal tenets which lay out a blueprint for collaboration between subnational state actors, indigenous peoples and local communities to recognize rights, support livelihoods, strengthen participation of forest-dependent communities in decision-making, and protect indigenous and community environmental defenders within the context of joint action for climate change mitigation. Their implementation would advance the integration of climate justice in subnational efforts for forest conservation. Taking the GPC as a point of departure, we explore how jurisdictional approaches to sustainability can protect and enhance the rights and livelihoods of indigenous peoples (IP) and local communities (LC). We develop and apply a suite of indicators to assess existing conditions across 11 tropical forest jurisdictions toward meeting the commitments described in the GPC. Our findings suggest that while the rights of indigenous peoples and local communities are recognized within national legal frameworks, implementation and security of those rights is uneven across subnational jurisdictions. Participation of IP and LC is not yet formalized as part of jurisdictional climate change mitigation initiatives in most cases, limiting their potential to inform policy outcomes and benefit-sharing mechanisms. Monitoring the implementation of the GPC may foster greater accountability for commitments, as well as collective action and learning to support regional transformations to sustainability.
Fast-growing forest plantations have been expanding in Brazil in the last 50 years, which reach productivities by over 40 m(3) ha(-1) year(-1) in reduced rotation between 5 and 15 years. In the 1990s, environmental warnings about these plantations guided research projects seeking to understand their effects on water and propose forest management actions to minimize them. The assessment of forest management effects on water resources is conducted by long-term experiments in paired catchments. In this paper we present results of some studies conducted at the hydrological monitoring centre of Itatinga Experimental Forest Station, of the University of Sao Paulo, where hydrological monitoring began in 1987, and currently include three catchments (83-98 ha) under different forest management regimes: short-rotation Eucalyptus plantation, long-term forest plantation mosaic and native forest restoration. Results show that at similar conditions observed at study area including deep soils and good natural water regulation, hydrological effects vary according to the forest management regime adopted, increasing water consumption and making the flow regime vulnerable to intra- and inter-annual seasonality. Regarding water quality, weekly sampling results showed suspended sediments and nitrate concentrations below water quality thresholds criteria by silvicultural operations, and the effects were transient but higher concentrations of nutrients were observed in intensive management regime. In the study area, reducing the management intensity of forest plantation by increasing the rotation time, adopting forest age mosaic and avoiding the coppice technique are alternative choices that reduced water use and increased flow regulation. Different adopted forest management schemes directly affected water use, showing that in water-deficit tropical regions, management regime of fast-growing forest plantations controls water availability.
Biotic seed dispersal is a key process maintaining biodiversity in tropical forests where most trees produce vertebrate-dispersed seeds. Existing meta-analyses suggest an overall positive effect of vertebrate gut passage on seed germination, but no significant effects for non-flying mammals. However, previous meta-analyses combined rodents (seed predators) and primates (seed dispersers) into the non-flying mammals category, which may confound specific effects of each group on seed germination. However positive effects of monkeys on germination had previously been found in some studies. Here we disentangle the role of Neotropical primates as contributors to seed dispersal in tropical forests by running a meta-analysis to determine the overall magnitude of gut passage effects on seed germination percentage and mean time to germination. We also compare effect sizes as a function of different feeding guilds, gut complexities, and seed size. Our results show a strong, positive effect of primates on seed germination percentage and on the number of days to first germination. Strictly frugivorous monkeys, the group most threatened by extinction, showed the highest dispersal quality, increasing germination percentage by 75%. Primates that include insects in their diets had no average effect on germination percentage or time. Gut passage had different outcomes on seeds with different sizes; both large and small seeds showed similar increases in germination percentages after gut passage, but only large seeds germinated faster than control seeds after gut passage. Our results show a relevant role for primates in providing high seed dispersal quality and as drivers of forest regeneration. The combined effects of defaunation and forest fragmentation may result in decreased regeneration of trees, which has the potential to affect negatively both forest structure and ecosystem processes. Finally, we provide general guidelines for standardizing research on seed dispersal by primates. Synthesis Consuming fleshy fruits and dispersing seeds is the main ecological service provided by vertebrates to plants. Vertebrate increases seed germination due to treatment given during digestive system passage. Previous meta-analyses suggest an overall positive effect of vertebrate gut passage on germination, but no insights are available on its variation among different functional groups of mammals. Our analyses indicated that gut passage by Neotropical primates increased seed germination. Strict frugivores, the ones most threatened by extinction, were the most efficient. Our results show a relevant role for primates in providing high seed dispersal quality and as drivers of forest regeneration, which can be meaningful for conservation in a community scale. © 2015 The Authors
To offset the declining timber supply by shifting towards more sustainable forestry practices, industrial tree plantations are expanding in tropical production forests. The conversion of natural forests to tree plantation is generally associated with loss of biodiversity and shifts towards more generalist and disturbance tolerant communities, but effects of mixed-landuse landscapes integrating natural and plantation forests remain little understood. Using camera traps, we surveyed the medium-to-large bodied terrestrial wildlife community across two mixed-landuse forest management areas in Sarawak, Malaysia Borneo which include areas dedicated to logging of natural forests and adjacent planted Acacia forests. We analyzed data from a 25-wildlife species community using a Bayesian community occupancy model to assess species richness and species-specific occurrence responses to Acacia plantations at a broad scale, and to remote-sensed local habitat conditions within the different forest landuse types. All species were estimated to occur in both landuse types, but species-level percent area occupied and predicted average local species richness were slightly higher in the natural forest management areas compared to licensed planted forest management areas. Similarly, occupancy-based species diversity profiles and defaunation indices for both a full community and only threatened and endemic species suggested the diversity and occurrence were slightly higher in the natural forest management areas. At the local scale, forest quality was the most prominent predictor of species occurrence. These associations with forest quality varied among species but were predominantly positive. Our results highlight the ability of a mixed-landuse landscape with small-scale Acacia plantations embedded in natural forests to retain terrestrial wildlife communities while providing an alternate source of timber. Nonetheless, there was a tendency towards reduced biodiversity in planted forests, which would likely be more pronounced in plantations that are larger or embedded in a less natural matrix. © 2022 The Authors. Ecology and Evolution published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Despite several efforts to quantify the effectiveness of forest certification in developing sustainable use of forest resources, there is little evidence that certified forests are more effective in conserving fauna than non-certified managed forest. To evaluate the impact of forest certification on the fauna, we compared the biodiversity in reference sites (n = 23), Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) certified management sites (n = 24) and non-FSCmanagement sites (n = 20) in the Tahuamanu region of Peru, during the dry season of 2017. Specifically, we determined if the acoustic space used (ASU), soundscapes composition, and the bird richness and composition significantly varied among the three management types. Variation inASUwas best explained by management type and meanASUin theFSCsites was significantly greater than the reference and non-FSCsites, possibly suggesting greater richness of acoustically active species. An ordination analysis of the soundscapes showed that there was a significant difference among the three management types. There was greater dissimilarity in soundscape composition between theFSCand non-FSCsites, and greater overlap betweenFSCand reference sites. Bird identifications resulted in 11,300 detections of 226 bird species. Bird species richness and composition were not significantly different among the management types, indicating, in this context, that birds may not be the best indicators of different management strategies. The weak discrimination by the bird community is likely due to their dispersal ability, undisturbed primary forest matrix, and the occurrence of bamboo patches. The differences inASUamong the management types were most likely due to differences in acoustically active insects, which may be more sensitive to changes in microhabitat differences. Our findings correspond with the conclusions of other studies that certified forests can maintain levels of fauna biodiversity similar to those of undisturbed primary forest in the Amazon region.
Understanding how different approaches of matrix management affect organisms that inhabit natural patches is crucial for biological conservation. Considering that great part of the tropical area is composed of agricultural land and that most of the land use is either intensified or on the verge to be, a relevant question is: how may agricultural intensification of the landscape matrix affect the population dynamics of understory birds? This paper describes a qualitative model based on the Qualitative Process Theory and implemented in Garp3 to provide answers to this question. We built a model using four species of endemic passerine birds in order to evaluate the case in an Atlantic Forest area, a biodiversity hotspot. The model describes a landscape composed of an extinction-resistant source patch and one target forest patch where stochastic events occur. If permeability of the matrix exceeds a given species-specific threshold, propagules coming from the source reach the target patch. Agriculture intensification affects the matrix spatial structure and reduces permeability to forest birds, thus reduces rescue effect. Additionally, we assume that some species may use the matrix as a supplementary habitat for feeding and that matrix management may affect the resource base for those species. Simulation results suggest that, if agriculture intensification continues to threat the Atlantic Forest biome, populations of sensitive species (Xiphorhynchus fuscus and Sclerurus scansor) that exist in the small forest patches (which is true for most forest remnants) will be highly susceptible to local extinctions and without further re-colonization. © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
Payments for ecosystem services have come to dominate international policies for addressing tropical deforestation. Political ecologists, degrowth scholars, and Indigenous activists have critiqued these approaches on the grounds that by centering economic growth, they can disrupt local conservation systems and compromise forest-dwelling communities' ability to protect forests and live well. Meanwhile, Indigenous groups have developed positive alternatives to ‘green growth’ strategies, including buen vivir (good living) in Latin America. In Peru, the National Forest Conservation Program (NFCP) serves as the state's flagship initiative to address tropical deforestation in Indigenous communities by paying communities for demonstrated reductions in deforestation, so long as they invest those funds according to an agreed up on management plan. We analyzed how the NFCP has interacted with quality-of-life plans, Indigenous planning tools rooted in buen vivir. Our findings suggest that the NFCP has eroded local systems for conservation, including the minga, an Amazonian tradition of mutual aid and shared labor for subsistence livelihoods, pushing communities to replace these systems with commodity production and employer-employee relationships. We argue that instead of imposing onerous conditions and steering communities towards evermore commodity production, conservation initiatives should support the implementation of quality-of-life plans. We suggest that climate justice organizers, political ecologists, and degrowth scholars explore and advocate for such initiatives. © 2022
Logging roads can trigger tropical forest degradation by reducing the integrity of the ecosystem and providing access for encroachment. Therefore, road management is crucial in reconciling selective logging and biodiversity conservation. Most logging roads are abandoned after timber harvesting; however, little is known about their long-term impacts on forest vegetation and accessibility, especially in Central Africa. In 11 logging concessions in the Congo Basin, we field-sampled a chronosequence of roads that, judging from satellite images, had been abandoned between 1985 and 2015. We assessed recovery of timber resources, tree diversity and above-ground biomass in three zones: the road track, the road edge (where forest had been cleared during road construction) and the adjacent logged forest. The density of commercial timber species <15 cm d.b.h. was almost three times higher in the road track (321 individuals ha−1) and edge (267) than in the logged adjacent forest (97). Over time, tree species diversity converged to a comparable level between roads and adjacent forests, along with an increase in canopy closure. The average width of forest clearing for road construction was 20 m, covering a total 0·76% of the forest area inside concessions. After 15 years following abandonment, road tracks had recovered 24 Mg ha−1 of above-ground woody biomass, which was 6% of that in the adjacent forest, while road edges had accumulated 167 Mg ha−1 (42%). Ten years after abandonment, roads were no longer penetrable by poachers on motorcycles. An exotic herb species was fully replaced by dominant Marantaceae that have even higher abundance in the adjacent forest. Synthesis and applications. Our evidence of vegetation recovery suggests that logging roads are mostly transient elements in the forest landscapes. However, given the slow recovery of biomass on abandoned road tracks, we advocate both reducing the width of forest clearing for road construction and reopening old logging roads for future harvests, rather than building new roads in intact forests. Road edges seem suitable for post-logging silviculture which needs to be assisted by removing dominant herbs during the early years after abandonment while the road track is still accessible. © 2016 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society
Timber extraction directly affects forest structure by opening the canopy, reducing the density and volume of dominant species, and transforming the composition, diversity, and func-tioning of the forest. We analyze the richness, diversity, and basal area of tree species in a pine–oak montane forest under two stages of the Silvicultural Development Method (thinning and liberation cut treatments) in comparison with remnants of forest considered to be control treatment in the Ocotones forest. Timber extraction began 14 years previously but its effect on the tree structure has not been studied to date in this area. We quantified and measured all the trees with a diameter at breast height >5 cm in 12 0.1 ha circular plots in each treatment. Diversity (Hill numbers) and the importance value index were calculated in each treatment. Observed species richness did not differ between treatments; Pinus oocarpa Schiede ex Schltdl. and Quercus sapotifolia Liebm. were the dominant species regardless of treatment. The principal differences in density and basal area among the treatments were found between the small oaks and small pines. In general, tree density recovered in managed areas because of newly recruited pines and re-sprouting oaks. Although no significant reduction in species richness was detected between treatments, species composition and vegetation structure were modified by the extraction of pine timber and the permanence of many large oaks. Silvicultural treatments appear to create conditions favorable to the maintenance of species richness. The silvicultural interventions in the site meet the objectives of timber production, regeneration, and biodiversity conservation; however, the question of how long the forest can maintain its species diversity and structure after timber extraction remains to be addressed. © 2021 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Monitoring of natural regeneration can provide information on potential species for use in ecological restoration projects, as well as provide indications of the area resilience after degradation. In order to analyze variations of natural regeneration in two successional stages and to subsidize the indication of species for planting and enrichness, two abandoned pastures were sampled in Serra do Itajaí National Park (PNSI), Santa Catarina state, Southern Brazil. In the analysis of the main components, the plots differed according to the change in the quantitative variables of the species (Monte Carlo, P ≤ 0.05), and two groups were segregated: the first one constituted by the vegetation in the initial stage, and the second one, by intermediate stage vegetation. Twenty-one species were sampled and the intermediate stage showed the greatest richness (n = 19). The pioneer species were predominant in both stages, especially Vernonanthura discolor, Piptocarpha regnellii and Myrsine coriacea. The results demonstrate that the initial stage does not have indicator species, because all species occur frequently in the intermediate stage. However, the intermediate stage was distinguished by the presence of eight indicator species, which are potentially recommended for reforestation and enrichment plantations of Montana Ombrophilous Dense Forest in the PNSI. © 2017, ALÖKI Kft., Budapest, Hungary.
Overexploitation of forest resources in China has caused serious concerns over its negative impacts on water resources, biodiversity, soil erosion, wildlife habitat and community stability. One key concern is the impact of forestry practices on hydrological processes, particularly the effect of forest harvest on water quality and quantity. Since the mid 1980s, a series of scientific studies on forest hydrology have been initiated in major types of forest across the country, including Korean pine (Pinus koraiensis), Chinese fir (Cunninghamia lanceolata), oak (Quercus mongolica), larch (Larix gmelinii), faber fir (Abies fabri), Chinese pine (Pinus tabulaeformis), armand pine (Pinus arandi), birch (Betula platyphylla) and some tropical forests. These studies measured rainfall interception, streamflow, evapotranspiration and impacts of forest management (clearcutting and reforestation). This paper reviews key findings from these forest hydrological studies conducted over the past 20 years in China. Forest canopy interception rates varied from 15 to 30% of total rainfall, depending on forest canopy and rainfall characteristics. Stemflow is generally a small percentage (<5%) of total rainfall, but it accounts for 15% in the oak forest in northeast China. The high amounts of stemflow, as well as higher amounts of nutrients contained in stemflow, ay allow oak trees to adapt to a dry and nutrient-poor environment. Evapotranspiration was a significant component of the water budget in these Chinese forests studied, ranging from 80-90% of total rainfall in the northern temperate forests to 40-50% in the southern tropical forests. Forests substantially reduced surface runoff and erosion. However, no consistent response on total streamflows was observed. The reason for the inconsistency may be due to complexities of streamflow processes and the utilization of different methodologies applied at the various spatial scales. Copyright © 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
The degradation of forest resources is a global issue and represents a considerable threat to both the functioning of ecosystems and the well-being of human communities. The recently introduced Forest Landscape Restoration approach focuses on building up a forest-based landscape that can improve biodiversity conservation, ecological functioning and the livelihoods of human communities. Reforestation, when properly planned, can mitigate the effects of the degradation process, protect biodiversity and enhance the provision of forest goods and services. To this purpose a sound identification of priority reforestation sites is fundamental. This study introduces a GIS-based methodology to identify reforestation priorities, design a number of landscape-scale reforestation options and evaluate them with respect to a set of ecological and socioeconomic criteria. The prioritisation is based on two main non-compensatory factors: the need for biodiversity conservation and the ecological feasibility of reforestation Suitability maps are generated for both factors through spatial multicriteria analysis and threshold pairs used to extract priority areas. The minimum suitability levels and the total area to be reforested are used as input parameters to generate a finite number of resulting reforestation options. These are assessed for their ability to conserve biodiversity and improve living conditions of local communities by introducing additional ecological and socioeconomic criteria. Finally, sensitivity analysis is used to test the robustness of the assessment. The methodology is applied to a case study in western Chiapas (Mexico) where conditions of forest degradation and widespread poverty occur. (C) 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Infestations of invasive plants can hinder forest regeneration in biodiversity hotspots in tropical Asia. Microstegium ciliatum is a native grass in parts of tropical and subtropical Asia. To assess impacts of Microstegium on secondary forest succession in its native range, a field experiment was undertaken in abandoned agricultural settlements in Cuc Phuong National Park, Vietnam from 2016 to 2018. Plots were established across 6 sites under low, medium and high tree canopy levels. In manipulated plots, M. ciliatum was killed with a grass-specific herbicide and invading vines were cut in a subset of plots; control plots were untreated. The results show that in its native range Microstegium can be invasive with impacts on forest restoration. Application of herbicide reduced the cover of M. ciliatum from 85 to 3% and increased the diversity and number of tree seedlings within the 2 years of the experiment. There was no difference in tree seedling abundance between the herbicide and herbicide + vine cutting treatments, but the number of tree seedling species was significantly higher in the latter in the 2nd year after treatments were applied under the medium canopy. The overstory influenced forest regeneration in the manipulated plots as there was a greater number of tree seedlings and species in plots under medium and high-density canopies. The results suggest that management of the native invasive grass under tree canopies will facilitate forest restoration after disturbance from agriculture and lead to the early recruitment of mid and late successional forest species. © 2020, Springer Nature B.V.
Impact of anthropogenic disturbance on species diversity and vegetation structure of a lowland tropical rainforest was studied in the foothills of Eastern Himalaya, India. Tree species richness, density, basal area and the diversity indices were found significantly (P<0.05) decreased with the increasing level of disturbances whereas, shrub density, basal area and herb density significantly increased with increasing disturbance level. In case of shrubs, Simpson’s dominance index significantly (P<0.007) increased along the disturbance gradient, whereas Pielou’s evenness index significantly (P<0.005) decreased with an increasing level of disturbance. Shannon-Weiner diversity index for herbs significantly (P<0.016) increased with increasing disturbance whereas, Simpson’s dominance index was significantly (P<0.013) declined along the disturbance gradient. Results revealed that 10–50 cm dbh classes constituted the highest stem density, and highest basal area was recorded in the >100 cm dbh class in all three sites. Density of the matured trees decreased with increasing DBH whereas, tree basal area tended to increase with increasing DBH in all three sites. Tree species richness was highest in the lower DBH classes. 62.07% of the total tree species regenerated in the largely undisturbed site followed by 50% in the mildly disturbed and 26.32% in the highly disturbed site. The overall regeneration condition was found to be good in the largely undisturbed site. Mildly disturbed site exhibited fair regeneration and so was in the highly disturbed site. Discernable variations in species composition, diversity, regeneration and tree population structure revealed the impact of anthropogenic disturbances on rainforest vegetation dynamics. Higher degree of disturbance was furtherly found not only affecting species diversity but also promoting the growth of invasive weed species. Dominance of Hydnocarpus kurzii and Crypteronia paniculata in the highly disturbed site also indicated that these less-valued timber species may benefit from the vegetation mosaic produced by the disturbance; so differences in abundance of these species may be useful for bio-indication. Furthermore, present study suggests the need of adequate biodiversity conservation measures and adaptation of sustainable forest management approaches in disturbed areas of lowland tropical rainforest in the foothills of eastern Himalaya, India. © 2018, Science Press, Institute of Mountain Hazards and Environment, CAS and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature.
To meet the growing demand for chocolate, cocoa (Theobroma cacao) agriculture is expanding and intensifying. Although this threatens tropical forests, cocoa sustainability initiatives largely overlook biodiversity conservation. To inform these initiatives, we analyzed how cocoa agriculture affects bird diversity at farm and landscape scales with a meta-analysis of 23 studies. We extracted 214 Hedges' g* comparisons of bird diversity and 14 comparisons of community similarity between a forest baseline and 4 farming systems that cover an intensification gradient in landscapes with high and low forest cover, and we summarized 119 correlations between cocoa farm features and bird diversity. Bird diversity declined sharply in low shade cocoa. Cocoa with >30% canopy cover from diverse trees retained bird diversity similar to nearby primary or mature secondary forest but held a different community of birds. Diversity of endemic species, frugivores, and insectivores (agriculture avoiders) declined, whereas diversity of habitat generalists, migrants, nectarivores, and granivores (agriculture associates) increased. As forest decreased on the landscape, the difference in bird community composition between forest and cocoa also decreased, indicating agriculture associates replaced agriculture avoiders in forest patches. Our results emphasize the need to conserve forested landscapes (land sparing) and invest in mixed-shade agroforestry (land sharing) because each strategy benefits a diverse and distinct biological community. Published 2021. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA. Conservation Biology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Society for Conservation Biology
In Hong Kong, as in many tropical areas, grasslands are maintained by fire on disturbed and abandoned land. However, Hong Kong's native forests are regenerating in many areas, alongside frequent burning of the hillsides, and are in different stages of structural succession to closed canopy forest patches. Understanding the major determinants of secondary succession is a vital input to forest management policies. Given the importance of forests for biodiversity conservation, watershed protection and carbon cycling. This study examines the relationship between burning regimes and structural forest succession over 42 years from 1973 to 2015, using an archive of satellite images, aerial photographs and field plot data. Overlay of a fire frequency map with maps of forest structural classes at different dates indicates the number of fires undergone by each successional class as well as the time taken to progress from one class to another under different fire regimes. Results indicate that the native sub-tropical evergreen forests, which are naturally fire intolerant, can regenerate alongside moderate burning, and once the shrub stage is reached, succession to closed forest is relatively rapid and can occur within 13 years. More than one burn, however, is more destructive, and twice-burnt areas were seen to have only one-third of the woody biomass of once-burnt plots. The most frequent fires occurred in areas where mono-cultural plantations had been destroyed by disease in the 1960s and were subsequently invaded by grasslands. These former plantation areas remained in early successional stages of grass and open shrubland by 2015. Other plantations from the 1970s and 1980s remain as plantations today and have acted as a barrier to natural forest succession, attesting to the greater effectiveness of fire control over re-afforestation measures.
Oil palm and rubber expansion is a main driver of the widespread deforestation of tropical rainforests taking place in South-East Asia, particularly in Indonesia. The replacement of forests with monoculture plantations of rubber and oil palm reduces biodiversity and carbon pools but also modifies canopy structure, which is an important determinant of microclimate. There is, however, a lack of quantitative information characterizing the effect of such land transformation on microclimate. We report the first medium-term observations of below-canopy microclimatic conditions (air temperature, relative humidity, vapour pressure deficit and soil temperature) across forest, jungle rubber agroforest, oil palm and rubber monoculture plantations in Sumatra/Indonesia. The data set covers a period of approximately three years (2013–2016) and includes one of the strongest El Niño-Southern Oscillations (ENSO) of the last decades. Forests were up to 2.3 and 2.2 °C cooler than oil palm and rubber monocultures respectively. The monocultures were also drier (11.9% and 12.8% less in oil palm and rubber respectively) and had higher vapour pressure deficit (632 Pa and 665 Pa higher in oil palm and rubber respectively) than the forest, while differences in soil temperature were less pronounced. Conversion from forest to other land uses, especially to monocultures, also amplified the diurnal range of all microclimatic variables studied. Jungle rubber stands out as the transformed land-use system that maintains more stable microclimatic conditions. Our results indicate that canopy openness is a key driver of below-canopy microclimate, and hence could be used in climate models to better evaluate climatic feedbacks of land-use change to rubber and oil palm. The ENSO event of 2015 led to warmer and drier conditions than in the previous two years in all four land-use systems, especially in the forest (up to 2.3 °C warmer, 8.9% drier and up to 351 Pa more during ENSO). The relative effect of ENSO was lower in the monoculture plantations, where below-canopy microclimate is generally more similar to open areas. Forests exhibited the largest differences with the pre-ENSO years, but still maintained more stable microclimatic conditions (lower temperatures and vapour pressure deficit and higher relative humidity) due to their higher climate regulation capacity. During ENSO, microclimatic conditions in jungle rubber were comparable to those in the monocultures, suggesting that while forests buffered the increase of temperature, jungle rubber might have surpassed its buffering capacity to extreme events. This capacity of buffering extreme climatic events should be considered when assessing the effects of land-use change. © 2018 Elsevier B.V.
Land use intensification at rainforest margins increases the pressure on the primary rainforest ecosystem, known for its high biodiversity and important functional role in global climate and carbon balances. Studying this system at different levels of disturbance increases our knowledge about its stability and mechanisms of diversity changes. While most studies investigating the effects of disturbance on animal populations focus on canopy communities, the present study reviews the driving factors for soil and litter arthropod communities. In addition, results from a study along a land use gradient in Central Sulawesi (Indonesia) will be discussed. Within natural forests, litter composition, patchiness and especially litter abundance seem to be key factors driving litter arthropod diversity and densities, by creating microhabitats for many species and individuals. With increasing levels of disturbance in tropical forests, and with forest conversion into agroforestry and agricultural systems, soil/litter temperature and moisture levels become extremely important, leading to reduced densities and species richness. Changes of soil pH, a reduction of the litter habitat and increased anthropogenic disturbance via site management practices add to degradation. In the present study, litter arthropod communities were compared between three levels of forest use (none, small and large timber extraction) and two types of cacao plantations (under natural shade trees and under a polyculture of planted shade trees). The negative effects of increasing gap fraction and thus increasing temperatures accompanied by decreasing moisture levels and litter depth could be confirmed. Abundances of Collembola, Oribatida and Symphyla in litter and soil and the number of ant species in the litter declined with increasing land use intensity. In contrast, spider density and ant activity increased when natural forest sites were compared with the two types of cacao plantations. This can be explained by the shifting community structure of these two taxa, indicating that few, but abundant species of open habitats, such as Lycosidae, were replacing forest species. Surprisingly, the decline in microarthropod abundances along the land use gradient was not linearly correlated with decreasing moisture and litter depth or increasing temperature or litter quality (C-to-N ratio). Rather low microarthropod densities were already measured in little disturbed natural forest sites with small timber extraction. A similar pattern was observed for fungal abundances and root production, indicating that even small levels of disturbance influence the litter and soil system in tropical forests. On the one hand, changing microclimate, limited litter space, reduced availability of microbial resources and increased disturbance by plot maintenance inhibit higher densities of litter and soil animal populations. On the other hand, the simplified habitat structure favours populations of open habitats, especially predatory groups adapted to higher temperatures and/or lower soil moisture. It has to be investigated how a reduction of decomposers and an increase in predators could influence pest control and thus yields in these agroforestry systems. © 2007, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
The current study analyzes the tree diversity and regeneration status of species between repeated forest fires and unburned areas of the tropical dry deciduous forest of Panna Tiger Reserve (PTR), Madhya Pradesh, Central India. Fire frequency maps were prepared with the help of Landsat 5, 7, and 8 satellite images, and the study area was classified into seven fire frequency classes (B1 to B7) and one control class (B0). Five plots were laid in every fire class including the control. A total of 45 tree species belonging to 33 genera and 20 families were recorded during the study period and of these, 44, 26, and 25 species were recorded in the three-growth stages: trees, saplings, and seedlings, respectively. Of the 7873 individuals recorded, 2667, 1243, and 3963 were seedlings, saplings, and trees, respectively. Our results showed that tree species diversity was higher at moderate fire frequencies than controls, but decreased with increasing fire frequency classes. Regeneration of species was significantly different among all fire frequency classes. Certain fire-tolerant species were increasingly dominant with increasing fire frequency classes. With fires left to continue unabated, the dry deciduous forest of the Central Indian region could have lower tree diversity in the future. © 2020 Taylor & Francis.
Tropical forest restoration is needed to mitigate the negative consequences of anthropogenic disturbances and climate change. One of the main limitations for the establishment of tropical forests is the competition with invasive species decreasing the survival and growth of native trees. Invasion management should affect soil microorganisms, which play essential roles in nutrient cycling, plant nutrition and on ecosystem functioning. Although chemical and nonchemical methods are applied worldwide to herbaceous invasion management, their impacts on soil microbial biomass, respiration and litter decomposition have yet to be measured over longer timeframes (>3 months) after application. Using a 3-year-old tropical forest restoration managed through chemical (herbicide pulverization) or nonchemical (mowing) treatments, and a secondary native forest patch nearby used as reference, we measured (1) soil microbial biomass and (2) basal soil respiration over 6 months, and on (3) litter decomposition over 1 year, after one management. We used mixed models to test whether management affected the response variables and found that chemical management resulted in lower microbial biomass and respiration after 5 months. Similarly, after 1 year, litter decomposition rate under chemical management was lower than that in the nonchemical and in the control. Chemical management effects on soil activity and litter decomposition should be considered when choosing suitable methods and its frequency to manage invasion, targeting the success of native trees and general ecosystem functioning. © 2023 Society for Ecological Restoration.
Bhutan is characterized by a landscape dominated by forests. A substantial share of these forests is dedicated to nature conservation, with an extensive protected area network connected by biological corridors. Forestlands are also partly allocated to timber production, including forest management units subjected to strict regulations. We assessed the effectiveness of these various land-use zoning units to protect forest cover. We used a matching procedure to control for covariates and obtain robust estimates of the impact of each type of unit on forest cover changes during the 2000s. We also investigated subsets of the protected area network to test for effectiveness heterogeneities within this network. Our results showed that protected areas prevented 63% of the forest loss expected in forestlands under this protection status. These units also curtailed forest gain. Long-established protected areas were more effective at avoiding forest loss than recent ones, while the levels of stringency and operationality of protected areas had no differentiable impact on forest loss. We detected more forest loss in forests surrounding protected areas compared to more distant forestlands, showing a leakage effect. Biological corridors had no impact on forest loss and gain. Forest management units decreased forest loss by half. After accounting for the selection bias, this study demonstrated the effectiveness of land use zoning for forest conservation in Bhutan.
Globally, the conservation value of tropical grasslands, unlike tropical forests, is underappreciated, and their degradation is widespread. Conservation of this vulnerable ecosystem requires scientifically validated management strategies. The present study examines the impact of flooding, herbivory, and other management practices on the riverine grasslands of Brahmaputra floodplains of Assam, India, for devising effective conservation strategies. Inundation period-based unsupervised classification was used to derive the types and extent of grasslands viz., short (SG) and tall (TG). Subsequently, the data on vegetation composition and nutrient status viz., soil carbon (C), nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K), was collected from inside and outside of 15 exclosures that were subjected to different management regimes, including grazing (freely accessed by mega- and meso-herbivores), ungrazed (not accessed by mega- and meso-herbivores), ungrazed with controlled burning and ungrazed with invasive removal. A total of 1152 plots were monitored for two-year, from January 2014 to December 2015. The results of the study revealed that the areas inundated for a longer duration were dominated by SG and had higher species diversity, while areas inundated for the shorter duration were dominated by TG and had low species diversity. We further observed that grazing exclusion promoted heterogeneity, woody and invasive growth, and soil nutrient content. Burning and invasive removal reduced woody and invasive growth and enhanced soil nutrient conditions. Grazing and burning decreased heterogeneity, while invasive removal increased heterogeneity. Alteration of the flooding regime due to reduced water availability may affect the ratio of SG and TG extent in the long run, which may alter the vegetation composition and the productivity of these grasslands. We recommend short-term rotational grazing for SG and long-term for TG to promote heterogeneity and soil quality. Controlled burning can be carried out in dry and invaded areas post uprooting of invasives to mitigate the effect of succession. © 2023 The Author(s)
Conservation and restoration of ecosystems impacted by nonnative ungulates increasingly involves their removal and exclusion. While the influence of nonnative ungulate removal on plant communities is commonly monitored, impacts on underlying ecological processes are seldom quantified. Here we examined how nonnative feral pig (Sus scrofa) removal from Hawaiian tropical montane wet forests affects soil physical and chemical properties. Unique to this study, measurements were taken in paired sites inside and outside of five feral pig removal units representing a ~20 year, highly constrained chronosequence where other potentially confounding variables are held constant. Additional targeted measurements were taken inside and outside of a single exclosure in areas characterized by ‘low’ versus ‘high’ feral pig activity. Overall, nonnative feral pig removal increased stable soil aggregates and porosity, and decreased bulk density, water-filled pore space, and soil moisture content. Further, feral pig removal increased soil nutrient regeneration as evidenced by increased extractable cations, increased resin available NO3         − and total inorganic N, and enriched foliar δ15N. Increasing time since feral pig removal was positively related to net nitrification and total net inorganic N mineralization, and negatively related to pH and net ammonification. Results from both the chronosequence and targeted sampling were consistent in direction and support a central role of feral pig removal in modifying soil physical and chemical properties. Changes in soil properties following ungulate removal coincided with large increases in understory vegetation cover, highlighting the need to better understand aboveground-belowground linkages following nonnative ungulate removal. © 2017, Springer International Publishing Switzerland (outside the USA).
Land-use change has negative impacts on the biodiversity of plants and animals. However, we lack studies and/or information about the impacts of land-use change on the biodiversity of soil microorganisms, especially those involved in the phosphorus (P) transformation processes. This represents a great concern since some microbial groups are extremely important to different P transformation processes and regulate P availability in tropical and subtropical regions. In our study, we used shotgun DNA-metagenomic sequencing and P fractionation analysis to assess the effects of forest-to-pasture conversion on the dynamics of soil bacterial groups involved in the P transformation processes and their potential functions. Additionally, we assessed if the dynamics of these specific soil bacterial groups were recovered after pasture abandonment and with secondary forest establishment. Our results demonstrated that the land-use change altered the total amount of P and its fractions in the soils. The bacterial community structure was affected by changes in soil chemical properties, mainly by changes in the aluminum, total P, and labile P contents. The bacterial groups involved in the P transformation processes and their potential functions were also affected by changes in land use. The pasture soil harbored a distinct bacterial community when compared to the primary and secondary forest sites. In general, forest-to-pasture conversion increased bacterial groups involved in the P mineralization, including Firmicutes, Cyanobacteria, and Gemmatimonadetes. Conversely, we observed an increase of Proteobacteria members (e.g., Bradyrhizobiaceae and Beijerinckiaceae) and genes related to P solubilization and mineralization after pasture abandonment and with the secondary forest re-establishment. Our multi-analytical approach suggests that forest-to-pasture conversion has negative impacts on the biodiversity of bacterial groups involved in the P transformation processes and their potential functions, while the secondary forest re-establishment can stimulate resilience. Taken together, our results indicated that the bacterial groups involved in the P transformation and their potential functions can be gradually recovered and reach intermediate and/or even similar levels to those observed in undisturbed forest sites. This brings new insights and helps to improve our knowledge about the impacts of anthropogenic actions on the soil microbiome in the Amazon region. © 2022
Grazing. fuelwood extraction and burning are common human activities in Indian forests. These activities can represent forest disturbances that drive the degradation of natural deciduous forest cover to scrub forest, with concurrent impacts on soils. The effects of human forest use on ecosystem functions were investigated in Bandipur National Park (BNP) in Peninsular India. This paper reports the impacts on Surface soils. Soils were sampled from 200 locations covering four watersheds within the Park. These samples spanned a degradation gradient measured by a field disturbance index (FDI). Soil physical, nutrient and hydraulic properties were measured. Cation exchange capacity (CEC) and saturated hydraulic conductivity (K-s) were analyzed as key response variables describing nutrient availability and infiltration respectively. Effects of cattle and Jeep trails on infiltration and bulk density were evaluated by sampling on-and-off trails. Trail density in research watersheds was estimated with satellite imagery. Soil nutrient availability is negatively impacted by disturbance, resulting front negative impacts on soil organic carbon (SOC) and clay content. Available water capacity (AWC) and saturated moisture content (SMC) were significantly higher in protected watersheds, attributed to reduced clay content in degraded watersheds. Off trails, high spatial variability in infiltration overwhelmed any meaningful trends with disturbance. However, infiltration was substantially reduced on trails as a result of significant increase in bulk density. The density of trails was considerably higher in degraded watersheds compared to protected watersheds. These results provide ground-based and remotely sensed evidence that forest disturbance within the Park has negative impacts on soil organic matter, nutrient availability and hydraulic characteristics. These have consequences for related ecological, nutrient cycling and hydrological processes, and the continuation of the services currently enjoyed by local human populations. Copyright (C) 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Uncontrolled fires place considerable burdens on forest ecosystems, compromising our ability to meet conservation and restoration goals. A poor understanding of the impacts of fire on ecosystems and their biodiversity exacerbates this challenge, particularly in tropical regions where few studies have applied consistent analytical techniques to examine a broad range of ecological impacts over multiyear time frames. We compiled 16 y of data on ecosystem properties (17 variables) and biodiversity (21 variables) from a tropical peatland in Indonesia to assess fire impacts and infer the potential for recovery. Burned forest experienced altered structural and microclimatic conditions, resulting in a proliferation of nonforest vegetation and erosion of forest ecosystem properties and biodiversity. Compared to unburned forest, habitat structure, tree density, and canopy cover deteriorated by 58 to 98%, while declines in species diversity and abundance were most pronounced for trees, damselflies, and butterflies, particularly for forest specialist species. Tracking ecosystem property and biodiversity datasets over time revealed most to be sensitive to recurrent high-intensity fires within the wider landscape. These megafires immediately compromised water quality and tree reproductive phenology, crashing commercially valuable fish populations within 3 mo and driving a gradual decline in threatened vertebrates over 9 mo. Burned forest remained structurally compromised long after a burn event, but vegetation showed some signs of recovery over a 12-y period. Our findings demonstrate that, if left uncontrolled, fire may be a pervasive threat to the ecological functioning of tropical forests, underscoring the importance of fire prevention and long-term restoration efforts, as exemplified in Indonesia. Copyright © 2024 the Author(s).
Secondary forests in the Amazon are important carbon sinks, biodiversity reservoirs, and connections between forest fragments. However, their regrowth is highly threatened by fire. Using airborne laser scanning (ALS), surveyed between 2016 and 2018, we analyzed canopy metrics in burned (fires occurred between 2001 and 2018) and unburned secondary forests across different successional stages and their ability to recover after fire. We assessed maximum and mean canopy height, openness at 5 and 10 m, canopy roughness, leaf area index (LAI) and leaf area height volume (LAHV) for 20 sites across South-East Amazonia (ranging from 375 to 1200 ha). Compared to unburned forests, burned forests had reductions in canopy height, LAI, and LAHV, and increases in openness and roughness. These effects were more pronounced in early successional (ES) than later successional (LS) stages, for example, mean canopy height decreased 33% in ES and 14% in LS and LAI decreased 36% in ES and 18% in LS. Forests in ES stages were less resistant to fire, but more resilient (capable of recovering from a disturbance) in their post-fire regrowth than LS stage forests. Data extrapolation from our models suggests that canopy structure partially recovers with time since fire for six out of seven canopy metrics; however, LAI and LAHV in LS forests may never fully recover. Our results indicate that successional stage-specific management and policies that mitigate against fire in early secondary forests should be implemented to increase the success of forest regeneration. Mitigation of fires is critical if secondary forests are to continue to provide their wide array of ecological services.     Florestas secund & aacute;rias na Amaz & ocirc;nia s & atilde;o essenciais para captura de carbono, biodiversidade e conex & atilde;o entre fragmentos florestais. Por & eacute;m, seu crescimento & eacute; altamente amea & ccedil;ado pelo fogo. Usando varredura a laser aerotransportada (ALS), entre os anos de 2016 e 2018, analisamos m & eacute;tricas de dossel em florestas secund & aacute;rias queimadas (inc & ecirc;ndios ocorridos entre 2001 e 2018) e n & atilde;o queimadas em diferentes est & aacute;gios sucessionais e sua capacidade de recupera & ccedil;& atilde;o ap & oacute;s o fogo. Avaliamos a altura m & aacute;xima e m & eacute;dia do dossel, clareiras a 5 m e 10 m, rugosidade do dossel, & iacute;ndice de & aacute;rea foliar (LAI) e volume de altura da & aacute;rea foliar (LAHV) para 20 locais no sudeste da Amaz & ocirc;nia (variando de 375 ha a 1200 ha). Comparadas com florestas n & atilde;o queimadas, florestas queimadas tiveram redu & ccedil;& otilde;es na altura do dossel, LAI e LAHV, e aumentos nas clareiras e rugosidade. Esses efeitos foram mais pronunciados nos est & aacute;gios sucessionais iniciais (ES) do que em est & aacute;gios sucessionais mais tardios (LS), por exemplo, a altura m & eacute;dia do dossel diminuiu 33% no ES e 14% no LS e o LAI diminuiu 36% no ES e 18% no LS. Florestas no est & aacute;gio ES foram menos resistentes ao fogo, mas mais resilientes (capazes de se recuperar de uma perturba & ccedil;& atilde;o) em sua regenera & ccedil;& atilde;o p & oacute;s-fogo do que florestas no est & aacute;gio LS. A partir da extrapola & ccedil;& atilde;o de dados, nossos modelos sugerem que a estrutura do dossel se recupera parcialmente com o tempo desde o fogo para seis dos sete atributos do dossel, algumas m & eacute;tricas como LAI e LAHV em florestas LS talvez nunca se recuperem totalmente. Nossos resultados indicam que o manejo espec & iacute;fico do est & aacute;gio successional e pol & iacute;ticas que mitigam contra inc & ecirc;ndios em florestas secund & aacute;rias iniciais devem ser implementados para aumentar o sucesso da regenera & ccedil;& atilde;o florestal. A mitiga & ccedil;& atilde;o de inc & ecirc;ndios & eacute; cr & iacute;tica para que as florestas secund & aacute;rias continuem a fornecer sua ampla gama de servi & ccedil;os ecol & oacute;gicos.
Tropical forests support two-thirds of the world's biodiversity, contribute to global climate regulation, and support the culture and livelihoods of forest-dependent people. Much of extant tropical forest is subject to selective logging and hunting - extractive activities that potentially alter ecosystem function and species diversity. However, the collective impact of these threats, especially in the context of protected vs unprotected areas, is not fully understood. Here we assess how vocalizing biodiversity responds to logging and hunting, across the diel cycle, seasonally, and between protected and unprotected landscapes in Gabon. We compared soundscape saturation across 109 sites in national parks, Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) certified, and non-certified logging concessions. We estimated hunting pressure by quantifying gunshots and relative accessibility per site. Overall, we found that the soundscapes of FSC-certified concessions resembled national parks (selectively logged 20+ years ago) more so than non-certified concessions. We also found that never logged sites, part of a proposed community conserved area, had different soundscapes than all other categories, including national parks. Unlogged sites had higher saturation than logging concessions at dusk and dawn. Soundscapes and hunting pressure were highly variable across different concessions. We found that higher gunshot rates and recent logging were associated with lower soundscape saturation overall. Based on our findings, we recommend that (i) the very few never logged forests that remain (and are not yet protected) should be urgently withdrawn from selective logging, and (ii) FSC or other certification schemes should be promoted in Gabon, with an emphasis on sustainable hunting. © 2024 The Authors
In this paper, we aim to assess the impacts of the forest definitions adopted by each African country involved in the global climate change programmes of the United Nations on national carbon emission estimations. To do so, we estimate the proportion of national carbon stocks and tree cover loss that are found in areas considered to be non-forest areas. These non-forest areas are defined with respect to a threshold on the percentage of tree cover adopted by each country. Using percent tree cover and aboveground biomass maps derived from remote sensing data, we quantitatively show that in many countries, a large proportion of carbon stocks are found in non-forest areas, where a large amount of tree cover loss can also occur. We further found that under the REDD+ framework (reduced deforestation, reduced degradation, enhancement and conservation of forest carbon stocks, sustainable management of forests), some partner countries have proposed activities related to only reducing deforestation, even when a large proportion of their carbon stocks are stored outside forests. This situation may represent a limitation of the efficiency of the REDD+ mechanism, and could be avoided if these countries choose a lower tree cover threshold for their definition of forests and/or if they were are engaged in other activities.
Widespread selective logging in tropical forest causes structural damage and associated shifts in species composition, but we lack understanding of how selective logging impacts mechanistic processes that drive these biodiversity changes. Movement is a vital mechanistic process underpinning demographic, ecological, and evolutionary processes that likely determine species responses to logging. We assessed how tropical selective logging impacts local movements of 71 understory avian species in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo, and determined whether movement patterns relate to species' conservation status, functional traits, sensitivity to logging and trophic position. We used a capture-mark-recapture methodology and a hierarchical Bayesian framework to model maximum observed local movement distances, accounting for spatial sampling heterogeneity. Across the avian community, we found a higher probability of moving shorter distances (up to 200 m) in logged forests, and higher movement probability at longer distances (above 200 m) in unlogged forests. Altered movement patterns after logging may reflect increased understory density, changed resource distribution and/or predation risks, and suggest smaller home-range sizes. Species' conservation status, body mass, foraging guild, logging sensitivity and trophic position were unrelated to the magnitude of movement change. The continued persistence of understory species in our sample after selective logging may depend on flexibility in movement behaviour, conferring resilience to habitat degradation and the retention of high conservation values. This lends further support for the protection of these logged forests for biodiversity conservation. © 2021 Elsevier Ltd
Deforestation is a major threat to biodiversity, particularly within tropical forest habitats. Some of the fastest diminishing tropical forest habitats in the world occur in Indonesia, where fragmentation is severely impacting biodiversity, including on the island of Java, which holds many endemic species. Extreme fragmentation on the western part of the island, especially due to small-scale agriculture, impacts animal movement and increases mortality risk for mainly arboreal taxa. To mitigate this risk in an agroforest environment in Garut District, West Java, we installed 10 canopy bridges and monitored them through camera trapping between 2017 and 2019. Five of the monitored bridges were made of waterlines and five of rubber hose. We recorded Javan palm civets using the waterline bridges 938 times, while Javan slow lorises used the waterlines 1079 times and the rubber bridges 358 times. At least 19 other species used the bridges for crossing or perching. Our results demonstrate that relatively simple and cost-effective materials can be used to mitigate the effects of habitat fragmentation. We also recommend the use of camera traps to monitor the effectiveness of these interventions. © 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
High-diversity reforestation can help jumpstart tropical forest restoration, but obtaining viable seedlings is a major constraint: if nurseries do not offer them, it is hard to plant all the species one would like. From 2007 to 2009, we investigated five different seed acquisition strategies employed by a well-established tree nursery in southeastern Brazil, namely (1) in-house seed harvesters; (2) hiring a professional harvester; (3) amateur seed harvesters; or (4) a seed production cooperative, as well as (5) participating in a seed exchange program. In addition, we evaluated two strategies not dependent on seeds: harvesting seedlings from native tree species found regenerating under Eucalyptus plantations, and in a native forest remnant. A total of 344 native tree and shrub species were collected as seeds or seedlings, including 2,465 seed lots. Among these, a subset of 120 species was obtained through seed harvesting in each year. Overall, combining several strategies for obtaining planting stocks was an effective way to increase species richness, representation of some functional groups (dispersal syndromes, planting group, and shade tolerance), and genetic diversity of seedlings produced in forest tree nurseries. Such outcomes are greatly desirable to support high-diversity reforestation as part of tropical forest restoration. In addition, community-based seed harvesting strategies fostered greater socioeconomic integration of traditional communities in restoration projects and programs, which is an important bottleneck for the advance of ecological restoration, especially in developing countries. Finally, we discuss some of the limitations of the various strategies for obtaining planting stocks and the way forward for their improvement. © 2011 Society for Ecological Restoration International.
Reference ecosystems used in tropical forest restoration lack the temporal dimension required to characterise a mature or intact vegetation community. Here we provide a practical 'palaeo-reference ecosystem' for the eastern Andean forests of Ecuador to complement the standard 'reference ecosystem' approach. Pollen assemblages from sedimentary archives recovered from Ecuadorian montane forests are binned into distinct time periods and characterised as 1) Ancient (pre-human arrival), 2) Pre-European (Indigenous cultivation), 3) Successional (European arrival/Indigenous depopulation), 4) Mature (diminished human population), 5) Deforested (re-colonisation), and 6) Modern (industrial agriculture). A multivariate statistical approach is then used to identify the most recent period in which vegetation can be characterised as mature. Detrended correspondence analysis indicates that the pollen spectra from CE 1718-1819 (time bin 4 - Mature (diminished human population)) is most similar to that of a pre-human arrival mature or intact state. The pollen spectra of this period are characterised by Melastomataceae, Fabaceae, Solanaceae and Weinmannia. The vegetation of the 1700s, therefore, provides the most recent phase of substantial mature vegetation that has undergone over a century of recovery, representing a practical palaeo-reference ecosystem. We propose incorporating palynological analyses of short cores spanning the last 500 years with botanical inventory data to achieve more realistic and long-term restoration goals.
Anthropogenic disturbance and climate change are major threats to biodiversity. The Brazilian Caatinga is the world's largest and most diverse type of seasonally dry tropical forest. It is also one of the most threatened, but remains poorly studied. Here, we analyzed the individual and combined effects of anthropogenic disturbance (three types: livestock grazing, wood extraction, and miscellaneous use of forest resources) and increasing aridity on taxonomic, phylogenetic and functional ant diversity in the Caatinga. We found no aridity and disturbance effects on taxonomic diversity. In spite of this, functional diversity, and to a lesser extent phylogenetic diversity, decreased with increased levels of disturbance and aridity. These effects depended on disturbance type: livestock grazing and miscellaneous resource use, but not wood extraction, deterministically filtered both components of diversity. Interestingly, disturbance and aridity interacted to shape biodiversity responses. While aridity sometimes intensified the negative effects of disturbance, the greatest declines in biodiversity were in the wettest areas. Our results imply that anthropogenic disturbance and aridity interact in complex ways to endanger biodiversity in seasonally dry tropical forests. Given global climate change, neotropical semi-arid areas are habitats of concern, and our findings suggest Caatinga conservation policies must prioritize protection of the wettest areas, where biodiversity loss stands to be the greatest. Given the major ecological relevance of ants, declines in both ant phylogenetic and functional diversity might have downstream effects on ecosystem processes, insect populations, and plant populations. © 2018 Elsevier B.V.
This paper presents data on the impact of biotic pressure in terms of grazing by livestock and wood cutting by humans on the plant community in the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve of India. Grass, and herbaceous plant biomass, number of cattle dung piles, number of woody stems available and damaged by human activities and weed biomass were assessed at different proximity along transects radiating from village-forest boundary to forest interior to measure the ecological impact of livestock grazing and fire wood collection. The grass biomass was positively correlated to overgrazing indicating the adverse effect on natural vegetation by cattle. Woodcutting was intense along the forest boundary and significantly declined as distance increased. Similarly, weed biomass and number of thorny species declined positively with proximity from village-forest boundary and the weed biomass was significantly higher in the pastoral sites compared to residential sites. The results suggest that human impact adversely affects natural vegetation and promotes weed proliferation in forest areas adjoining human settlements in the ecologically important Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve. Continued anthropogenic pressure could cause reduction in fodder availability to large herbivores like elephants, which in turn leads to an increase in human-elephant conflict. (C) 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
Climate change has been with us for several decades. Some tropical forest tree species will be unable to disperse and will become extinct. Hence biodiversity loss is inevitable and strict sustainable forest management (SFM) is not possible in tropical forests. Some of the main international definitions of SFM consider joint optimization of a mix of competing criteria and indicators (C & I), and hence can only lead to compromise solutions in which further loss of biodiversity resources is inevitable. The complexity and diversity of tropical forest tree species means that any assessment of the state of a tropical forest is very uncertain, and almost impossible to achieve through routine cost-limited inventories. The adequacy of some current international C & I monitoring approaches are evaluated specifically in relation to the diversity of tropical forest tree species, and they are found to be inadequate for this purpose. The main weaknesses lie in the partial adoption of an inappropriate indicator methodology and insufficient consideration of uncertainty issues. It is suggested that the ecosystem approach of the Convention on Biological Diversity enacted within a modern modelling, statistical and scientific framework would enable understanding of the basic change process, and possibly aid in limiting losses of tropical biodiversity at a global scale. © CAB International 2007.
We studied the impacts of colonists, two groups of indigenous residents (Miskitu and Mayangna), and management by the Nicaraguan Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARENA) on the forest of the Bosawas International Biosphere Reserve. Indigenous people and colonists subsist on the natural resources of the reserve, and MARENA is responsible for protecting the area from colonization and illicit exploitation. Using geostatistical procedures and Landsat images at three different time periods, we compared per capita deforestation and boundary stabilization in areas with colonists and areas with indigenous peoples. We also examined whether the Mayangna deforested less than the Miskitu and whether the Nicaraguan government has effectively defended the Bosawas boundary against the advance of the agricultural frontier. In addition, we analyzed the current distribution of land uses within the reserve and its contiguous indigenous areas with a supervised classification of current land cover. Indigenous demarcations protected the forest successfully, whereas the Bosawas boundary itself did not inhibit colonization and consequent deforestation. Indigenous farmers deforested significantly less per capita than colonists, and the two indigenous groups in Bosawas did not differ significantly in their effects on the forest. Our results show that indigenous common-property institutions and indigenous defense of homeland have been powerful factors in protecting the forests of Bosawas and that the difficult evolution of a nested cross-scale governance system in Bosawas-under pressure from indigenous peoples-is probably the key to the forest's survival thus far.
Aim Pathways linking grazing and detrital subsystems of terrestrial ecosystems are important for ecosystem processes and function, but remain poorly understood. The invasion of a generalist predator creates a unique opportunity to study the effects of predation across these subsystems. We examine here, the effects of a non-native generalist predator, the little red fire ant (Wasmannia auropunctata, Roger) on both grazing and detrital invertebrate communities and ecosystem processes in a rain forest understorey.     Location Gamba Protected Area Complex, south-western Gabon, Africa.     Methods We measured abundances and diversities of understorey grazing and detrital invertebrate communities, soil nutrients, herbivory, litter fragmentation rates and leaf chemistry of a dominant understorey shrub inside and outside of 19 separate invasion fronts. We then explored possible trophic cascades and pathways of interaction using path analysis.     Results Results suggest that invasive ants may alter herbivory regimes, grazing and detrital communities, and may indirectly alter litter decomposition and nutrient cycling in the soil by suppressing important microbivore and detritivore populations with consequences for leaf chemistry.     Main conclusions These results demonstrate that generalist predators may be major drivers of both grazing and detrital subsystems by inducing strong shifts in adjacent communities that ultimately affect ecosystem processes.
Termites play an important role in the process of decomposition of organic matter in tropical ecosystems and participate in the evolution of soil structure. This study was carried out in the north of Côte d’Ivoire to evaluate the influence of cashew tree orchards’ age on termite assemblages. The standardised method for rapid estimation (RAP) of biodiversity was used to collect termites in four (4) classes of cashew tree orchards (Class 1: ˂ 5 years, Class 2: 5–10 years, Class 3: 11–20 years, Class 4: 21 years and above) in comparison to savannah. The results showed that species richness, were low in young orchards of class 1 (9 species). This increased progressively with age to its maximum in older orchards of class 4 (30 species). These old orchards were even richer in termite species than the savannah (27 species). Shannon-Weiner diversity index varied in the same way as species richness. The abundance of termites, were low in young orchards (45 occurrences), higher in older orchards of class 4 (423 occurrences), with a predominance of fungus-growing termite species. This study showed the recovery of termite diversity in cashew tree orchards after the stoppage in agricultural activities. Suggesting that, this form of agroforestry would allow for the conservation of diversity of the soil fauna while ensuring food security in the area. © 2021, African Association of Insect Scientists.
Environmental factors control the accumulation of aboveground biomass (AB) in tropical forests, along with the role of AB in climate change mitigation. As such, the objective of this study was to evaluate the influence of factors such as forest type, succession, abundance of individuals, species richness, height, diameter, texture, and soil nutrient levels on the AB in mature and postmining forests in Chocó, Colombia. Five plots each were set up in primary and postmining forests with 15 and 30 years of regeneration, in which the amount of AB was measured and related to the environmental factors. The AB was 178.32 t ha−1 in the mature forests and 35.17 and 56.3 t ha−1 after 15 and 30 years of postmining regeneration, respectively. Furthermore, the general AB level was determined by the ecosystem type, diameter, richness, abundance, Shannon evenness, and Margalef diversity. In mature forests, the AB amount was positively influenced by height and richness, and negatively influenced by dominance and evenness; in areas degraded by mining, the AB level was positively related to richness and equity, and negatively related to species diversity and soil silt. In summary, environmental factors determine the carbon storage in the forests in Chocó. Mining reduces the function of these ecosystems in mitigating climate change. © 2025 by the authors.
Wild edible fruits are a complement to the diet, generate income, and contain cultural values for local populations. In Mexico, their presence is threatened mainly by deforestation. The purpose of this work was to evaluate the distribution of 106 wild edible fruits from Veracruz state in several vegetation types and consider the effect of land-use changes on species distribution between 1993 and 2013. Seven species with the least number of herbarium specimens were chosen in order to estimate the current and potential distribution using Maxent models. The types of vegetation with the largest number of wild edible fruit species were the evergreen tropical rainforest with 64, deciduous tropical forest with 51, and the mountain cloud forest with 33. The largest loss between 1993 and 2013 was in secondary vegetation (0.19%) and evergreen tropical rainforest (0.11%). The main causes are the increment in human settlements and pasture, and grazing land (originally populated by tropical forests)—both factors that could put at risk, in the near future, most of the species studied. All of the species with restricted distribution in Veracruz showed a tendency to shrink in area, particularly the piñón (Pinus cembroides) and nuez de castilla (Juglans pyriformis), both of economic importance. In the face of land-use changes, conservation strategies must be designed in accordance with rational use and public policies that promote a sustainable management of wild edible fruits and the forests in which they grow. © The Author(s) 2018.
Exotic species are used to trigger facilitation in restoration plantings, but this positive effect may not be permanent and these species may have negative effects later on. Since such species can provide a marketable product (firewood), their harvest may represent an advantageous strategy to achieve both ecological and economic benefits. In this study, we looked at the effect of removal of a non-native tree species (Mimosa caesalpiniifolia) on the understory of a semideciduous forest undergoing restoration. We assessed two 14-year-old plantation systems (modified “taungya” agroforestry system; and mixed plantation using commercial timber and firewood tree species) established at two sites with contrasting soil properties in São Paulo state, Brazil. The experimental design included randomized blocks with split plots. The natural regeneration of woody species (height ≥0.2 m) was compared between managed (all M. caesalpiniifolia trees removed) and unmanaged plots during the first year after the intervention. The removal of M. caesalpiniifolia increased species diversity but decreased stand basal area. Nevertheless, the basal area loss was recovered after 1 year. The management treatment affected tree species regeneration differently between species groups. The results of this study suggest that removal of M. caesalpiniifolia benefited the understory and possibly accelerated the succession process. Further monitoring studies are needed to evaluate the longer term effects on stand structure and composition. The lack of negative effects of tree removal on the natural regeneration indicates that such interventions can be recommended, especially considering the expectations of economic revenues from tree harvesting in restoration plantings. © 2015, Springer Science+Business Media New York.
Studies evaluating the pioneer tree species capacity to provide favorable conditions to natural regeneration in forest restoration plantings are still scarce. Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate whether pioneer tree species affect differentially the microclimate conditions of the understory in forest restoration plantations. Two forest restoration sites, with three and five years old, were selected in a semi-deciduous forest in Itu city, São Paulo State, Brazil. In each site, five individuals of five pioneer species were studied. In the three years old site, Luehea grandiflora, Schinus terebinthifolius, Solanum erianthum, Croton urucurana and Cecropia pachystachya were studied, and in the five years old site, plants of the species L. grandiflora, S. terebinthifolius, Apeiba tibourbou, C. urucurana and S. erianthum were selected. Each species was considered as a sampling unit. Tree species height and canopy cover, air relative humidity and soil and air temperature were analyzed. In the three years old restoration site no effect of species in microclimatic conditions was found. However, in the five years old restoration site, microclimatic conditions were significantly different among species. Therefore, the importance of a careful choice of pioneer tree species as ecosystem engineers which modify environmental conditions and facilitate natural regeneration in forest restoration projects was emphasized.
Abstract: Tropical forests host a remarkable proportion of global arthropod diversity. Yet, arthropod communities living in tropical forests are still poorly studied, particularly for dry forests of Eastern Africa. The aim of this study was to analyse community structures, species richness and relative abundances of insects across a heterogeneous forest consisting of various forest types. We collected insects in the lower canopies with light traps across the Arabuko Sokoke forest, part of the East African coastal forest biodiversity hotspot in southeast Kenya. Sampling was conducted across three forest types and along the forest edge. In total we collected > 250,000 individuals. We grouped these individuals into orders, and beetles into (sub)families. Representatives of the taxonomically well-known beetle families Cerambycidae, Tenebrionidae and Scolytinae were further determined to species level. We subsequently classified these groups into guilds according to their ecological requirements and life-histories. Relative abundances of arthropods strongly differed among taxonomic groups and forest types. Evenness was highest in the heterogeneous natural Brachystegia forest type. The mixed forest type and the forest edges showed intermediate degrees of evenness, while the structurally homogenous Cynometra forest showed comparatively low degrees of evenness. Implications for insect conservation: We found that taxonomic and guild compositions strongly differed among the forest types. Our findings reveal that structural heterogeneity of a forest is the major driver of insect diversity, community composition, and relative abundance. Our study underlines that the preservation of all three forest types is crucial to maintain the complete diversity of arthropods across all taxonomic groups. © 2021, The Author(s).
Remnant trees have been widely reported to facilitate tropical forest recovery, however, few restoration strategies can mimic the role such trees play in their absence. This study evaluated the establishment success and growth of planting oversized vegetative 'stakes' (>4 m tall) of three species: Ficus pertusa (Moraceae), Bursera simaruba (Burseraceae), and Erythrina poeppigiana (Fabaceae) at three different sites in southern Costa Rica. I found high establishment rates for all species (range 67-100%) with no mortality for Erythrina. This result was coupled with a rapid development of canopy area over 1 yr for Erythrina (7.69 ± 0.86 m2) and Bursera (1.82 ± 0.86 m2), but not Ficus (0.23 ± 0.04 m2). Similar results are reported for height. The study presents an important new addition to the growing body of literature on the use of stakes in tropical restoration, where, oversized stakes may be planted as solitary individuals in restoration sites to mimic the role played by remnant trees in forest recovery. © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Species richness has dominated our view of global biodiversity patterns for centuries. The dominance of this paradigm is reflected in the focus by ecologists and conservation managers on richness and associated occurrence-based measures for understanding drivers of broad-scale diversity patterns and as a biological basis for management. However, this is changing rapidly, as it is now recognized that not only the number of species but the species present, their phenotypes and the number of individuals of each species are critical in determining the nature and strength of the relationships between species diversity and a range of ecological functions (such as biomass production and nutrient cycling). Integrating these measures should provide a more relevant representation of global biodiversity patterns in terms of ecological functions than that provided by simple species counts. Here we provide comparisons of a traditional global biodiversity distribution measure based on richness with metrics that incorporate species abundances and functional traits. We use data from standardized quantitative surveys of 2,473 marine reef fish species at 1,844 sites, spanning 133 degrees of latitude from all ocean basins, to identify new diversity hotspots in some temperate regions and the tropical eastern Pacific Ocean. These relate to high diversity of functional traits amongst individuals in the community (calculated using Rao's Q), and differ from previously reported patterns in functional diversity and richness for terrestrial animals, which emphasize species-rich tropical regions only. There is a global trend for greater evenness in the number of individuals of each species, across the reef fish species observed at sites ('community evenness'), at higher latitudes. This contributes to the distribution of functional diversity hotspots and contrasts with well-known latitudinal gradients in richness. Our findings suggest that the contribution of species diversity to a range of ecosystem functions varies over large scales, and imply that in tropical regions, which have higher numbers of species, each species contributes proportionally less to community-level ecological processes on average than species in temperate regions. Metrics of ecological function usefully complement metrics of species diversity in conservation management, including when identifying planning priorities and when tracking changes to biodiversity values. © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
Recent studies have critiqued integrated conservation and development projects for failing to attain either of their two major goals. This paper evaluates one such project in Peru's Pacaya Samiria National Reserve, which entailed community-based natural resource-management plans for palm and aquatic resources. We conducted semistructured interviews with reserve inhabitants (n=57) during May 2007, as well as key-informant interviews with state and non-governmental organization (NGO) staff. Monitoring data and reports from NGOs were important secondary sources in this study. The intervention has improved the status of targeted species and has improved the well-being of participants. This project worked well for a number of reasons, including the long-term commitment of the implementing organization, the social capital and legitimacy provided by participation in management groups, and the fact that local knowledge was incorporated into resource-management techniques.
Forest regeneration at large-scales is one of the main paths to achieving the ongoing ambitious restoration commitments. Thus, the identification of the main drivers of this process in agricultural landscapes is critical to understand the drivers determining restoration success. A growing number of studies have explored the biophysical and, less often, the socioeconomic drivers of forest regeneration using remote sensing approaches, but have not directly considered the influence of farmers’ decisions in spatial prediction models of forest regeneration. We explored the influence of biophysical and socioeconomic drivers on forest regeneration in a rural landscape of Southeastern Brazil, where native forest cover increased by 7.7%. We evaluated forest regeneration through the analysis of time series of multi-temporal satellite images and socioeconomic information obtained through a Social Survey with 47 landowners, using each farm as the study unit. Natural forest regeneration was mainly favored by lower land suitability for agriculture and higher proximity (lower distances) to forest remnants, as well by higher numbers of land-uses types in the farm and lower economic dependence of landowners from the farm income. Our results emphasize the importance of considering farmers’ decisions on predictive models of natural forest regeneration, which are critically needed to guide the implementation of large-scale forest restoration initiatives in agricultural landscapes. © 2021
Open-cast mining in tropical forests causes negative impacts on biodiversity and carbon storage. Postmining reclamation is therefore imposed to recover the vegetation despite the lack of understanding which indicators can be used to monitor the progress of succession. This study proposes an integrated framework to assess the trajectory of vegetation succession in coal mining site in East Kalimantan, Borneo. We combine the indicators of floristic diversity of naturally growing terrestrial and epiphytic plants, survival and growth of enrichment planting of native plants, above-ground carbon stock of pioneer trees, and the measurements on micro-climate and soil conditions. We compare some indicators across the 9-year-old and 17-year-old reclaimed sites and the premining sites. The results showed that naturally growing vegetation at the reclaimed sites was at the early to midsuccession stages, with biodiversity indicators much lower than those at the premining areas, implying the necessity of native species planting. During a six-month monitoring, the enrichment planting of native species had high rates of survival and growth. Surprisingly, the above-ground carbon at the two reclamation sites were higher, up to six times larger, than that at the premining sites. While the micro-climates had been improved, the soils in the reclaimed sites were still in poor conditions. Our findings suggest that using single parameter to monitor the trajectory of vegetation succession in postmining reclamation can be biased, and integrating several monitoring measures would provide a much better assessment. © TÜBİTAK.
Fire is an important tool in tropical forest management, as it alters forest composition, structure, and the carbon budget. The United Nations program on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) aims to sustainably manage forests, as well as to conserve and enhance their carbon stocks. Despite the crucial role of fire management, decision-making on REDD+ interventions fails to systematically include fires. Here, we address this critical knowledge gap in two ways. First, we review REDD+ projects and programs to assess the inclusion of fires in monitoring, reporting, and verification (MRV) systems. Second, we model the relationship between fire and forest for a pilot site in Colombia using near-real-time (NRT) fire monitoring data derived from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS). The literature review revealed fire remains to be incorporated as a key component of MRV systems. Spatially explicit modeling of land use change showed the probability of deforestation declined sharply with increasing distance to the nearest fire the preceding year (multi-year model area under the curve [AUC] 0.82). Deforestation predictions based on the model performed better than the official REDD early-warning system. The model AUC for 2013 and 2014 was 0.81, compared to 0.52 for the early-warning system in 2013 and 0.68 in 2014. This demonstrates NRT fire monitoring is a powerful tool to predict sites of forest deforestation. Applying new, publicly available, and open-access NRT fire data should be an essential element of early-warning systems to detect and prevent deforestation. Our results provide tools for improving both the current MRV systems, and the deforestation early-warning system in Colombia. © 2017 by the Ecological Society of America.
As forests in neotropical regions, particularly in developing countries, are devastated, interventions to restore biodiversity and its ecological functions are needed. Rural producers have thus been encouraged to grow trees for wood production as an economic activity. The objective of this study was to quantify the increment of wood density of four forest species from different successional classes of a mixed system of restoration in a neotropical forest in Brazil. Tree discs were sampled at breast height and analyzed radially by X-ray densitometry to obtain apparent density and basic density. Three trees each of a species from the pioneer, early and late secondary successional stages and of the dominant species in the climax community. The radial profiles indicated increasing density from the pith to bark of trunks, except for some variations due to wood defects and growth. Average density was 0.576 g cm(-3), 0.655 g cm(-3), 0.706 g cm(-3) and 0.775 g cm(-3), respectively, for Peltophorum dubium, Schinus terebinthifolius, Cariniana estrellensis and Hymenaea courbaril. Radial profiles indicated higher amplitudes in the apparent densities for slow-growing species. X-ray densitometry generated parameters such as minimum, average and maximum densities, and radial density variations. These parameters are important for understanding the ecological functional role of successional classes of the Atlantic Forest from the Neotropical region.
Mountain forests are traditionally used for cattle grazing during the dry season in southern Bolivia. To evaluate browsing intensity and damage to young trees and shrubs, a forest grazing area was monitored for about 3 months in both 2006 and 2007. Three similar paddocks of about 3 ha each, consisting of grassland and forest in a ratio of about 1:3 were stocked with 0.9, 1.6 and 2.6 tropical livestock units per ha (equivalents of 250 kg of body weight), reflecting low, medium and high stocking densities. Six 5 m × 5 m plots were mapped out within each paddock in 2006. Three additional plots per paddock were added in 2007. Within plots, the individuals of 18 woody species were coded and evaluated weekly for intensity of browsing. Intensity was quantified using five-scale categories reflecting the proportions of plant tissue removed (0 = no browsing, 1 = 1-25%, 2 = 26-50%, 3 = 51-75% and 4 = 76-100%). Across all plant species, the average category of browsing intensity, as determined in the post-grazing evaluation, was affected (P < 0.001) by stocking density. Browsing intensity increased in an approximately linear manner from 1.58 to 2.18 and 2.77 with low, medium and high stocking density, respectively. There was no significant difference between years. Most woody species followed the same general response pattern to stocking density, although some species were only noticeably browsed at high stocking density while a few others were intensively browsed at all stocking densities. The onset of browsing on woody species was observed only after some weeks had passed, indicating that herbaceous plants were preferred as a forage resource. The proportion of fatally damaged individuals, as assessed about 8 months after grazing in 2006, were 10.6%, 8.6% and 11.4% for low, medium and high stocking density, respectively. The percentage of completely browsed individuals increased with stocking density, but 80% of those plant individuals recovered following a resting period of 8 months. However, although most woody species recovered from browsing and fatal damage was infrequent, long-term changes in woody plant species composition and structure caused by grazing cannot be excluded. High stocking density in particular may reduce the vigour of heavily browsed species. © 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
The extensive area of degraded tropical land and the calls to conserve forest biodiversity and sequester carbon to offset climate change demonstrate the need to restore forest in the tropics. Deforested land is sometimes replanted with fast-growing trees; however, the consequences of intensive replanting on biomass accumulation or plant and animal diversity are poorly understood. The purpose of this study was to determine how intensive replanting affected tropical forest regeneration and biomass accumulation over ten years. We studied reforested sites in Kibale National Park, Uganda, that were degraded in the 1970s and replanted with five native tree species in 1995. We identified and measured the size of planted versus naturally regenerating trees, and felled and weighed matched trees outside the park to calculate region-specific allometric equations for above-ground tree biomass. The role of shrubs and grasses in facilitating or hindering the establishment of trees was evaluated by correlating observed estimates of percent cover to tree biomass. We found 39 tree species naturally regenerating in the restored area in addition to the five originally planted species. Biomass was much higher for planted (15,675. kg/ha) than naturally regenerated trees (4560. kg/ha), but naturally regenerating tree regrowth was an important element of the landscape. The establishment of tree seedlings initially appeared to be facilitated by shrubs, primarily Acanthus pubescens and the invasive Lantana camara; however, both are expected to hinder tree recruitment in the long-term. Large and small-seeded tree species were found in the replanted area, indicating that bird and mammal dispersers contributed to natural forest restoration. These results demonstrate that intensive replanting can accelerate the natural accumulation of biomass and biodiversity and facilitate the restoration of tropical forest communities. However, the long-term financial costs and ecological benefits of planting and maintaining reforested areas need to be weighed against other potential restoration strategies. © 2010 Elsevier B.V.
Animal species in the Neotropics have evolved under a lower spatiotemporal patchiness of food resources compared to the other tropical regions. Although plant species with a steady-state flowering/fruiting phenology are rare, they provide predictable food resources and therefore may play a pivotal role in animal community structure and diversity. I experimentally planted a supplemental patch of a shrub species with a steady-state flowering/fruiting phenology, Hamelia patens Jacq., into coffee agroforests to evaluate the contribution of this unique phenology to the structure and diversity of the flower-visiting community. After accounting for the higher abundance of captured animals in the coffee agroforests with the supplemental floral resources, species richness was 21% higher overall in the flower-visiting community in these agroforests compared to control agroforests. Coffee agroforests with the steady-state supplemental floral patch also had 31% more butterfly species, 29% more hummingbird species, 65% more wasps and 85% more bees than control coffee agroforests. The experimental treatment, together with elevation, explained 57% of the variation in community structure of the flower-visiting community. The identification of plant species that can support a high number of animal species, including important ecosystem service providers, is becoming increasingly important for restoration and conservation applications. Throughout the Neotropics plant species with a steady-state flowering/fruiting phenology can be found in all aseasonal forests and thus could be widely tested and suitable species used throughout the tropics to manage for biodiversity and potentially ecosystem services involving beneficial arthropods. © 2014 Valerie E. Peters.
Reforestation projects have gained interest over recent years due to the loss of biodiversity in tropical regions as a result of large deforestation by anthropogenic actions. However, better knowledge on the tolerance of plant species to environmental stresses is needed for reforestation success. Here, we evaluated the photoprotective and antioxidant capacity, in terms of vitamin E accumulation, of five pioneer (Platypodium elegans Vogel, Schinus terebinthifolius Raddi, Lafoensia pacari A. St.-Hil, Cecropia pachystachya Trécul. and Aegiphila sellowiana Cham.) and five non-pioneer (Myracrodruon urundeuva Allemão, Cedrela fissilis Vell., Genipa americana L., Copaifera langsdorffii Desf. and Hymenaea courbaril L.) species, in relation to the extent of lipid peroxidation in leaves. Furthermore, we examined differences between sun and shade leaves on vitamin E accumulation and the extent of lipid peroxidation. Pioneer plants showed on average 33% higher malondialdehyde levels, an indicator of lipid peroxidation, than non-pioneer species, but no significant differences in vitamin E contents. In contrast, a marked interspecific variation was observed in the levels of α-tocopherol and its precursor, γ-tocopherol. Natural variation revealed interesting relationships between vitamin E levels and the extent of lipid peroxidation in leaves. The pioneer species, P. elegans, did not accumulate α-tocopherol and displayed the highest levels of malondialdehyde. Sun and shade leaves accumulated vitamin E levels to a similar extent, except for the pioneer L. pacari and the non-pioneer C. langsdorffii, the former accumulating more α-tocopherol in sun leaves and the latter in shade leaves. We conclude that interspecific variation is higher than both leaf type and successional-group variation in terms of vitamin E accumulation and the extent of lipid peroxidation, and that vitamin E levels, particularly those of α-tocopherol, negatively correlate with the extent of lipid peroxidation, thus supporting a photoprotective and antioxidant function for vitamin E in plants growing in tropical environments. © 2016 The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
Ecologists have historically sought to identify the mechanisms underlying the maintenance of local species diversity. High-dimensional trait-based relationships, such as alternative phenotypes, have been hypothesized as important for maintaining species diversity such that phenotypically dissimilar individuals compete less for resources but have similar performance in a given environment. The presence of alternative phenotypes has primarily been investigated at the community level, despite the importance of intraspecific variation to diversity maintenance. The aims of this research are to (1) determine the presence or absence of intraspecific alternative phenotypes in three species of tropical tree seedlings, (2) investigate if these different species use the same alternative phenotypes for growth success, and (3) evaluate how findings align with species co-occurrence patterns. We model species-specific relative growth rate with individual-level measurements of leaf mass per area (LMA) and root mass fraction (RMF), environmental data, and their interactions. We find that two of the three species have intraspecific alternative phenotypes, with individuals within species having different functional forms leading to similar growth. Interestingly, individuals within these species use the same trait combinations, high LMA x\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$\times$$\end{document} low RMF and low LMA x\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$\times$$\end{document} high RMF, in high soil nutrient environments to acquire resources for higher growth. This similarity among species in intraspecific alternative phenotypes and variables that contribute most to growth may lead to their negative spatial co-occurrence. Overall, we find that multiple traits or interactions between traits and the environment drive species-specific strategies for growth, but that individuals within species leverage this multi-dimensionality in different ways for growth success.
Agricultural and Agroforestry play an important role in the economy of West African countries. They contribute to nearly 40% of the GDP and provide a large variety of ecosystem services to the local populations. However, the sustainability of agricultural and agroforestry systems in these countries is gradually jeopardised by climate change since these ecosystems are still predominantly rain-fed and therefore at the mercy of climatic hazards. For a developing country like Benin, there is still a lot of data gap in other to quantify the impact of climate change on agro-ecosystems. Thus, the current study focused on providing an inventory of the evolution and the monetary value of agro-ecosystem services in Benin with an analysis of the perceptions of the impact of climate change on these services. The data analysed showed, from 1975 to 2015, a reduction in forests and savannahs in favour of an increase in cultivated land. The areas of water bodies, swamps and floodplains have increased by almost 500% in the subequatorial climate regions and have remained almost unchanged in the tropical climate regions. The main uses of agroecosystems were agriculture, fishing, energy production, timber trade, and cultural rituals. A monetary estimate reveals that the value of agroecosystems services provided in the subequatorial regions (USD 3700/ha) is 2–3 times greater than that of the value of these services in the tropical regions (USD 1600/ha). The local population didn't perceive see climate hazards as a threat to community forests and planted forests. However, they felt that the establishment of sustainable management of agroecosystems through good agricultural practices and sustainable management of the landscape, would allow better regulation of the climate, conservation of specific and genetic biodiversity, and solve the problems of erosion and silting up of rivers. © 2022
Lillo EP, Malaki AB, Alcazar SMT, Rosales R, Redoblado BR, Diaz JLB, Pantinople EM, Buot Jr. IE. 2021. Inventory of native and mother trees in Key Biodiversity Areas of Cebu Island, Philippines for species selection in local reforestation programs. Biodiversitas 22: 4740-4749. Forest restoration is the counterforce of deforestation and forest degradation. Yet, despite promoting natural recovery after forest harvest, afforestation and reforestation efforts, tropical forest ecosystems still experience a poor ratio of forest loss to forest gain. The study assessed the native tree species and potential mother trees in different Cebu Island Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs) as well as their distribution and habitat preferences which can be used in local reforestation programs. A vegetation survey was conducted in three KBAs in Cebu Island, namely Nug-as forest, Mount Lantoy and Mount Capayas to inventory all native species. Assessment based on the phenotypic characteristics of adult trees was also conducted for indicating mother trees. This study in Cebu Island KBAs recorded a total of 292 species, categorized into 125 families and 203 genera, which can be classified into native trees (210), vines and lianas (18), shrub (37), and herbs (27). Out of the 292 species, 214 were recorded in Nug-as forest, 172 in Mount Lantoy, and 145 in Mount Capayas. Of the 210 native tree species, Nug-as forest had 145 species, Mount Lantoy 131 species, and Mount Capayas 109 species. A total of 241 mother trees were identified in the three KBAs, corresponding to 77 species in which Nug-as forest had 143 trees correspond to 52 species, Mount Lantoy had 68 trees correspond to 29 species, and Mount Capayas had 31 trees correspond to 6 species. Such native tree species are recommended for reforestation programs as planting materials that could reduce the risks of failure due to its high adaptability to the environment. © 2021, Society for Indonesian Biodiversity. All rights reserved.
A fundamental challenge for ecologists is to evaluate the effects of anthropogenic disturbance on ecosystem processes and functions. Tropical rainforests in Borneo are biologically diverse and provide an array of ecosystem functions and services. However, these forests are being logged and converted to agricultural plantations at a rapid pace. While there are numerous studies on the impacts of these land-use changes on biodiversity, there are far fewer that investigate the consequences of forest disturbance for ecosystem functioning. We investigated the impacts of land-use change in Bornean tropical rainforests on invertebrate-mediated functions using a suite of six easily measurable processes that are linked to nutrient cycling and plant regeneration, and which can be used as indicators of the degree of disturbance and the health of the forest. We explored whether the conversion of primary forest to logged, fragmented forest or agricultural plantations altered the ecosystem processes of dung removal, predation of insect herbivores, functional activity of soil invertebrates, bioturbation, seed removal, and decomposition. Overall, ecosystem processes remained resistant to habitat change except for seed removal, which was lower in heavily logged forests and plantations than in primary forests. This suggests that, despite the loss of many species when forests are logged and converted to agriculture, ecosystem processes provided by invertebrates can remain robust across land-use gradients. Graphical Abstract: (Figure presented.) © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2024.
The deforestation has led to local loss of species and important ecosystem services performed by them, causing ecological and economic losses. It is proposed that the reforestation of such areas aims to reduce those impacts. However, particularly in the tropics, little is known about the real success of different types of reforestation in the recovery of the species, and especially of the population parameters. Here we evaluated whether different types of reforestations affect Trypoxylon (Trypargilum) lactitarse Saussure (Hymenoptera: Crabronidae) in terms of abundance, percentage of emergence, proportion of males, fluctuating asymmetry, and foraging capacity. We compared primary forest (control) data to data collected in five different habitats: pasture, secondary forest, and tree plantations of Teak, Ficus, and a mixture of native species. The abundance of T. lactitarse was higher in tree plantations than in pasture. However, among the analyzed parameters, Teak plantation presented lower emergence percentage and the majority of individuals born were males. The emerged females in this habitat showed higher asymmetry and lower foraging capacity. Ficus showed lower individual abundance and mixed plantation showed lower emergence percentage, with both plantation types showing higher male emergence. On the other hand, in secondary forest, the analyzed parameters did not differ in relation to the primary forest, being the habitat more efficient in relation to those with tree planting. The changes in population parameters of T. lactitarse in different reforestations and particularly on Teak monocultures were probably attributed to indirect effects, such as low food availability and inadequate environmental conditions. © 2019, Sociedade Entomológica do Brasil.
The East Usambara mountains are globally important for biodiversity conservation. The work reported here aimed to clarify whether plantations of Maesopsis eminii, an introduced pioneer tree, are a source of alien tree invasion or a temporary element in a protected conservation forest ecosystem in these mountains. The natural regeneration dynamics of M. eminii and indigenous primary tree species were assessed in M. eminii plantations which were up to 35 years old, using clustered systematic sampling. A total of 103 and 95 woody species were observed in the sapling and lower canopy layers, respectively. Both layers showed an abundance of Cephalosphaera usambarensis, a local species also used in plantations. M. eminii was virtually absent in the sapling layer, and its frequency decreased in the lower canopy with time. Abundant spontaneous regeneration of native primary forest species occurred under M. eminii. The sapling density of Allanblackia stuhlmannii, Beilschmiedia kweo and Greenwayodendron suaveolens increased, and that of Newtonia buchananii decreased, with time. In the lower canopy, the density of G. suaveolens, Parinari excelsa and Strombosia scheffleri increased in relation to plantation age. Therefore, no active, risky eradication of Maesopsis is needed in the conservation area, but a priority management task should be to avoid canopy gaps.
Conversion of forest to rubber plantation is one of the most common land-use change in the humid tropical region. It is one of the fastest expanding farms that lead to various socioenvironmental issues. We investigated the effect of this land-use change on soil physico-chemical properties by surveying different succession stage rubber plantations, including monoculture and a mixture derived by mixing jungle rubber and a reference tropical rainforest. We also assessed the impact on stoichiometric ratios and allocation relationships of soil carbon (C), nitrogen (N), and phosphorus (P). Our results demonstrated that conversion of tropical rainforest to rubber monoculture resulted in serious soil degradation, with a lower level of water content, water holding capacities, total porosity, pH, and soil nutrients, and a higher level of soil bulk density. However, after transforming a rubber monoculture into a jungle rubber, the concentrations of soil total C, N, P, Ca, and Mg significantly increased, by 28%, 24%, 23%, 17%, and 39%, respectively. Meanwhile, soil salinity declined by 15%. Jungle rubber also exerted some desirable effects on soil physical properties, such as decreased soil bulk density, increased field capacity and non-porosity by 6%, 2%, and 33%, respectively. Like other tropical regions, soils in the present study areas are mainly under P limitation, but jungle rubber increased soil P turnover and thereby increases P availability. In conclusion, jungle rubber correcting the soil degradation resulted from rubber plantation on tropical forest soil. Given the improvements in soil quality, constructing multiple-strata and multispecies rubber agroforestry (e.g., jungle rubber) can be a promising approach to facilitate the restoration of the existing monoculture rubber plantations.
Land change was assessed in the Albertine rift region (ARR) using its central section of north-western Rwanda as case study. This region is one of Africa's most ecologically sensitive environments under severe pressure from human activities. The study maps and quantifies the spatial extent of land use-land cover (LULC) changes between 1987 and 2016 from Landsat images. Transitions between five major land classes were identified in order to understand the trajectory of observed changes. In terms of gains, the forest class, the urban built-up and bare land class increased by 9% and 4% respectively over the study period. The gains of forest were mainly derived from the afforestation of some agricultural lands in the southern part, whereas the gains of built-up and bare lands were mostly from cultivated land which was a net losing class. Forest increase is in line with government's policy to increase the national forest cover to 30% by 2020. Forest losses occurred mostly outside protected areas due to land conversion for settlement and agricultural purposes. Much needed information about changes in LULC over the last three decades is provided. This study demonstrates in a timely manner how to analyse and monitor LULC change and the drivers in an environment where field based research is a challenge due to the mountainous terrain. The ecological richness of the region, which coincides with heightened human population pressure, necessitates the monitoring of land change as input for improving land use planning with focus on conserving biodiversity. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
The Caatinga biome covers an area of 844,453 km(2) and has enormous endemic biodiversity, with unique characteristics that make it an exclusive Brazilian biome. It falls within the earth's tropical zone and is one of the several important ecoregions of Brazil. This biome undergoes natural lengthy periods of drought that cause losses in crop and livestock productivity, having a severe impact on the population. Due to the vulnerability of this ecosystem to climate change, livestock has emerged as the main livelihood of the rural population, being the precursor of the replacement of native vegetation by grazing areas. This study aimed to measure GHG emissions from two different soil covers: native forest (Caatinga) and pasture in the municipality of Sao Joao, Pernambuco State, in the years 2013 and 2014. GHG measurements were taken by using static chamber techniques in both soil covers. According to a previous search, so far, this is the first study measuring GHG emissions using the static chamber in the Caatinga biome. N2O emissions ranged from -1.0 to 4.2 mg m(-2) d(-1) and -1.22 to 3.4 mg m(-2) d(-1) in the pasture and Caatinga, respectively, and they did not significantly differ from each other. Emissions were significantly higher during dry seasons. Carbon dioxide ranged from -1.1 to 14.1 and 1.2 to 15.8 g m(-2) d(-1) in the pasture and Caatinga, respectively. CO2 emissions were higher in the Caatinga in 2013, and they were significantly influenced by soil temperature, showing an inverse relation. Methane emission ranged from 6.6 to 6.8 and -6.0 to 4.8 mg m(-2) d(-1) in the pasture and Caatinga, respectively, and was significantly higher only in the Caatinga in the rainy season of 2014. Soil gas fluxes seemed to be influenced by climatic and edaphic conditions as well as by soil cover in the Caatinga biome. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
The Caatinga is an endemic biome in Brazil and classified as a seasonally dry tropical forest, with relevant biodiversity and environmental and social importance. However, anthropic activities such as burning, deforestation, agriculture and grazing, have been suppressing considerable areas of vegetation in this biome, contributing to its fragmentation. In this sense, this study aimed to analyze the anthropic pressures under the Caatinga biome in the micro-region of the Cariri Oriental da Paraíba, using metrics such as land use and cover, suppression of primary and secondary vegetation, as well as the extraction of firewood and production of coal. Data from three different databases were used (BDiA; MAPBIOMAS and SIDRA), analyzed separately and, subsequently, together through principal component analysis (PCA). Considerable differences were observed for land use and cover among the municipalities in this micro-region, with predominance of areas with agriculture and livestock and Wooded Stépica Savannah. The mosaic of uses (Pastures/Agriculture) was the main agricultural land use class in Eastern Cariri. Suppression of primary vegetation greater than 1000 hectares was registered in the years 1990, 1991, 1992, 1995, 1996 and 1998. Significant values of firewood extraction (>130,000 m3 per year) were observed in the period 1998-2001. The ACP showed significant associations between the suppression of primary vegetation and the production of firewood and charcoal. The results together demonstrate the local susceptibility of the Caatinga and the need for conservation actions in this biome. © 2023 University Center of Maringa. All rights reserved.
Land use change in the Amazon rainforest alters the taxonomic structure of soil microbial communities, but whether it alters their functional gene composition is unknown. We used the highly parallel microarray technology GeoChip 4.0, which contains 83992 probes specific for genes linked nutrient cycling and other processes, to evaluate how the diversity, abundance and similarity of the targeted genes responded to forest-to-pasture conversion. We also evaluated whether these parameters were reestablished with secondary forest growth. A spatially nested scheme was employed to sample a primary forest, two pastures (6 and 38years old) and a secondary forest. Both pastures had significantly lower microbial functional genes richness and diversity when compared to the primary forest. Gene composition and turnover were also significantly modified with land use change. Edaphic traits associated with soil acidity, iron availability, soil texture and organic matter concentration were correlated with these gene changes. Although primary and secondary forests showed similar functional gene richness and diversity, there were differences in gene composition and turnover, suggesting that community recovery was not complete in the secondary forest. Gene association analysis revealed that response to ecosystem conversion varied significantly across functional gene groups, with genes linked to carbon and nitrogen cycling mostly altered. This study indicates that diversity and abundance of numerous environmentally important genes respond to forest-to-pasture conversion and hence have the potential to affect the related processes at an ecosystem scale.
Rubber plantation establishment is a common land use that can profoundly impact plant diversity and soil properties in tropical forest ecosystems, although empirical data on such effects are scarce in tropical Africa. In this study, we examined the effects of this land use on tree species diversity and soil physicochemical properties of the Awudua Forest in Ghana. We surveyed 60 25 m × 25 m plots, 20 in each of three land uses (i.e., primary forest, secondary forest and rubber plantation) of the study area. Within each plot, we identified and enumerated all trees (≥ 10 cm diameter at breast height, dbh at 1.3 m) and collected soil samples at three depths (i.e., 0–10 cm, 10–20 cm and 20–30 cm) for the determination of soil physicochemical properties (bulk density, particle size distribution, pH, OC, TN, AP, K, Mg, Ca). Soil physicochemical properties; sand, OC, AP, K, Mg, Ca in the rubber plantation decreased by 4.4%, 24.9%, 40.0%, 16.7%, 50.0% and 20.2% respectively, whereas the primary forest recorded decreases in OC (42.2%), TN (25%), AP (71.1%), K (69%), Mg (59.6%), Ca (27%) from the surface to the sub layers. Results showed significantly lower tree species richness (S, 12), diversity (H', 0.37), evenness (E, 0.43), and basal area (BA, 2.86 m2/ha) in the rubber plantation compared to those of the secondary forest (36, 1.10, 0.85 and 0.93 m2 ha-1, respectively) and the primary forest (46, 2.28, 0.97, and 3.32 m2 ha-1, respectively). Non-metric multidimensional scaling ordination also revealed distinct tree species composition among the land uses. Terminalia ivorensis (IVI = 7.1%), Musanga cecropoides (28.91%) and Hevea brasiliensis (72.03%) were the most dominant species in the primary forest, secondary forest and plantation respectively. Soil OC, TN, K, AP, Mg and bulk density differed among the land uses, but no differences were observed in pH and Ca. The findings confirmed the strong negative impacts of rubber plantation land use on plant diversity and soil properties, suggesting the need for mitigation measures such as afforestation and offsetting to ensure sustainable utilization and conservation of biodiversity in the reserve. © 2022 The Authors
To conserve biodiversity and combat climate change it is vital to restore forest ecosystems. Natural forest regrowth is a nature-based solution to restore forests, but it has rarely been evaluated how this is affected by the combination of previous land use intensity and surrounding forest cover, and how this varies between the two main tropical forest types; dry and wet forests. Thirty-three plots were established on abandoned agricultural fields in a dry (13 plots) and wet (20 plots) tropical forest in Mexico and monitored 3 years for the following tree community attributes: structure, diversity, regeneration mode, potential symbioses with N fixing bacteria and mycorrhizal fungi. Previous land use intensity was described using interviews, and landscape forest cover and fragmentation within a 1000 m radius surrounding the plots were quantified using satellite images. Variable importance analyses indicated that land use intensity was more important than forest cover and fragmentation for the state of the tree community attributes after 3 years. This suggests that previous land use impacts the start of succession and leaves important legacies on the vegetation. Land use intensity, forest cover and fragmentation were equally important in determining the change in tree community attributes over time, indicating that both management practices and dispersal shape subsequently community assembly. A higher land use intensity decreases tree richness recovery, while size of the largest forest patch decreases tree density and connectivity of these patches increases tree density. The dry forest had a faster increase in tree density recovery compared to the wet forest through a high initial resprouting capacity and abiotically dispersed trees. Synthesis and applications: Both a higher land use intensity and fragmented forest landscape decreases the speed of forest recovery, indicating that human actions and landscape transformation shape the course of succession. Restoration in fragmented forest landscapes through natural regeneration is more suitable in areas with low previous land use intensity, higher forest connectivity and abiotically dispersed species. Effective restoration should therefore consider both land use history and landscape forest cover and be tailored to local socio-ecological conditions. © 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Applied Ecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Ecological Society.
There has been widespread clearance of tropical forests for agriculture, but in many cases the cultivation phase is only transient. The secondary forests recovering on these abandoned sites may contribute to mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions and protection of biodiversity, but the rates of recovery may be dependent on land-use intensity and changes in soil properties during cultivation. However fine-scale details on these changes are poorly known for many tropical forest locations. We quantified soil properties and recovery of woody biomass in 42 tropical forest fragments representing a chronosequence following two types of agricultural land-uses, and in 15 comparable reference old growth forests, between the Andes and the Amazon in Peru. Soil fertility, particularly base cation concentrations, responded negatively to increasing intensity of agricultural land-use, and either decreased or increased with time after abandonment dependent on prior land-use. The predicted mean recovery rate of woody biomass over the first 20 years following abandonment matched that predicted by a general model for the Neotropics, but recovery was three-fold higher on sites abandoned following traditional agriculture than on sites recovering from intensive agriculture. Estimated total biomass recovered to just above half that of reference old growth forests within 71 years. The inclusion of the biomass of lianas and smaller tree stems did not modify the apparent rate of ecosystem biomass recovery, however the proportion of the total biomass stored in small stems was greater following intensive than traditional agriculture, which suggests that patterns of stand structural development are sensitive to land-use history. We conclude that effects of historic land use on soil nutrient concentrations and their changes through time are required for a more complete interpretation of variation in biomass recovery rates at local scales. These results also highlight the critical importance of contemporary agricultural intensification for carbon storage in tropical forests. © 2021 Elsevier B.V.
The present study examines the land use land cover (LULC) and change detection impacts on forest ecosystem in Achanakmaar Amarkantak Biosphere Reserve (AABR – area 626.76 km2) of Central India. Results revealed that there has been a change in AABR land use pattern from 2008 to 2018. The major changes include loss of 19.72 km2 of vegetation cover in various forest types due to increasing biotic interference and over grazing, conversion of 14.77 km2 of Dense Sal mixed forest to open mixed forest and cultivable land, and 5.0 km2 teak plantation and Bamboo brakes to agricultural land. Despite losing many plant species due to anthropogenic pressure, the present study found that the AABR as a unique repository of plant species rich in biodiversity. Many spots of this area are invaded or replaced by exotic species which is causing the loss of ecology and diversity of this region. Based on our study Sal mixed forest reduced by 2.88% (5.23 km2), Dense mixed forest 4.02% (9.54 km2), Teak plantation 6.77% (2.61 km2) and Bamboo brakes reduced by 7.66% (2.34 km2). The study concludes that the Landsat 7 TM and Resourcesat 2A satellite images are the most suitable for studying the LULC change on forest ecosystem of AABR. We advocate that by adopting the rigorous conservation measures, especially in open & dense forest and young under-stocked teak forests can restore the vegetation density and diversity in the area. Moreover, Sal natural regeneration of vegetation would remain crucial, and invasion of exotic species over native species needs to be restored in the forest area. Such findings on major changes occurring in forest ecosystem hold tremendous implications in relation to the welfare of the resource-poor tribal communities who are greatly dependent on the natural resources available in AABR for their livelihood. © 2020
In hyperdiverse tropical forests, the key drivers of litter decomposition are poorly understood despite its crucial role in facilitating nutrient availability for plants and microbes. Selective logging is a pressing land use with potential for considerable impacts on plant-soil interactions, litter decomposition, and nutrient cycling. Here, in Borneo's tropical rainforests, we test the hypothesis that decomposition is driven by litter quality and that there is a significant home-field advantage, that is positive interaction between local litter quality and land use. We determined mass loss of leaf litter, collected from selectively logged and old-growth forest, in a fully factorial experimental design, using meshes that either allowed or precluded access by mesofauna. We measured leaf litter chemical composition before and after the experiment. Key soil chemical and biological properties and microclimatic conditions were measured as land-use descriptors. We found that despite substantial differences in litter quality, the main driver of decomposition was land-use type. Whilst inclusion of mesofauna accelerated decomposition, their effect was independent of land use and litter quality. Decomposition of all litters was slower in selectively logged forest than in old-growth forest. However, there was significantly greater loss of nutrients from litter, especially phosphorus, in selectively logged forest. The analyses of several covariates detected minor microclimatic differences between land-use types but no alterations in soil chemical properties or free-living microbial composition. These results demonstrate that selective logging can significantly reduce litter decomposition in tropical rainforest with no evidence of a home-field advantage. We show that loss of key limiting nutrients from litter (P & N) is greater in selectively logged forest. Overall, the findings hint at subtle differences in microclimate overriding litter quality that result in reduced decomposition rates in selectively logged forests and potentially affect biogeochemical nutrient cycling in the long term.
Landscape approaches are widely applied in attempts to reconcile tradeoffs amongst different actors with conflicting demands on land and water resources. Key principles for landscape approaches have been endorsed by inter-governmental processes dealing with climate change mitigation and adaptation and biodiversity conservation. We review experiences from seven landscapes located in the Congo Basin, Eastern Indonesia and Northern Australia. Landscape initiatives were applied in situations where large-scale extractive industries, local peoples’ livelihoods and global biodiversity objectives were in conflict. We found that common published principles for landscape approaches are not applied systematically in the areas studied. Practitioners draw upon landscape approach principles selectively and adapt them to deal with local conditions. We consider that landscape approaches do not provide silver bullet solutions to these situations nor do they provide an operational framework for large-scale land management. Landscape approaches do, however, provide an organising framework for disentangling the complexity of the landscape and facilitating the investigation of impacts of different courses of action. They enable alternative scenarios for what future landscapes might look like to be investigated and they create the space for multi-stakeholder negotiations. Outcomes from landscape scale approaches are determined by the power differentials amongst stakeholders and the existence, or otherwise, of functional institutions to take decisions and enforce agreements. Landscape approaches cannot overcome disparities in power or entrenched interests nor can they substitute for institutions with authority to establish and legitimise property and resource rights. They can, however, provide a mechanism around which civil society can be mobilised to achieve better land use outcomes. Landscape approaches are successful when they have strong leadership, sustained long-term and facilitated processes, good governance, adequate budgets and adequate metrics for assessing progress. Private sector engagement is necessary and all parties must have sufficient shared interest in outcomes to motivate their participation. © 2014, Springer Japan.
The northern karst of Puerto Rico is a unique formation that contains one of the island's largest remaining forested tracts. The region is under ever-increasing human pressure, but large portions of it are being considered for conservation. Forest classification of the region is at a coarse scale, such that it is considered one vegetation type. We asked whether there were distinct tree assemblages which would necessitate targeted conservation strategies to ensure their protection. We examined tree species and communities across the region at three different major topographic positions along mogotes, or haystack-shaped hills. We found distinct tree communities on hilltops and valleys, with significantly more non-native species in valleys and significantly more endemic species on hilltops and hillsides. At a landscape level, we identified at least four different communities within each topographic position. Two mogote top communities were separated geographically (west and south) within the region, while two others co-occurred in the east-central part of the region. Mogote side and valley communities were less distinct geographically. Temperature, elevation, and precipitation were important variables in separating some communities, suggesting that abiotic stress may play an important role in the distribution of some species. In contrast, the lack of geographic separations of other communities suggested that variables such as soil conditions, land use and biotic interactions such as dispersal limitation may also be important. Conservation planning strategies should target the south, west, and east-central areas that harbor distinct mogote top plant communities to ensure protection of the widest range of tree species and communities in the karst region.
Biodiversity-friendly agricultural systems allow the maintenance of native species even in highly fragmented landscapes by providing corridors to species dispersion and offering supplementary resources for animal populations. In the tropical region, cocoa agroforestry systems are of great importance for biodiversity conservation as they maintain part of the native vegetation, and therefore can be used by the local fauna. In this system, understory of native forests is replaced by cocoa trees, which are shaded by large old-growth trees. However, the persistence of native species in cocoa agroforests depends on local vegetation characteristics but also the landscape structure in which these systems are located. Here, we investigated the influence of landscape composition (i.e. amount of forest cover, cocoa agroforestry and cattle pasture) and local vegetation structure (i.e. number of native and cocoa trees, basal area of native trees and canopy closure) on understory birds in 18 cocoa agroforestry systems located in three regions in the Brazilian Atlantic forest, presenting distinct land use contexts. Specifically, we assessed the effects of these landscape and local features in predicting richness and abundance patterns of the entire community, and also in distinct ecological groups, such as forest-dependent and non-forest-dependent birds, and insectivores, frugivores, and omnivores. Using generalized linear models and Akaike information criterion, we observed lower species richness of complete community, non-forest and omnivorous birds in the most deforested region. Also, our findings demonstrated that cocoa agroforests integrated in more forested landscapes harbor greater richness and abundance of frugivorous birds. Conversely, the increase in cattle pasture amount at the landscape had a harsh effect on all bird groups evaluated. Regarding local vegetation, we observed that the increase of canopy closure leads to greater abundance of insectivorous birds in cocoa agroforestry systems. Similarly, abundance of non-forest species increased in agroforests with higher number of cocoa trees. Our study demonstrated that cocoa agroforestry systems can provide complementary habitats for many species, including forest birds, and therefore can mitigate the effects of habitat loss. However, this key benefit for bird conservation will be more effective when these agroforestry systems are located in more forested landscapes, with low amount of cattle pastures. Our findings therefore reinforce the alarming need to maintain and recover landscape-scale forest amount to ensure species persistence of birds in anthropogenic landscapes, even in those comprising biodiversity-friendly land uses such as cocoa agroforestry systems. © 2020 Elsevier B.V.
ContextThe expansion of agricultural lands threatens biodiversity maintenance across the tropics. Although some agroforestry systems may be biodiversity-friendly, their conservation value likely depends on the landscape and regional contexts in which they are embedded-a poorly tested hypothesis.ObjectivesWe assessed the conservation value of shaded cocoa agroforests for bees and social wasps, and evaluated whether such value depends on the remaining forest cover at the landscape and/or regional scales.MethodsUsing a paired design, we compared alpha- (species number) and beta-diversity of each taxon between cocoa agroforests and neighbouring rainforests in 30 landscapes from three regions with different deforestation levels from the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. We assessed whether the species number ratio (cocoa/forest) and beta-diversity related to landscape-scale forest cover, and whether such a relationship differed among regions (interacting effect).ResultsCocoa agroforests held more bee and wasp species than forests, and beta-diversity between habitats was moderate (bees) to high (wasps). Bees' species number ratio peaked at the intermediate-deforested region, and beta-diversity decreased with increasing forest cover, indicating that both land uses shared more species in more forested landscapes, especially in the high- and intermediate-deforested regions. Yet, for social wasps, beta-diversity varied only within regions, with habitats sharing more species in the low-deforested region.ConclusionsOur findings highlight that the conservation value of shaded cocoa agroforests for bees and social wasps depends on local and regional landscape forest cover. With cocoa agroforest being highly permeable matrix which increases with higher forest cover especially for bees in high- and intermediate-deforested regions.
Context: High rates of deforestation have prompted discussions on the use of agricultural systems for biodiversity conservation. Although agroforests are recognized as supplementary habitats for many species, it is still unclear whether this agricultural system can maintain multiple dimensions of species diversity. Objectives: We investigated the impact of landscape and local factors on the taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic richness and diversity of the herpetofauna in 30 cocoa agroforests located in three different regions of the Atlantic Forest. Methods: We used Hill's numbers in orders 0 and 1 to estimate the richness and diversity of each dimension of amphibian and reptile communities. Using model selection approach, we evaluate the influence of landscape and local factors on the different dimensions of diversity of both groups. Results: For amphibians, we observed that pasture cover positively affects taxonomic richness and diversity, as well as phylogenetic richness. In contrast, forest edge density and number of forest fragments negatively affect richness and functional diversity, respectively. We also observed that the region with high forest cover exhibited lower amphibian functional richness. For reptiles, we found that forest cover and edge density positively affect species richness. We also noted that forest cover and edge density positively affect phylogenetic richness and diversity, respectively. Regarding local factors, only humidity positively affected functional richness and diversity, while temperature had a negative effect on reptile functional richness. Conclusions: Our study showed that the landscape context in which cocoa agroforests are located modulates the ability of this agricultural system to harbor multiple dimensions of amphibian and reptile diversity in human-modified landscapes. © The Author(s) 2025.
Tropical forest area is disappearing at the rate of 13.5 million ha each year, due mainly to clearing for agriculture and shifting cultivation. Timber harvesting results in more than 5 million ha of tropical forest annually being transformed into degraded, poorly managed, logged-over forests. The reduction and degradation caused by anthropological activities affect not only the sustainable production of timber but also the global environment. Accurate scientific information will enable managers to devise silvicultural systems to enhance soil properties and forest resources important for sustainable production and to minimize deleterious impacts of harvesting and short-rotation plantations. Ultimately, rehabilitation can increase the area of forest as well as conserve remaining primary forests and environmental quality. Rehabilitation aims to improve biological diversity, increase commercial value of timber and non-timber products, increase forest functions and improve soil fertility. Technical advances will reduce logging impacts, accelerate natural regeneration and improve species selection, enrichment, sustainable site management, catalytic planting and site evaluation and classification. Socio-economic reform should focus on local community participation and acceptance. The CIFOR/Japan project has undertaken research in many countries to evaluate impacts of harvesting and fires on forest ecosystems and to develop methods to rehabilitate logged-over forests and degraded forestlands in ways that are biologically successful as well as socio-economically acceptable. In Indonesia, CIFOR collaborates with Universitas Mulawarman at the Bukit Soeharto Education Forest, a mixed dipterocarp forest logged by INHUTANI I in 1976. The approach to rehabilitation has been through the "taungya" system whereby farmers grow annual crops among newly planted trees. With the Instituto Nacional de Investigacion Agraria (INIA), Peru, the project is trialling revegetation of fallow fields abandoned after agricultural use in the Ucayali region of the Peruvian Amazon. There is specific interest in selecting tree species with high economic value that grow rapidly in abandoned agricultural land and on infertile soils. Early results point to promising species. The project also involves small farmers in silvicultural activities and species selection. © 2004 Published by Elsevier B.V.
ContextIsolated pasture trees play an important role in forest recovery within fragmented tropical landscapes by attracting seed dispersers and facilitating seedling growth. However, studies with conflicting results have led to confusion about what drives variation in zoochorous-dispersed seed rain patterns under isolated tree canopies.ObjectivesTo assess the role of landscape and biological factors impacting zoochorous-dispersed seed rain under isolated pasture trees across three tropical regions of the world.MethodsWe measured seed dispersal under 144 isolated pasture trees found in 12 fragmented tropical and sub-tropical landscapes in Australia, Colombia and Nigeria. Using linear mixed effect models, we modeled seed diversity, abundance, richness and evenness as functions of the biological features and landscape context of isolated trees.ResultsThroughout all regions, the amount of woody vegetation surrounding trees in pastures was negatively related to rainforest seed diversity, evenness and abundance. Seed diversity and evenness increased significantly with the distance of isolated trees to forest fragments in the Australian sub-tropics, but elsewhere, seed diversity and evenness tended to decline with distance to forest, though not significantly.ConclusionsOur results suggest that the tree composition of landscapes surrounding isolated pasture trees is important for influencing zoochorous-dispersed seed rain, regardless of the region studied. Our study highlights the prominent role of landscape-scale, rather than local-scale factors on seed dispersal to isolated pasture trees, while providing strong evidence that early stage successional processes involving isolated pasture trees are similar throughout global tropical regions.
Understanding the extent and causes of savannah-forest dynamics in tropical regions is vital as small but widespread changes to tropical forests can have a major impact on global climate, biodiversity and human well-being. There is emerging evidence from aerial photography that an overall expansion of monsoon rainforests has occurred in northern Australia over the last few decades. Factors that may have driven the observed rainforest dynamics include the management of local scale disturbance events such as fire and buffalo numbers, as well as regional scale factors such as increases in rainfall and atmospheric CO2. Landscape ecology studies conducted in Kakadu National Park are provided as a case study as they together provide a cohesive methodology for investigating the consequences of management. The extent of boundary change at individual rainforest patches supported an effect of fire on the rainforest dynamics. The effect of historical buffalo impact was also supported by modelling analyses. However disturbance factors were unable to account for the overall expansion of rainforest. We conclude that fire and buffalo management have mediated the boundary dynamics. However, the overall boundary expansion is likely to have been primarily driven by factors that have shown similar increases during the study period, such as annual rainfall and atmospheric CO2. The methodology presented can be applied to forests in other regions and will contribute to 'adaptive management' programs, particularly with respect to fire management.
The use of remote sensing to determine land-use and land-cover (LULC) dynamics is often applied to assess the levels of natural forest conservation and monitor deforestation worldwide. This study examines the loss of native vegetation in the Campo Maior Complex (CMC), in the Brazilian Caatinga dry tropical forest, from 2016 to 2020, considering the temporal distribution of rainfall and discussing the trends and impacts of forest-degradation vectors. The Google Earth Engine (GEE) platform is used to obtain the rainfall data from the CHIRPS collection and to create the LULC maps. The random forest classifier is used and applied to the Landsat 8 collection. The QGIS open software and its SPC plugin are used to visualize the LULC dynamics. The results show that the months from June to October have the lowest average rainfall, and that 2019 is the year with the highest number of consecutive rainy days below 5 mm. The LULC maps show that deforestation was higher in 2018, representing 20.19%. In 2020, the proportion of deforestation was the lowest (11.95%), while regeneration was the highest (20.33%). Thus, the characterization of the rainfall regime is essential for more accurate results in LULC maps across the seasonally dry tropical forests (SDTF). © 2022 by the authors.
The conversion of tropical forests into agriculture reduces biodiversity dramatically. However, species might differ in their responses, depending on their habitat specialisation and geographic origin. In this study, we assess how butterfly assemblages differ between old-growth forests, forest fragments, forest-derived vanilla agroforests, fallow-derived vanilla agroforests, woody fallows, herbaceous fallows, and rice paddies in Madagascar. We recorded 88 butterfly species, of which 65 species are endemic to Madagascar. Land-use types with woody vegetation sustained many endemic (mean: 6.8 species) and forest butterfly species (mean: 4.8 species). Rice paddies and herbaceous fallows were richer in open-land species (mean: 7.6 species) and poorer in forest species (mean: 1.7 species) compared to other land-use types. Compared to herbaceous fallows, fallow-derived vanilla agroforests hosted more endemic (+164%) and forest (+239%) species. Richness of open-land species in forest-derived vanilla agroforests was six times higher than in forest fragments. Overall, 27% of species occurred exclusively in one land-use type and 19% of all species when old-growth forests were excluded. We found the highest number of exclusive species in forest-derived vanilla agroforests. We conclude that all studied land-use types contribute to butterfly conservation in our study region. Especially the woody vegetation in forest fragments, vanilla agroforests, and woody fallows supports a high butterfly diversity and is pivotal for maintaining a broad diversity of forest butterflies in the agricultural matrix. Our study highlights the importance of preserving the diversity of small-scale land-use types, including agroforestry, forests and fallow land in this tropical biodiversity hotspot. © 2022 The Authors. Insect Conservation and Diversity published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Royal Entomological Society.
Deforestation and agricultural land degradation in tropical regions can create conditions for growth of perennial plant species forming mono-dominated patches (MDP). Such species might limit forest regeneration, and their proliferation forces the abandonment of fields and subsequent deforestation to establish new fields. Therefore, identifying factors fostering MDP species is critical for biodiversity conservation in human-modified landscapes. Here, we propose a conceptual framework to identify such factors and apply it to the case of Pteridium aquilinum (bracken fern), a light-demanding species, tolerant of low soil fertility and fire. We hypothesize that bracken proliferation is promoted by land-use changes that increase light availability, especially in sites with low soil fertility and land uses involving fire. We assessed this idea using agricultural fields in southeastern Mexico with different land-use change histories and quantifying prevalence and cover of bracken. Five different land-use change histories resulted from transitions among forest, crop, pasture, and fallow field stages. Of the 133 fields sampled, 71 percent had P. aquilinum; regression tree analysis indicated that 65 percent of inter-field variation in prevalence and 90 percent in cover was explained by land-use change history and soil type. Maximum prevalence, cover, and rates of increase in bracken were found on fields with low fertility sandy/clay soils, which had been used for crops and pasture, were frequently burned, and had high levels of light. Fields on fertile alluvial soil never used for pasture were bracken-free. Agriculture promoting high light environments on less fertile soils is a major cause of bracken proliferation and likely that of other MDP species. © 2014 The Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation.
Key message: For better categorization of species according to foliar habit, a set of leaf and wood traits must be observed. Abstract: Tropical forests are influenced by distinct regional rainfall regimes, microclimates, and dynamics of nutrient cycling, which are responsible for creating key biodiversity patterns and differences in leaf deciduousness to drought. Functional traits studies have improved understanding of the functioning and heterogeneity of complex ecosystems. We have reviewed the literature focusing mainly on tropical dry forests and relationships among leaf habits (evergreen and deciduous) and other leaf and wood traits. Thus, we have compiled 121 original papers, 2 reports, and 9 book chapters published since 2000. We also provide a meta-analysis of these traits from Neotropics. Tropical deciduous species often have high photosynthetic rates per mass and specific leaf area and traits that improve water flow throughout the plant, such as wide xylem diameters and high hydraulic conductivity, maximizing resource capture during a limited growing season because of an acquisition strategy. The opposite is observed in evergreen species, namely as conservative species. Regardless of the plant organ, more morphological than physiological traits are available to compare leaf habits. For better categorization of species according to foliar habit, a set of leaf and wood traits must be observed. However, while local comparisons based on one or few traits may group species according to leaf habit, multivariate analyses for large spatial scales can reveal a different pattern. We have identified some open questions that can be further addressed in this research field to contribute to the improvement of theoretical frameworks as well as the consequences of a changing climate for tropical dry forests. © 2021, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature.
Fungi are important components of tropical ecosystems, especially in the recycling of nutrients. However, there is little information on how fungal diversity is structured at scales suitable to plan their conservation. We tested if the distribution of fruiting bodies of litter fungi was random in the landscape (over 25 km2) in a tropical evergreen forest in Central Amazonia. We used linear regressions to evaluate the influence of rainfall, soil characteristics and topography on morphospecies richness and composition. Fungi were collected twice in thirty 0.25 x 250 m plots. Short-term rainfall was represented by the cumulative rainfall in the three days before each plot was surveyed. Plots were classified in two groups based on cumulative rainfall. Clay content in soil and rainfall influenced morphospecies richness, but responses to edaphic factors depended on rainfall. Wetter periods apparently decreased limiting moisture conditions in higher areas, allowing fungal activity and fruiting body production. Morphospecies composition was influenced by clay content, but influence on fungi was probably indirect as clay content was correlated with altitude, plant community and nitrogen availability. Our results suggest that the species of litter fungi are not randomly distributed in the landscape. Furthermore, they indicate that it is viable to conduct mesoscale evaluations of fungal diversity, if the temporal and spatial variation and their interaction are taken into account. © 2007 Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
Forests produce a large amount of detritus, that inevitably end up in streams, subsidizing aquatic systems with organic matter and nutrients. Here we review some of the research carried out at the University of Coimbra with the objective of getting a better understanding of the breakdown process of these materials and its incorporation to secondary production. Litter-fall in deciduous forests in Central Portugal can reach up to 750 g AFDM of leaves m-2 yr-1, with 73% of the litter produced between October and December. In several retention experiments, we measured a 90% leaf retention in low order (1st- 4th) streams within 15 - 70 m, and a standing stock of up to 450 g AFDM m-2. The amount of nutrients in the water and the plant physical and chemical defenses can be an indicator of the rate at which plant material is incorporated into secondary production or exported as dissolved and fine particles of organic matter. Respiration rates of decomposing leaves incubated with fungicides were severely reduced, supporting the idea that fungi are very important agents in litter breakdown. The fungi group known as aquatic hyphomycetes are capable of producing enzymes able to cause leaf maceration, and by 2 to 3 weeks, up to 15% of the decomposing leaf biomass corresponds to fungi. Shredder invertebrates are also biological agents involved in litter breakdown. Given their densities and feeding rates, we measured consumption rates of 12 - 54 g of leaves m-2 yr-1 in a stream in Central Portugal, corresponding to 2 to 9 times the litter standing stock. Feeding rates were high in nutrient rich leaves and low in chemical and physically protected leaves with low nutrient content. According to several experiments, fungal colonization facilitates the access of invertebrates to the energy trapped in deciduous leaves in streams. Some invertebrates have strategies to cope with low quality food (leaves with low microbial biomass or high chemical defenses). Those include high mobility, small size, compartmentalized digestion in the gut, presence of endosymbionts, and the capability to decrease respiration rates. The relative importance of fungi and invertebrates in the incorporation of plant litter material into secondary production varies across rivers and biomes. Shredder invertebrates seem to play a key role in litter breakdown in headwaters, but their importance appears to decrease downstream. In the same way, some systems where leaves are hard or protected, shredder invertebrates may be less abundant and the energy may be mainly recovered from litter by fungi. Eucalyptus plantations are systems with low diversity of invertebrates and aquatic hyphomycetes. Streams running through eucalyptus plantations seem therefore ideal to experimentally investigate relationships between structural parameters (biodiversity) and function. Finally, our research has been extended to other climatic areas including the Mediterranean and tropical streams. We reported a wide variety of situation in those systems. A general rule applying to all of them is that if leaf litter is abundant and high quality, the incorporation of energy into detrital food webs can be processed very quickly. However, if leaves are well protected and nutrients in the water are low, processing rates are equally very low, independently of the ambient temperatures. © Asociación Española de Limnología.
Ideally, science should inform policy development in all areas of human endeavor. Nowhere is this truer than in the case of human land use and our impact on the natural environment. Unfortunately, little recent science has percolated into policy guidelines for tropical forest management in areas facing serious threats. To help science inform policy we present six guidelines, which have been empirically proven important, for the management of fragmented landscapes: (1) incorporate protection measures as part of development projects; (2) protect large areas and prevent the fragmentation of currently contiguous large patches of forest; (3) manage forest edges when creating forest patches; (4) protect gallery forests along waterways to connect isolated forest patches; (5) control the use of fire and the introduction of exotic plant species and limit the use of toxic chemicals in areas near forest patches; and (6) promote reforestation and forest cover in critical areas of landscapes. Straightforward linkages between science and policy formulation can result in simple, yet powerful, changes in land-use patterns and have a concurrent positive effect on biodiversity and natural resources.
While restoration projects globally scale-up to meet the growing demand to restore degraded ecosystems, data on the long-term benefits of restoration are still rare. Here, we describe the lessons learned from the Sow-A-Seed project in Sabah, Borneo: a long-term and large-scale restoration project launched in 1998 with the aim to rehabilitate 18,500 ha of tropical rainforest degraded by logging and forest fires. The project was built from the ground-up, including establishment of essential infrastructure and knowledge creation via trial-and-error. Three restoration techniques were used depending on the level of degradation; 1) Assisted Natural Regeneration (weeding, climber cutting and selective girdling) to promote natural regeneration of late-successional species in the least disturbed forests, and; 2) Enrichment Planting in gap-clusters in moderately disturbed forests, and; 3) Enrichment Planting in rows (i.e, line-planting) throughout heavily degraded forests with no- or few late successional tree species in the overstory. The project includes successful propagation of 92 native tree species including dipterocarps and fruit trees, and planting of over 5 million trees during the last 25 years. Long-term monitoring shows that the mortality rate of planted seedlings is ∼15% per year up to 3 years, but decreases to ∼2% between years 3–10 and 10–20. One of the largest trees, a Shorea leprosula planted in 1998, is now 74 cm in DBH and some planted trees have reached reproductive age and are contributing to natural regeneration. A range of wildlife including orangutans, elephants, hornbills and all five wildcat species in Sabah have been documented in the area. In 2015, the area was classified as a Class 1 protected forest, the highest level of conservation status in Malaysia, and removed from commercial forestry. We highlight that there is much knowledge to be gained by research dove-tailing with operational activities, and we encourage that the lessons learned from operational restoration are shared among practitioners and restoration ecologists. We present 8 key lessons learned from the Sow-a-Seed project. © 2024 The Authors
Forest and landscape restoration (FLR) is a powerful strategy for large-scale tropical forest recovery, and payment for ecosystem services (PES) is used to support FLR programs and projects on privately-owned land. In this article, we discuss the lessons learned from the Water Producer Project, a pioneer, multiple-stakeholder, and PES-supported FLR project in the Atlantic Forest, south-eastern Brazil. The project was implemented in four landscapes located in two municipalities. Altogether, 41 PES contracts with landowners were signed, resulting in various FLR practices being implemented in a total of 342.4 ha (64.2 ha for riparian forest restoration, 90.8 ha for soil conservation, and 187.4 for forest conservation) of land, which represents 39% of the project goal. As of the end of the project, only 50% (USD 49,250) of the available PES funds had been spent. However, funds spent on project planning, implementation, communication, and monitoring were 12 times greater than those spent on PES. Several challenges restricted the progress and monitoring of the project. The main issue was landowner participation and/or engagement. In terms of lessons learned, we highlight that PES schemes are more complex than initially thought, and that sufficient funding does not guarantee the success of FLR projects. It is essential to promote landowner participation and engagement by considering them key players in FLR projects. Finally, acceptance from landowners was higher and implementation was easier for forest conservation practices that required no land-use changes. Thus, we suggest that similar future projects should focus on targeting private properties in marginal agricultural lands with a high probability of natural regeneration. Alternatively, future projects could focus on lands with remnant forest cover of high conservation value. © 2019 by the authors.
1. There is considerable debate about whether tropical forests can be managed for timber production and to conserve biodiversity. Few 'sustainable forestry' systems have been evaluated adequately in this respect. Microchiropteran bats may be model taxa for this purpose. They are an important component of mammalian diversity, play key roles in forest dynamics and are indicators of disturbance in neotropical forests. 2. We investigated the effect of Trinidad's periodic block system (PBS) on bat species diversity and community organization. PBS is a polycyclic system of selective logging with a 30-year harvesting rotation. We captured bats in primary forest and PBS-managed forest logged 33, 31, 21, 20 and 10 years previously. 3. Selective logging did not affect species diversity but did affect community structure. Frugivorous bats were significantly more abundant in logged forest whereas gleaning animalivores were more abundant in primary forest, suggesting that frugivores benefited and gleaning animalivores were adversely affected by logging. 4. The bat community showed evidence of recovery. The number of years since forest disturbance was positively correlated with the abundance and number of species of gleaning animalivores and negatively correlated with the proportional abundance of the most common species. Gleaning animalivores increased in abundance with forest regeneration, whereas the community became less dominated by a single generalist frugivore. 5. Synthesis and applications. PBS selective logging appears to be compatible with the conservation of bat diversity. This provides evidence that neotropical forests can be managed for timber production in an ecologically sustainable way and that significant biodiversity conservation efforts can occur outside national parks and nature reserves in areas set aside for sustainable development. PBS could serve as a basic blueprint for sustainable forestry in the Guianan Shield where there are forests similar in species composition to those of Trinidad. Key attributes that could be adopted by many tropical countries to manage their forests in an ecologically sustainable way are a low intensity harvest, a long rotation and multiple controls on harvesting. © 2005 British Ecological Society.
Understanding the relationship between functional diversity (FD) and species diversity changes and the effects of environmental factors on FD during succession is useful to improve forest management, conservation and restoration strategies. In this study, we measured 9 environmental factors related to light availability, soil water content and nutrients, and 19 leaf functional traits related to leaf light and nutrient utilization, growth and defense, water-use efficiency, and leaf respiration strategies in the dominant species during subtropical forest succession in southern China. Logarithmic function analysis and linear mixed model were used to explore the relationships between FD and species diversity and between FD and environmental factors. The results showed that FD and species diversity were not linearly correlated during succession. The light availability (represented by leaf area index), soil phosphorus, and different nitrogen forms were negatively related to the FD, suggesting these factors were the main environmental factors affecting FD during succession in the subtropical forest. By dividing FD into components corresponding to the diversity of different plant strategies, this study improves our understanding of the roles of light availability and soil nutrients in plant community functional structure, and provides useful information for forest conservation and restoration. (C) 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V.
We quantified the effect of overstory species composition on forest floor dynamics in lowland Costa Rica. Aboveground litter production and forest floor mass were measured over 1 year in 16-year-old single-species plantations established in a randomized complete block design with four blocks. The tree species investigated (=experimental treatments) were Hyeronima alchorneoides, Pentaclethra macroloba, Pinus patula subsp. tecunumanii, Virola koschnyi, Vochysia ferruginea, and Vochysia guatemalensis. Organic matter fluxes in litterfall, which averaged 10.1 Mg ha-1 year-1, were similar to those reported from comparable Neotropical plantations, whereas nitrogen fluxes in litterfall (up to 210 kgN ha-1 year-1) were high. Litter production was significantly greater beneath Hyeronima and V. ferruginea than beneath Virola, primarily due to high rates of non-woody litter production by Hyeronima, large amounts of twig litter production by V. ferruginea, and low production of both fractions by Virola. V. ferruginea had significantly more branch litter on the ground than did any other species, whereas Hyeronima had the largest accumulations of non-woody (mostly leaf) litter. Accumulations of woody litter correlated closely with rates of branchfall: branches ≤1 cm in diameter persisted on the forest floor for 0.9 year on average, independent of species. Rates of decay of non-woody litter, in contrast, varied significantly among species, with fastest rates (2.8 year-1) observed beneath Pentaclethra and the slowest decay rates (1.5 year-1) in plots of V. guatemalensis. Contrary to expectations, litter decay rates increased with increasing lignin contents, paralleling results of a concomitant study that found a significant negative correlation between litter lignin and surface-soil organic matter content. Our results demonstrate that different overstory-tree species generate significantly different forest floors, in terms of mass, composition and dynamics. These differences affect soil restoration, tree regeneration and other ecological processes important to selecting species for tropical plantation establishment and reforestation efforts. © 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
One important strategy to conciliate forest conservation and economic development is the use of reduced-impact logging techniques. Here we evaluated the effects of low-intensity forest management on ant assemblages and vegetation structure in a managed area in the southeast of Acre State, Brazil. Ground-dwelling and arboreal ants, and several forest-structure descriptors were sampled in nine paired areas located in control (unlogged) and logged areas in 2005, 2007 and 2009. None of the forest structure predictors were related with either the treatment or the time since logging. However, some ant assemblage' descriptors were related with logging activities. Arboreal and ground-dwelling ant species richness was similar between unlogged and logged areas, but more ground-dwelling ant species were found in areas logged in 2005 compared with areas logged in 2009. Ground-dwelling ant assemblage composition differed between treatments (logged and unlogged) and year of logging, but species composition heterogeneity was similar between areas. Arboreal ant assemblage composition was not related with treatment and year of logging, but assemblage composition was more heterogeneous in managed areas, suggesting that species that forage on the understory vegetation may be more resilient than ground-dwelling species. The general results of functional group approach suggest that changes of species composition between control and managed areas are more related with differences in ant species occurrence than ant species richness. Selective logging had limited effect on both vegetation descriptors and ant assemblage structure, suggesting that the conciliation of impact reduction techniques with low intensity extraction seems a promising alternative for sustainable logging activity in tropical forests.
Landsat and Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) imagery have recently been used to identify broad-scale floristic units in Neotropical rain forests, corresponding to geological formations and their edaphic properties. Little is known about the structural and functional variation between these floristic units, however, and Landsat and SRTM data lack the spectral and spatial resolution needed to provide this information. Imaging spectroscopy and LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) have been used to measure canopy structure and function in a variety of ecosystems, but the ability of these technologies to measure differences between compositionally-distinct but otherwise uniform tropical forest types remains unknown. We combined 16 tree inventories from central Panama with imaging spectroscopy and LiDAR elevation data from the Carnegie Airborne Observatory to test our ability to identify patterns in plant species composition, and to measure the spectral and structural differences between adjacent closed-canopy tropical forest types. We found that variations in spectroscopic imagery and LiDAR data were strong predictors of spatial turnover in plant species composition. We also found that these compositional, chemical, and structural patterns corresponded to underlying geological formations and their geomorphological properties. We conclude that imaging spectroscopy and LiDAR data can be used to interpret patterns identified in lower resolution sensors, to provide new information on forest function and structure, and to identify underlying determinants of these patterns. (C) 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Leaf litter represents an important link between tree community composition, forest productivity and biomass, and ecosystem processes. In forests, the spatial distribution of trees and species-specific differences in leaf litter production and quality are likely to cause spatial heterogeneity in nutrient returns to the forest floor and, therefore, in the redistribution of soil nutrients. Using mapped trees and leaf litter data for 12 tree species in a subtropical forest with a well-documented history of land use, we: (1) parameterized spatially explicit models of leaf litter biomass and nutrient deposition; (2) assessed variation in leaf litter inputs across forest areas with different land use legacies; and (3) determined the degree to which the quantity and quality of leaf litter inputs and soil physical characteristics are associated with spatial heterogeneity in soil nutrient ratios (C:N and N:P). The models captured the effects of tree size and location on spatial variation in leaf litterfall (R2=0.31-0.79). For all 12 focal species, most of the leaf litter fell less than 5 m away from the source trees, generating finescale spatial heterogeneity in leaf litter inputs. Secondary forest species, which dominate areas in earlier successional stages, had lower leaf litter C:N ratios and produced less litter biomass than old-growth specialists. In contrast, P content and N:P ratios did not vary consistently among successional groups. Interspecific variation in leaf litter quality translated into differences in the quantity and quality (C:N) of total leaf litter biomass inputs and among areas with different land use histories. Spatial variation in leaf litter C:N inputs was the major factor associated with heterogeneity in soil C:N ratios relative to soil physical characteristics. In contrast, spatial variation soil N:P was more strongly associated with spatial variation in topography than heterogeneity in leaf litter inputs. The modeling approach presented here can be used to generate prediction surfaces for leaf litter deposition and quality onto the forest floor, a useful tool for understanding soil-vegetation feedbacks. A better understanding of the role of leaf litter inputs from secondary vegetation in restoring soil nutrient stocks will also assist in managing expanding secondary forests in tropical regions. © 2015 by the Ecological Society of America.
Soils are the central organizing entities in terrestrial ecosystems and possess extremely diverse prokaryotic and eukaryotic biota. They are physically and chemically complex, with micro- and macro-aggregates embedded within a solid, liquid and gaseous matrix that is continually changing in response to natural and human-induced perturbations. Recent advances in molecular techniques in systematics have provided opportunities for the study of biodiversity and biocomplexity of soil biota. A symposium and workshop on soil biogeochemistry and biodiversity International Symposium on Impacts of Soil Biodiversity on Biogeochemical Processes in Ecosystems, Taiwan Forestry Research Institute, Taipei, Taiwan April 18-24, 2004. Convened an international array of participants working in biomes on virtually every continent on the planet (ranging from polar to tropical regions). This special issue reports on the theoretical bases and applications of molecular methods for the measurement of soil biodiversity.     Themes addressed include a melding of classical taxonomic investigations with biochemical fingerprinting and molecular probing of organism identities. Several papers highlight new advances in identifications of prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. Examples include new developments in "fingerprinting" of microbes active in "mycorrhizospheres" using immunocapture and other innovative techniques. Developments in the study of impacts of invasive plant and animal species on ecosystem function and subsequent microbial community composition and function have been very great in the last 2-3 years. Soils are major repositories of legacies, including fine and coarse woody debris and other organic products, which have feedbacks on soil diversity. The ways in which species diversity and function of microbial and faunal communities interact and their importance to ecosystem function are examined in biological and biochemical detail. This paper provides an overview of soil biodiversity and its feedbacks on soil biogeochemical processes in ecosystems. (c) 2005 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
The recovery of soil ecological processes during the restoration of tropical forests is greatly influenced by arthropods that live in the litter and soil. However, these communities present complex dynamics, and their colonization patterns are not well understood. In this study, we examined the response patterns of litter and soil arthropods to the ecosystem regeneration process by assessing reforestation sites from two regions of Sao Paulo State, Brazil, and we compared the data obtained from these sites with data from mature forests. We assessed the arthropod communities using similarity indices and high-level taxa abundance, with the level of forest succession and the locations of the restoration areas as factors. Forest succession correlated with the species composition as communities from the reforestation sites gradually became more similar to communities from the mature forests, while their quantitative patterns were minimally related. Forest maturation positively affected the richness of the litter community and the abundance of some minor groups, such as Protura, Diplura, and Symphyla. The region influenced the species composition but did not influence the manner in which the communities changed during the maturation process. We also found a convergent soil colonization pattern as arthropod communities from different sites became more similar during forest succession. This finding is consistent with both empirical data and theoretical predictions from the specialized literature, although the subject has been poorly explored until now. We conclude that reforestation allows the colonization of soil and litter fauna in a biased manner.
Litterfall and litter decomposition are key elements of nutrient cycling in tropical forests, a process in which decomposer communities such as macro-arthropods play a critical role. Understanding the rate and extent to which ecosystem function and biodiversity recover during succession is useful to managing the growing area of tropical successional forest globally. Using a replicated chronosequence of forest succession (5–15, 15–30, 30–45 years, and primary forest) on abandoned pastures in lowland tropical wet forest, we examined litterfall, litter chemistry, and effects of macro-arthropod exclusion on decomposition of two litter types (primary and 5- to 15-years-old secondary forest). Further, we assessed macro-arthropod diversity and community composition across the chronosequence. Overstory cover, litterfall, and litter nutrients reached levels similar to primary forest within 15–30 years. Young secondary forest litter (5–15 years) had lower initial N and P content, higher C:N, and decayed 60 percent faster than primary forest litter. The presence of macro-arthropods strongly mediated decomposition and nutrient release rates, increasing litter mass loss by 35–44 percent, N released by 53 percent, and P release by 84 percent. Forest age had no effect on soil nutrients, rates of litter decomposition, nutrient release, or macro-arthropod influence. In contrast, abundance and community composition of macro-arthropods remained significantly lower and distinct in all ages of secondary compared with primary forest. Order richness was lower in 5–15 years of secondary compared with primary forest. Our results suggest that in highly productive tropical wet forest, functional recovery of litter dynamics precedes recovery of decomposer community structure and biodiversity. Abstract in Spanish is available with online material. © 2019 The Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation
In highly transformed regions, such as the tropical Andes, identifying the influence of forest succession and soil fauna on non-additive effects of litter decomposition is crucial for gaining a more realistic understanding of carbon dynamics and nutrient cycles. The objective of this paper was to analyze the changes of litter mixture effects on decomposition between different soil fauna treatments (macrofauna inclusion vs macrofauna exclusion) and successional stages (mature forests vs secondary forests) in upper Andean tropical forests along time by using a reciprocal translocation experiment of 1,344 litterbags that ran for 18 months with six common native Andean species. Thought t-tests, linear regressions, and linear mixed models, I found that litter mixture effects vary among sites and increase with time in secondary forests until the year of decomposition in litterbags with macrofauna exclusion. Mature forests exhibited strong antagonistic effects, while pronounced synergistic effects were observed in secondary forests. Although soil macrofauna did not increase significantly litter decomposition and synergistic effects in the mixtures at any of the stages of decay, it is likely that soil macrofauna may impact litter mixtures through top-down effects within soil food webs, rather than exerting a direct effect in the litter consumption as has been reported in tropical lowland ecosystems. Overall, this study supports the idea that litter mixtures exhibit significant variability across sites, can change with successional stage, and are influenced by soil fauna depending on the stage of decay in tropical Andean montane forests.
Multi-year studies comparing changes in litterfall biomass and nutrient inputs in sites under different restoration practices are lacking. We evaluated litterfall dynamics and nutrient inputs at 5 yr and after a decade of recovery in four treatments (natural regeneration—no planting, plantation—entire area planted, tree islands—planting in patches, and reference forest) at multiple sites in an agricultural landscape in southern Costa Rica. We inter-planted two native species (Terminalia amazonia and Vochysia guatemalensis) and two naturalized N-fixing species (Inga edulis and Erythrina poeppigiana) in plantation and island treatments. Although litterfall N was higher in plantations in the first sampling period, litter production and overall inputs of C, N, Ca, Mg, P, Cu, Mn, and Fe did not differ between island, plantation, or reference forest after a decade; however, all were greater than in natural regeneration. Potassium inputs were lower in the natural regeneration, intermediate in island and plantation, and greater in reference forest. The percentage of litterfall comprised by the N-fixing planted species declined by nearly two-thirds in both plantations and islands between sampling periods, while the percentage of V. guatemalensis more than doubled, and the percentage from naturally regenerated species increased from 27 to 47 percent in islands. Island and plantation treatments were equally effective at restoring litterfall and nutrient inputs to levels similar to the reference system. The nutrient input changed substantially over the 7-yr interval between measurements, reflecting shifts in vegetation composition and demonstrating how rapidly nutrient cycling dynamics can change in recovering forests. © 2018 The Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation
In degraded tropical pastures, active restoration strategies have the potential to facilitate forest regrowth at rates that are faster than natural recovery, enhancing litterfall, and nutrient inputs to the forest floor. We evaluated litterfall and nutrient dynamics under four treatments: plantation (entire area planted), tree islands (planting in six patches of three sizes), control (same age natural regeneration), and young secondary forest (7-9-yr-old natural regeneration). Treatments were established in plots of 50 × 50m at six replicate sites in southern Costa Rica and the annual litterfall production was measured 5yr after treatment establishment. Planted species included two native timber-producing hardwoods (Terminalia amazonia and Vochysia guatemalensis) interplanted with two N-fixing species (Inga edulis and Erythrina poeppigiana). Litter production was highest in secondary forests (7.3Mg/ha/yr) and plantations (6.3), intermediate in islands (3.5), and lowest in controls (1.4). Secondary forests had higher input of all nutrients except N when compared with the plantation plots. Inga contributed 70 percent of leaffall in the plantations, demonstrating the influence that one species can have on litter quantity and quality. Although tree islands had lower litterfall rates, they were similar to plantations in inputs of Mg, K, P, Zn, and Mn. Tree islands increased litter production and nutrient inputs more quickly than natural regeneration. In addition to being less resource intensive than conventional plantations, this planting design promotes a more rapid increase in litter diversity and more spatial heterogeneity, which can accelerate the rate of nutrient cycling and facilitate forest recovery. Abstract in Spanish is available at © 2010 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2010 by The Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation.
This book brings together a wealth of scientific findings and ecological knowledge to survey what we have learned about the "Wet Tropics" rainforests of North Queensland, Australia. This interdisciplinary text is the first book to provide such a holistic view of any tropical forest environment, including the social and economic dimensions. The most thorough assessment of a tropical forest landscape to date. Explores significant scientific breakthroughs in areas including conservation genetics, vegetation modeling, agroforestry and revegetation techniques, biodiversity assessment and modeling, impacts of climate change, and the integration of science in natural resource management. Research achieved, in part, due to the Cooperative Research Centre for Tropical Rainforest Ecology and Management (the Rainforest CRC). Written by a number of distinguished international experts contains chapter summaries and section commentaries. © 2008 Blackwell Publishing, Ltd.
Global tropical forests have been modified and fragmented by commodity agroforests, leading to significant alterations in ecological communities. Nevertheless, these production landscapes offer secondary habitats that support and sustain local biodiversity. In this study, we assess community level and species-specific responses of amphibians to land management in areca, coffee and rubber, three of the largest commodity agroforests in the Western Ghats. A total of 106 agroforests across a 30,000-km2 landscape were surveyed for amphibians using a combination of visual and auditory encounter surveys. We used a Bayesian multi-species occupancy modelling framework to examine patterns of species richness, beta diversity, dominance structure and individual species occupancies. The influence of biogeographic variables such as elevation and latitude as well as microhabitat availability of streams, ponds and unpaved plantation roads was tested on amphibian species occupancy. Coffee agroforests had the highest species richness and lowest dominance when compared to areca and rubber. Beta diversity was highest in areca for within agroforest measures. Compared across agroforests, coffee had highest beta diversity with areca and rubber. Both elevation and latitude showed an overall positive association with amphibian occupancy, although species-specific responses varied considerably. Microhabitat availability was one of the strongest predictors of amphibian occupancy, with mean community response being positive with presence of water bodies and roads. Pond presence increased species richness per site by 34.7% (species-specific responses in occupancy ranged from –2.7% to 327%). Stream presence alone did not change species richness but species-specific response ranged from –59% to 273%. Presence of plantation roads also increased species richness by 21.5% (species-specific response ranged from –82% to 656%). Being unpaved with little vehicular traffic, plantation roads seem to provide additional habitats for amphibians. Presence of all three microhabitats at a site increased species richness by 75%. Our study highlights the importance of land management strategies that maintain diverse native canopy and freshwater bodies and other microhabitats in sustaining amphibian fauna. Market-driven land-use change from coffee to other agroforest types will have detrimental effects on amphibian communities and their long-term sustainability in the Western Ghats. © 2021 The Authors. Ecological Solutions and Evidence published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Ecological Society.
Non-timber forest product (NTFP) extraction contributes significantly to household incomes across India. This study aimed to understand the relationship between market proximity, NTFP dependence and forest condition, and assess how it is mediated by local forest institutions. Three villages with different degrees of access to markets for sale of forest products, in an area of high poverty and forest dependence in the dry tropical forest belt in central India, were examined. The village with the greatest access to the market had a greater proportion of income coming from non-forest sources, the least dependence on NTFP harvest and the most degraded forests. The strongest forest institution was found in the village closest to the market, owing largely to its access to support from the Forest Department. This emphasizes the extreme vulnerability of forest villages located distant from local markets, which are forced to depend on forests for most of their livelihood and income requirements, and left to deal with degrading forests in the absence of technical and financial support from the Forest Department. There is a critical need to strengthen local institutions for sustainable forest management in such villages, and to provide them with alternate sources of income generation. © 2009 Foundation for Environmental Conservation.
The dry tropical ecosystems are among the world's most threatened, and the dry deciduous forest of northern India is being progressively converted to scrub, savannah and grasslands through industrialization, agriculture, fuelwood collection, lopping of trees for fodder and severe grazing/browsing. This habitat destruction threatens the survival of many species. This study examined the demographic instability of tree species in 3-ha permanent plots: at five sites differing in the degree of disturbance. Based on the proportion of seedlings of a species in its total population (seedling + sapling + adults), about 52% of the total 65 species exhibited local demographic instability, and at one or more sites a single individual represented 10 species. The increase in the proportion of declining species with increase in disturbance intensity indicated that local anthropogenic pressure is responsible for the depletion. Apart from stronger protection measures, it is necessary to encourage fuelwood plantations, develop village pastures and reduce livestock numbers.
Developing restoration strategies that accelerate natural successional processes and are resource-efficient is critical to facilitating tropical forest recovery across millions of hectares of deforested lands in the tropics. We compared tree recruitment after a decade in three restoration treatments (natural regeneration, applied nucleation/island tree planting and plantation) and nearby reference forest in the premontane rain forest zone in southern Costa Rica. The study was replicated at 13 sites with a range of surrounding forest cover, enabling us to evaluate the relative influence of local restoration treatments and landscape forest cover on tree recruitment. Density of small-seeded (<5 mm), animal-dispersed recruits was lower in natural regeneration than in applied nucleation, plantation or reference forest plots. Species richness, species density and density of medium (5–10 mm)- and large (>10 mm)-seeded, animal-dispersed recruits were greatest in reference forest, intermediate in applied nucleation and plantation and lowest in natural regeneration plots. Recruit composition differed substantially between reference forest and all restoration treatments. In general, plantation recruit composition was more similar to reference forests and natural regeneration least similar; however, there was high within-treatment variation. Models suggested weak support for the effect of surrounding forest cover on tropical tree recruit density and composition, as compared to restoration treatment and site conditions (e.g. elevation), in this intermediate forest cover landscape. Synthesis and applications. Applied nucleation appears to be a cost-effective strategy as compared to plantation-style planting to accelerate tropical forest recovery regardless of the amount of forest cover immediately adjacent to the site. However, even with active restoration interventions, forest recovery is a multidecade process that proceeds at highly variable rates. © 2016 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society
Bolivia contains some of the largest remaining tracts of relatively undisturbed tropical forests in the world. Situated in the centre of South America, these tropical forests are also some of the most diverse, ranging from wet Amazonian rainforests to dry Chaco woodlands. After decades of light selective logging with little attention to management. Bolivia is now actively promoting sustainable forestry. A new forestry law requires government-approved management plans for all logged forests and Bolivia already has more than a half million hectares of internationally certified production forest. However, several obstacles remain in reconciling current logging practices with forest conservation. While selection logging does not appear to cause immediate damage to biodiversity or forest functioning, research points to gradual degradation of forest economic value in the form of reductions in timber stand quality and regeneration failures of commercial timber species. Their decreased value for timber production may make these forests more prone to conversion to other land uses, such as cattle ranching, agriculture, and human population settlements. Forest managers must address these problems through the application of silvicultural treatments that provide for regeneration of commercial species and maintenance of stand quality. Whether or not these improvements are realized at the stand level. Bolivian forests still face threats from powerful social and economic forces. Because logging roads also provide access for wildlife poachers, timber thieves and squatters and because logged forests are more susceptible to wildfire, forest protection measures will be critical to forest conservation efforts in Bolivia. More intensive silviculture on a smaller land base and restoration of forests on degraded lands may help reduce the extent of human invasion into primary forest.
Logging roads are considered to be a major cause of forest degradation because of their direct and indirect impacts on ecosystem functioning and biodiversity. Given the prevalence of logging in tropical forests around the world, effective road management is of crucial importance to reduce both logging- related environmental impacts and the costs of logging operations. Through a review of the literature, our study analysed how logging roads have been addressed in scientific articles to date. We compared studies published over the past 65 years in the Bois et Forêts des Tropiques journal (BFT), mostly written in French, with a range of more recent articles from the Scopus and Web of Knowledge databases. Half of the articles in BFT were published before 1972, while the more generalist databases show a steady increase in publications on the subject since then, up to the current peak number. From the entire body of literature, we selected 126 articles dealing with impacts and management of logging roads in tropical forests around the world for critical appraisal. The BFT articles were characterized by a strong focus on practical issues in forest road engineering, while the focus of many publications written in English was on the identification of road impacts on forest ecosystems. Road-related environmental impacts stem from the loss of forest cover during construction, the increase in edge effects, soil erosion and interference with wildlife, as well as from the resulting easier access to the forest for hunting and agricultural colonization. Based on this review, we present a list of recommended measures to reduce these impacts. We conclude that, despite the continuing attention given to the subject of logging roads, little is known about how they evolve in the forest landscape over the long term.
Previous studies have demonstrated that the tree community of small and isolated forest fragments show persisting structural and functional attributes characteristic of early-successional systems. Yet, the impacts of forest small size and isolation on several tree community attributes have not been comprehensively quantified in long-term studies. Here we analysed permanent plots over 17 years to investigate the recovery of community attributes in a small tropical forest remnant surrounded by human-modified landscapes in the endangered Brazilian Atlantic Forest. We conducted analyses on community species richness, functional diversity and composition, and aboveground biomass for the overall, adult and juvenile communities. The analysis of the demographic rates indicates a self-thinning phase (reduction in stem density and increase in basal area) characteristic of late-succession stages. In general, we found a reduction in the proportion of simple leaves along with a gradual increase in wood density mostly for the adult tree community and a significant increase in aboveground biomass throughout the years. Despite its reduced size, the fragment studied does not show clear trends of altered forest structure and functional composition dynamics through time. Yet, it holds aboveground biomass values comparable to large undisturbed rainforests, thus indicating that the ecological value of small forest fragments should not be neglected.
Selective logging is one of the most prominent land uses in tropical forests and although it involves harvesting a limited number of trees, the impact on forest structure, composition and aboveground biomass can be significant. Although these impacts are well documented, what is little known is the extent to which selective logging affects tree floristic composition and its recovery process. Understanding how floristic composition is affected by logging activities is essential for determining subsequent cutting cycles, for the maintenance of carbon stocks and for biodiversity conservation. This research investigates the effect of logging on long-term trends on the recovery of species composition in a tropical forest using a unique logging experiment where measurements have been taken annually over a period of 25 years. Changes in 12 long-term 1-hectare (ha) permanent plots were assessed where different selective logging intensities occurred. In the first years after logging, floristic composition differed widely between intact and selectively logged forests, with exploited areas deviating from pre-logged composition. Over time, exploited areas shifted towards the original composition, with more pronounced changes in this trend after ∼13 years. Shifts in floristic composition were caused mainly by a significant increase in light-demanding fast-growing pioneer species and their subsequent continuous high mortality rates after 13 years of the recovery process. In contrast, the control plots showed similar shifts in composition over time, suggesting external factors such as long-term climate changes may be driving these shifts. The results suggest that 25 years after an experimental selective logging has taken place, floristic composition tends to recover closer to the pre-logged status. Thus, in the absence of further human disturbances, experimental selectively logged forests in low to moderate intensities are compatible with biodiversity conservation, at least during the first cycle of exploitation. Reconciling conservation strategies with the recovery of stocks of commercial timber species would be greatly improved by using these results and lead towards more sustainable forest management plans. © 2019 Elsevier B.V.
The abiotic and biotic factors that regulate stability in species-rich forests are poorly resolved, and this limits the ability to predict how climate change and other perturbations impact forest dynamics. Phosphorus limitation and nitrogen deposition are important factors affecting the dynamics and functioning of tropical and subtropical forests, but how long-term temporal stability of tree communities is affected by availability and heterogeneity of soil phosphorus and nitrogen remains unclear.We collected annual dynamic data of 20,768 regenerating saplings, which were censused from 2008 to 2019 in a subtropical forest, to investigate how soil nutrients affect the temporal stability of productivity at both population and community levels.We found that concentrations of soil inorganic phosphorus were significantly and positively correlated with sapling richness and phylogenetic diversity, leading to significantly higher species asynchrony and community temporal stability. By contrast, higher concentrations of organic phosphorus weakened community stability via a negative effect on species richness. Structural equation models provide further strong evidence that increasing concentrations of soil inorganic phosphorus strongly promoted community temporal stability via increased species diversity, species asynchrony and population stability, while organic phosphorus displayed opposite effects. Meanwhile, soil concentrations of available and unavailable forms of nitrogen showed much weaker and negative associations with community stability.Synthesis. Using a 12-year data set of sapling demography from a subtropical forest of south China, our study demonstrates that soil phosphorus is an important determinant of the long-term stability of sapling dynamics and consequently the whole-community structure, and the composition of soil phosphorus pools predicts the temporal stability and diversity of tree communities in phosphorus-limited forests.     Using a 12-year field monitoring on the demography of over 20,000 individual seedlings in a subtropical forest, this study demonstrates that soil phosphorus availability is an important determinant of the long-term stability of sapling dynamics and consequently the whole-community structure, which highlights the importance of considering different forms of soil nutrients when predicting the temporal stability and diversity of tree communities.image
The loss of tropical forests and associated biodiversity is a global concern. Conservation efforts in tropical countries such as India have mostly focused on state-administered protected areas despite the existence of vast tracts of forest outside these areas. We studied hornbills (Bucerotidae), an ecologically important vertebrate group and a flagship for tropical forest conservation, to assess the importance of forests outside protected areas in Arunachal Pradesh, north-east India. We conducted a state-wide survey to record encounters with hornbills in seven protected areas, six state-managed reserved forests and six community-managed unclassed forests. We estimated the density of hornbills in one protected area, four reserved forests and two unclassed forests in eastern Arunachal Pradesh. The state-wide survey showed that the mean rate of encounter of rufous-necked hornbills Aceros nipalensis was four times higher in protected areas than in reserved forests and 22 times higher in protected areas than in unclassed forests. The mean rate of encounter of wreathed hornbills Rhyticeros undulatus was twice as high in protected areas as in reserved forests and eight times higher in protected areas than in unclassed forests. The densities of rufous-necked hornbill were higher inside protected areas, whereas the densities of great hornbill Buceros bicornis and wreathed hornbill were similar inside and outside protected areas. Key informant surveys revealed possible extirpation of some hornbill species at sites in two protected areas and three unclassed forests. These results highlight a paradoxical situation where individual populations of hornbills are being lost even in some legally protected habitat, whereas they continue to persist over most of the landscape. Better protection within protected areas and creative community-based conservation efforts elsewhere are necessary to maintain hornbill populations in this biodiversity-rich region. Copyright © Fauna & Flora International 2014.
Cumulative losses from shifting cultivation in the tropics can affect the local to regional to global balance of carbon and nutrient cycles. We determined whether shifting cultivation in the Southern Yucatán causes feedbacks that limit future forest productivity and carbon sequestration potential. Specifically, we tested how the recovery of carbon stocks changes with each additional cultivation-fallow cycle. Live aboveground biomass, coarse woody debris, fine woody debris, forest floor litter and soil were sampled in 53 sites (39 secondary forests 2-25 years old, with one to four cultivation-fallow cycles, and 14 mature forests) along a precipitation gradient in Campeche and Quintana Roo, Mexico. From the first to the third or fourth cultivation-fallow cycle, mean carbon stocks in live aboveground biomass debris declined 64%. From the first to the third cycle, coarse woody debris declined by 85%. Despite declining inputs to soil with each cultivation-fallow cycle, soil carbon stocks did not further decline after the initial conversion from mature to secondary forest. The combined aboveground and soil carbon stock declined almost 36% after conversion from mature forest, however two additional cultivation cycles did not promote further significant decline, largely because of the stability of the soil carbon pool. Although age was the dominant factor in predicting total carbon stocks of secondary forests under shifting cultivation, the number of cultivation-fallow cycles should not be neglected. Understanding change beyond the first cycle of deforestation will enhance forest management at a local scale by improving predictions of secondary forest productivity and related agricultural productivity. A multi-cycle approach to deforestation is critical for regional and national evaluation of forest-based carbon sequestration. Finally, models of the global carbon cycle can be better constrained with more accurate quantification of carbon fluxes from land-use change. © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
With 120 million hectares of forest area, Indonesia has the third largest area of biodiversity-rich tropical forests in the world, and it is well-known as a mega-biodiversity country. However, in 2020, only 70 percent of this area remained forested. The government has consistently undertaken corrective actions to achieve Sustainable Development Goal targets, with a special focus on Goals #1 (no poverty), #2 (zero hunger), #3 (good health and well-being), #7 (affordable and clean energy), #8 (decent work and economic growth), #13 (climate action), and #15 (life on land). Good environmental governance is a core concept in Indonesia’s forest management and includes mainstreaming ecosystem services as a framework for sustainable forest management. This paper analyzes efforts to mainstream Indonesia’s remaining forest ecosystem services. We review the state of Indonesia’s forests in relation to deforestation dynamics, climate change, and ecosystem service potential and options and provide recommendations for mainstreaming strategies regarding aspects of policy, planning, and implementation, as well as the process of the articulation of ecosystem services and their alternative funding. © 2022 by the authors.
Fallow vegetation within landscapes dominated by shifting cultivation represents a woody species pool of critical importance with considerable potential for biodiversity conservation. Here, through the analysis of factors that influence the early stages of fallow vegetation regrowth in two contrasting forest margin landscapes in Southern Cameroon, we assessed the impact of current trends of land use intensification and expansion of the cultivated areas, upon the conservation potential of shifting cultivation landscapes. We combined the analysis of plot and landscape scale factors and identified a complex set of variables that influence fallow regrowth processes in particular the characteristics of the agricultural matrix and the distance from forest. Overall we observed a decline in the fallow species pool, with composition becoming increasingly dominated by species adapted to recurrent disturbance. It is clear that without intervention and if present intensification trends continue, the potential of fallow vegetation to contribute to biodiversity conservation declines because of a reduced capacity, (1) to recover forest vegetation with anything like its original species composition, (2) to connect less disturbed forest patches for forest dependent organisms. Strategies to combat biodiversity loss, including promotion of agroforestry practices and the increase of old secondary forest cover, will need not only to operate at a landscape scale but also to be spatially explicit, reflecting the spatial pattern of species reservoirs and dispersal strategies and human usage across landscapes. © 2011 Springer Science+Business Media, LLC.
Commercial forest plantations of fast-growing species have been established globally to meet increasing demands for timber, pulpwood, and other wood products. Industrial plantations may contribute to tropical forest conservation by reducing exploitation of primary and secondary natural forests. Whether such plantations can support critical elements of biodiversity, including provision of habitat and movement corridors for species of conservation concern, is an important question in Southeast Asia. Our objectives were to investigate relationships between habitat gradients and community attributes of medium-sized to large mammals in a mixed plantation mosaic in Bengkoka Peninsula, Sabah, East Malaysia. Data on mammals were collected using 59 remote camera stations deployed for a minimum of 21 days (24-hour sampling occasions) in three major land-use types: natural forest, Acacia plantations, and non-Acacia plantations (oil palm, rubber, young Eucalyptus pellita). We used sample-based rarefaction to evaluate variation in species richness with land use. We used generalized linear models and ordination analyses to evaluate whether variation in mammal detections and species composition was associated with habitat gradients. We recorded >22 mammal species over 1572 sampling occasions. Natural forest area was positively associated with mammal species richness and detections of threatened mammals. Overall detections of mammals increased with decreasing elevation, but decreased within, and close to, Acacia plantations. Detections of threatened mammals increased with greater proportions of natural forest and Acacia and increasing proximity to roads. Sample-based rarefaction indicated that species richness of mammals in Acacia and natural forest was considerably higher than observed. Both natural forest and Acacia plantations shared similar values for species richness and diversity, but non-Acacia plantations scored lower in both metrics. Mammal species composition differed among different types of land use. Smaller generalists used non-Acacia plantation forests. A variety of other mammals including some threatened species used natural forest, Acacia, or a combination of the two. Acacia plantations possess attributes supporting a diversity of mammal species, including those we defined as threatened based on IUCN criteria. However, this is likely a function of the habitat mosaic with natural forest in the study area and the mangrove forests on the fringes of the peninsula serving as refuges of mammal diversity. Retention and restoration of natural and mangrove forests may therefore enhance the conservation potential of industrial Acacia plantations. Additionally, controlled road access in conjunction with anti-poaching operations and strengthening public awareness are essential to reduce the threat of overexploitation. © 2021 Elsevier B.V.
Heterogeneous landscapes harboring mosaics of natural habitat and agriculture are increasingly gaining conservation focus in the tropics. While research on cash crops such as coffee, rubber, and oil palm has led to an understanding of their role as supplementary habitats, such has remained limited in cashew plantations despite it being a cash crop of global significance. We conducted a study to understand the occurrence of terrestrial mammal species in a mixed forest-cashew landscape in the northern Western Ghats, India. During January to April 2016, we used trail cameras to sample a total area of 25 km(2) divided into 100 grid cells of 0.25 km(2) each. We deployed six trail cameras for a 24 h period in each grid cell and obtained photo-captures of 11 species in forests, of which nine were detected in cashew plantations, but most species showed low capture rates. For three of these species-Indian crested porcupine, sambar, and wild pig-we modeled habitat use as a function of site-specific attributes. Wild pig showed a higher probability of use of cashew than forest, while porcupine and sambar did not show any pronounced differences between the two land uses. The probability of habitat use by sambar and porcupine was positively influenced by undergrowth but not for the wild pig. Wild pig habitat use was positively related to increased proximity of human settlements and increasing distance to forests, but the pattern was unreliable for sambar and porcupine. Our preliminary study demonstrates that a subset of terrestrial mammals in the forest makes use of cashew plantations and highlights the need for further research in forest-cashew landscapes to assess conservation opportunities.
The ecological function of animal seed dispersal depends on species interactions and can be affected by drivers such as the management interventions applied to protected areas. This study was conducted in two protected areas in the Monte Desert: a fenced reserve with grazing exclusion and absence of large native mammals (the Man and Biosphere Nacunan Reserve; FR) and an unfenced reserve with low densities of large native and domestic animals (Ischigualasto Park; UFR). The study focuses on Prosopis flexuosa seed removal by different functional mammal groups: "seed predators", "scatter-hoarders", and "opportunistic frugivores". Under both interventions, the relative contribution to seed removal by different functional mammal groups was assessed, as well as how these groups respond to habitat heterogeneity (i.e. vegetation structure) at different spatial scales. Camera traps were used to identify mammal species removing P. flexuosa seeds and to quantify seed removal; remote sensing data helped analyze habitat heterogeneity. In the FR, the major fruit removers were a seed predator (Graomys griseoflavus) and a scatter-hoarder (Microcavia asutralis). In the UFR, the main seed removers were the opportunistic frugivores (Lycalopex griseus and Dolichotis patagonum), who removed more seeds than the seed predator in the FR. The FR shows higher habitat homogeneity than the UFR, and functional groups respond differently to habitat heterogeneity at different spatial scales. In the FR, because large herbivores are locally extinct (e.g. Lama guanicoe) and domestic herbivores are excluded, important functions of large herbivores are missing, such as the maintenance of habitat heterogeneity, which provides habitats for medium-sized opportunistic frugivores with consequent improvement of quality and quantity of seed dispersal services. In the UFR, with low densities of large herbivores, probably one important ecosystem function this group performs is to increase habitat heterogeneity, allowing for the activity of medium-sized mammals who, behaving as opportunistic frugivores, did the most significant seed removal.
The rapid loss of tropical forests, particularly in the developing world, has been a global concern since the late 1980s and has prompted a variety of international initiatives to save the forests. In 1991, the World Bank responded to global concerns and to criticism by nongovernmental organizations by forming a conservation-oriented forest strategy. Managing a Global Resource is an outgrowth of the independent evaluation conducted by the World Bank's Operations Evaluation Department and discusses how effectively that strategy was implemented. In this detailed investigation, Uma J. Lele explores why the loss of forests and biodiversity has been so rapid in some developing countries (Brazil, Indonesia, and Cameroon) and not in others (China, India, and Costa Rica). She assesses future prospects for conservation in these six countries by critically examining their policies, institutional arrangements, and emerging national and international instruments to conserve forests and biodiversity. Together these six countries account for 25 percent of the world's forest cover and 44 percent of the world's population. Managing a Global Resource presents case studies of the forest sectors of each country in the context of overall development policies, interest groups, and governance issues. Lele's investigation finds a fundamental divergence in forest-rich countries between the global objectives of conservation and the local objectives of development and private profit. In some forest-poor countries, in contrast, natural resource loss has led the countries on their own accord to adopt a variety of conservation-oriented policies and programs. Despite the greater congruence between the global and national objectives in these forest-poor countries, competing demands on their resources and the constraints on their policies, institutions, and human capital make it difficult for them to affect forest and biodiversity conservation. This volume makes it clear that. © 2002 by Taylor & Francis. All rights reserved.
Plant communities along tropical coastlines are often affected by natural and human disturbances, but little is known about factors influencing recovery. We focused on mangrove forests, which are among the most threatened ecosystems globally, to examine how facilitation by herbaceous vegetation might improve forest restoration after disturbance. We specifically investigated whether recovery of mangrove forests in harsh environments is accelerated by nurse plants and whether the beneficial effects are species-specific. Quantification of standardized effects allowed comparisons across performance parameters and over time for: (1) net effect of each herbaceous species on mangrove survival and growth, (2) effects of pre- and post-establishment factors associated with each herbaceous species, and (3) need for artificial planting to enhance growth or survival of mangrove seedlings. Mangrove recruitment in a clear-cut forest in Belize was accelerated by the presence of Sesuvium portulacastrum (succulent forb) and Distichlis spicata (grass), two coastal species common throughout the Caribbean region. The net effect of herbaceous vegetation was positive, but the magnitude of effects on mangrove survival and growth differed by species. Because of differences in their vegetative structure and other features, species effects on mangroves also varied by mechanism: (1) trapping of dispersing propagules (both species), (2) structural support of the seedling (Distichlis), and/or (3) promotion of survival (Sesuvium) or growth (Distichlis) through amelioration of soil conditions (temperature, aeration). Artificial planting had a stronger positive effect on mangrove survival than did edaphic conditions, but planting enhanced mangrove growth more in Sesuvium than in Distichlis patches. Our study indicates that beneficial species might be selected based on features that provide multiple positive effects and that species comparisons may be improved using standardized effects. Our findings are not only relevant to the coastal environments found in the Caribbean region, but our assessment methods may be useful for developing site-specific information to restore disturbed mangrove forests worldwide, especially given the large pool of mangrove associates (>45 genera) available for screening. © 2007 by the Ecological Society of America.
Mangrove ecosystems are important coastal habitats in tropical regions, directly or indirectly supporting subsistence and commercial fisheries. However, they are under threat in developing countries, where stands are being felled to accommodate a variety of human activities. An estimated aerial loss of 1% per year is occurring in Asia and the Pacific, with some areas having lost 70% of their original mangrove habitat. Due to continued disturbance, altered soil conditions and limited dispersal, natural recovery may be slow. This paper discusses mangrove restoration as a potential tool for the management of coastal ecosystem. We examine briefly the connections between mangroves and fisheries, and outline an ecosystem approach to evaluate mangrove restoration initiatives. Past mangrove restoration projects in developing countries have focussed only on methods of re-establishing trees, with little attention given to assessing whether ecosystem function is restored. However, the goal of mangrove restoration projects should be to actively promote a return to the natural assemblage structure and function (within the bounds of natural variation) that is self-sustaining. This goal requires: (i) identifying the natural state, including key organisms in maintaining the physical substratum, community structure and food webs maintaining fish stocks; (ii) developing biotechnology for restoring key organisms; and (iii) assessing the long-term success of the project. As restoration promises to be an important tool for maintaining coastal ecosystem health in developing countries, priority should be given to incorporating restoration projects and their evaluation into coastal management plans.
Mangroves have long been known as the important ecosystem for being home to aquatic and terrestrial biodiversity, as well as fisheries resources. It is also considered an efficient carbon pool in tropical regions such as Indonesia. However, recent developments in the coastal areas of Bengkulu City in Indonesia could potentially alter and erode mangrove functions, in particular, mangroves as a carbon sink. Previous studies on the role of mangrove forests concerning global warming in the area have not illustrated the distribution of biomass and carbon and its uncertainties. Hence, this study aimed to assess mangrove richness, biomass and carbon content to provide the current state and distribution and its role in climate change mitigation. Six sampling locations were determined reflecting area distribution and its status (conservation and non-conservation). A total of 60 nested quadrat plots were employed for the trees and saplings category. Above-and below-ground biomass was estimated by using the allometric model. The findings showed that a total of nine species were observed. The average biomass and carbon stocks were 302.27 t ha-1 and 135.02 t C ha-1, respectively, over seven-fold higher than the previous studies. Pantai Panjang station was the highest storing carbon at 235.95 t C ha-1, while the lowest was in Teluk Sepang (74.61 t C ha-1 ). These findings also suggest that non-protected mangrove forests also played a key role, similar to the conservation mangrove forests, regarding the climate change mitigation. It is, therefore, urgently required to enhance the strategy and program in order to maintain the current mangrove ecosystems within and beyond the conservation areas. © 2022, BIOFLUX SRL. All rights reserved.
Secondary forests play an important role in restoring carbon and biodiversity lost previously through deforestation and degradation and yet there is little information available on the extent of different successional stages. Such knowledge is particularly needed in tropical regions where past and current disturbance rates have been high but regeneration is rapid. Focusing on three areas in the Brazilian Amazon (Manaus, Santarém, Machadinho d'Oeste), this study aimed to evaluate the use of single-date Landsat Thematic Mapper (TM) and Advanced Land Observing Satellite (ALOS) Phased Arrayed L-band Synthetic Aperture Radar (PALSAR) data in the 2007–2010 period for i) discriminating mature forest, non-forest and secondary forest, and ii) retrieving the age of secondary forests (ASF), with 100 m × 100 m training areas obtained by the analysis of an extensive time-series of Landsat sensor data over the three sites. A machine learning algorithm (random forests) was used in combination with ALOS PALSAR backscatter intensity at HH and HV polarizations and Landsat 5 TM surface reflectance in the visible, near-infrared and shortwave infrared spectral regions. Overall accuracy when discriminating mature forest, non-forest and secondary forest is high (95–96%), with the highest errors in the secondary forest class (omission and commission errors in the range 4–6% and 12–20% respectively) because of misclassification as mature forest. Root mean square error (RMSE) and bias when retrieving ASF ranged between 4.3–4.7 years (relative RMSE = 25.5–32.0%) and 0.04–0.08 years respectively. On average, unbiased ASF estimates can be obtained using the method proposed here (Wilcoxon test, p-value > 0.05). However, the bias decomposition by 5-year interval ASF classes showed that most age estimates are biased, with consistent overestimation in secondary forests up to 10–15 years of age and underestimation in secondary forests of at least 20 years of age. Comparison with the classification results obtained from the analysis of extensive time-series of Landsat sensor data showed a good agreement, with Pearson's coefficient of correlation (R) of the proportion of mature forest, non-forest and secondary forest at 1-km grid cells ranging between 0.97–0.98, 0.96–0.98 and 0.84–0.90 in the 2007–2010 period, respectively. The agreement was lower (R = 0.82–0.85) when using the same dataset to compare the ability of ALOS PALSAR and Landsat 5 TM data to retrieve ASF. This was also dependent on the study area, especially when considering mapping secondary forest and retrieving ASF, with Manaus displaying better agreement when compared to the results at Santarém and Machadinho d'Oeste. © 2017 The Authors
Reduced-impact logging (RIL) is a promising management strategy for biodiversity conservation and carbon sequestration, but incentive mechanisms are hindered by inadequate monitoring methods. We mapped 937 ha of logging infrastructure in a selectively harvested tropical forest to inform a scalable approach to measuring the impacts of discrete management practices (hauling, skidding, and felling). We used a lidar-derived disturbance model to map all skid trails and haul roads within 26 months of the selective harvest of six blocks of dipterocarp forest in five industrial concessions in East Kalimantan, Indonesia. Lidar maps of logging impacts (220 ha) agreed well with ground-based maps (total of 217 ha, RMS error of 6 ha or 3%), but skid trail positions agreed only 59% of the time. Due to rapid forest regeneration, total lidar-derived haul road area was 31% smaller than road area measured in the field; agreement was higher for lidar collections within a year of the harvest. Maps of carbon density generated from Fourier transforms of lidar height profiles estimated skidding and felling biomass losses to within 1-5% of ground-based measurements. Lidar-derived skidding and hauling impact zones covered only 69% of the permitted harvest area; the remaining areas showed no signs of logging disturbance, and available biophysical data did not explain their location. These results emphasize the need for more extensive mapping of logging infrastructure to capture spatial variability in skid trail density and hitherto undetected no-impact zones. While a ground-based GPS is recommended as the most affordable method for wide-scale infrastructure mapping, aerial lidar is an effective tool for remotely quantifying the extent of logging impacts in tropical forests. © 2016 The Authors.
Recent research suggests that there is substantial public support (including willingness to pay) for forest conservation. Based on a nationwide survey experiment in Brazil (N 2500) the largest and richest of the world's tropical developing countries, we shed new light on this issue. To what extent does the public in fact support forest conservation and what factors are influencing support levels? Unlike previous studies, our results show that the willingness to pay for tropical forest conservation in Brazil is rather low. Moreover, framing forest conservation in terms of biodiversity protection, which tends to create more local benefits, does not induce more support than framing conservation in terms of mitigating global climate change. The results also show that low levels of trust in public institutions have a strong negative impact on the public's willingness to pay for forest conservation, individually and/or via government spending. What could other (richer) countries do, in this context, to encourage forest conservation in Brazil and other tropical developing countries? One key issue is whether prospects of foreign funding for forest conservation are likely to crowd out or, conversely, enhance the motivation for domestic level conservation efforts. We find that prospects of foreign funding have no significant effect on willingness to pay for forest conservation. These findings have at least three policy implications, namely, that the Brazilian public's willingness to pay for forest conservation is very limited, that large-scale international funding is probably needed, and that such funding is unlikely to encourage more domestic effort, but is also unlikely to crowd out domestic efforts. Restoring public trust in the Brazilian government is key to increasing public support for forest conservation in Brazil. © 2016 IOP Publishing Ltd.
No-till system (NTS) is a method of soil management that involves techniques recommended to increase agricultural land productivity. Therefore, employing NTS results in changes in agricultural land use decisions and indirectly impacts the conservation of natural areas. This study aims to evaluate the causal effect between NTS adoption and land use decisions in Brazil, with particular attention to their impacts on natural areas. The discussion on the effects of NTS use over agricultural practices gains relevance in Brazil, given the country's strategic position in the global agricultural market and the need to preserve tropical natural areas to mitigate global warming and preserve local biodiversity. We conducted this assessment using the statistical approach of spatial propensity score matching, which relies on a small set of assumptions to estimate causal effects in experiments with observational data robustly. Our statistical results show that the adoption of NTS had a positive effect on the natural (0.338; p-value < 0.05) and cultivated agricultural (0.214; p-value < 0.05) areas of the treated municipalities. The evidence from this case study indicates that NTS allows for the recovery of eroded soil and expansion of cultivated lands, preserving natural areas, while corroborating Borlaug's approach and further reinforcing the use of NTS as a sustainable soil management practice.
Effective assessment of the success of ecological restoration projects is critical in justifying the use of restoration in natural resource management as well as improving best practice. One of the main goals of ecological restoration is the recovery of ecosystem function, yet most researchers assume that increasing species and or functional diversity equates with restoration of ecosystem function, rather than empirically demonstrating these mechanistic relationships. In this study, we assess how dung beetle species diversity, community composition, functional diversity and ecological functions vary along a restoration chronosequence and compare restored areas with reference (rain forest) and degraded (pasture) systems. We also directly investigate the dung beetle diversity – ecosystem functioning relationship in the context of ecological rain forest restoration by testing the predictive power of traditional taxonomic indices and functional diversity metrics for functionality. Species richness, abundance, biomass and functional richness all increased with restoration age, with the oldest restoration sites being most similar to rain forest, whereas functional evenness and functional divergence decreased with restoration age. Community composition in the restored areas was clearly progressing towards the rain forest sites and deviating from the pasture sites with increasing restoration age. Secondary seed dispersal rates increased with restoration age, but there was only a weak positive relationship between dung removal and soil excavation and restoration age. Biodiversity metrics explained 47–74% of the variation in functions mediated by dung beetles; however, functional trait-based indices provided greater explanatory power of functionality than traditional species-based metrics. Synthesis and applications. Our results provide empirical evidence on the potential of tropical forest restoration to mitigate biodiversity losses, recovering not only faunal species diversity, but also functional diversity and ecosystem functions in a relatively short period of time. We also demonstrate that functional trait-based metrics are better predictors of functionality than traditional species-based metrics but that the relationship between restoration age, diversity and ecosystem functioning is not straightforward and depends on the functions, traits and metrics used. © 2016 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society
Humans have interacted with trees for millennia and the strength of such interactions determines the long-term social values of trees and forests. Such ecocultural linkages could be important to promote during reforestation efforts, potentially helping to turn the tide on the current rapid extinction of cultural and biological diversity. In addition, predicting the fate of ecoculturally important species to changing climates may help guide tree species selection best-suited to future climates. We assessed the vulnerability of four ecoculturally important tree species native to Southeast Asia to an extreme drought: Koompassia excelsa, Nephelium lappaceum, Shorea fallax and Shorea leprosula. These species provide distinct and unique products, and Koompassia excelsa is well-represented in local mythological stories and considered a Cultural Keystone Species (CKS). We used two complementary approaches: 1) an experimental common garden and 2) naturally occurring wild trees growing in a secondary forest and compared the performance of trees before, after, and during the 2016 El Niño event with record breaking low precipitation and high temperatures. We found that mortality of the CKS K. excelsa in the common garden, along with mortality and growth of wild trees were unaffected by the El Niño drought. In contrast, young trees of N. lappaceum and S. fallax planted in the common garden had mortality 4 and 3 times higher, respectively, during the El Niño drought compared to normal years. Growth rate of S. fallax in the wild was also significantly lower during the El Niño drought and this effect was particularly pronounced in highly disturbed forests. Our results demonstrate that the impact of extreme climatic events, that are predicted to become more common with climate change, on culturally important tree species is species specific. Management of such species may thus need species specific measures to maintain viable populations and hence provide the basic physical settings for human-nature interactions and associated cultural identities to persist. In this context, our findings that cultural keystone species such as K. excelsa could be drought tolerant is noteworthy, as investing on such species could prove to be beneficial for both local cultures and conservation of native ecosystems and biodiversity. © 2021
The Central Corridor of the Atlantic Forest is noted for its biodiversity of flora and fauna, with a high number of endemic species. Studies that characterise the tropical bee flora and bee products in these areas are scarce. This study therefore sought to characterise the pollen spectrum of honey from Apis mellifera L. (Hymenoptera, Apidae) in some municipalities found in the Central Corridor of the Atlantic Forest, in Bahia, Brazil. A total of 16 honey samples from Belmonte, Camacan, Eunápolis, Itabela, Itabuna, Ilhéus, Medeiros Neto, and Valença were analysed. The honey was acetolysed and the mounted slides were analysed under light microscopy, from which at least 500 pollen types per sample were counted. In total, 60 pollen types with botanically determined origin were found, comprising 52 genera in 24 families. For this study, pollen types having a prevalence equal to or greater than 10% in the samples were emphasised. Thus, we found 14 most representative pollen types, related to eight families. Fabaceae was the richest, with a total of four recorded pollen types, of which Mimosa pudica stood out, found in 56.2% of samples. Eucalyptus (Myrtaceae) had a high frequency distribution, especially in Belmonte, Eunápolis, Valença, and Medeiros Neto, where it was a predominant pollen, due to reforestation with Eucalyptus spp. for commercial purposes in these municipalities. In addition, Alternanthera brasiliana and Chamaecrista were predominant pollen in samples from Camacan and Medeiros Neto, respectively. The similarity analysis revealed the environmental heterogeneity of this tropical region. © 2023 Collegium Palynologicum Scandinavicum.
Experimental studies linking community composition to functioning are typically confined to small and closed micro- or mesocosms. Such restricted conditions may affect both species' biology and their environment. Yet, targeting simple features in the behaviour of species may circumvent these constraints. Focusing on ecological functions provided by dung beetles, we test whether large, open-top cages - MESOCLOSURES - will intercept the flight trajectories of beetles, thereby allowing manipulation of local community composition. MESOCLOSURES were built in both tropical forest (Brazil) and temperate grasslands (Finland), thus testing their general efficiency. Within the respective environments, we varied different aspects of MESOCLOSURE design: in the tropical forest, we examined the impact of MESOCLOSURE dimensions on exclusion efficiency, whereas in the temperate grassland, we assessed the potential for selectively excluding and including community members by different mesh sizes. In the temperate environment, we also went from method to application, using MESOCLOSURES to relate community composition to functioning under two simulated grazing regimes. MESOCLOSURES allowed efficient manipulation of dung beetle communities, maintaining dung beetle densities at intended levels in both temperate and tropical systems. In the tropics, the smallest cages (1 × 1 m) offered the highest contrast in beetle densities inside vs. outside of the fence, whereas the largest cages (9 × 9 m) offered the lowest. Nonetheless, densities inside cages never exceed one-fifth of those outside. At the temperate site, manipulations of community structure through mesh size yielded significant differences in functioning and suggested an interaction between small dung-dwelling species and large tunnelling species. Within cages, higher grazing was reflected in augmented dung removal. We conclude that MESOCLOSURES can be effectively used to study dung beetle functions across habitats and latitudes. As applied insights, the present study adds resolution to the significance of different functional groups of dung beetles and shows that grazing pressure may have an important impact on the ecosystem functions that they provide. Overall, this study suggests that targeted manipulation of dispersal may offer new solutions for linking fauna to ecosystem functions with minimal impact on the processes measured. © 2015 British Ecological Society.
Evidence is mounting that vertebrate defaunation greatly impacts global biogeochemical cycling. Yet, there is no comprehensive assessment of the potential vertebrate influence over plant decomposition, despite litter decay being one of the largest global carbon fluxes. We therefore conducted a global meta-analysis to evaluate vertebrate effects on litter mass loss and associated element release across terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Here we show that vertebrates affected litter decomposition by various direct and indirect pathways, increasing litter mass loss by 6.7% on average, and up to 34.4% via physical breakdown. This positive vertebrate impact on litter mass loss was consistent across contrasting litter types (woody and non-woody), climatic regions (boreal, temperate and tropical), ecosystem types (aquatic and terrestrial) and vertebrate taxa, but disappeared when evaluating litter nitrogen and phosphorus release. Moreover, we found evidence of interactive effects between vertebrates and non-vertebrate decomposers on litter mass loss, and a larger influence of vertebrates at mid-to-late decomposition stages, contrasting with the invertebrate effect known to be strongest at early decomposition stage. Our synthesis demonstrates a global vertebrate control over litter mass loss, and further stresses the need to account for vertebrates when assessing the impacts of biodiversity loss on biogeochemical cycles.     Across terrestrial and aqueous ecosystems, vertebrates increase litter decomposition, both directly and indirectly, by 6.7% on average, and this effect interacts with but generally occurs at a later stage of decomposition than the effect of invertebrates.
Understanding how well tropical forest biodiversity can recover following habitat change is often difficult due to conflicting assessments arising from different studies. One often overlooked potentially confounding factor that may influence assessments of biodiversity response to habitat change, is the possibility that different survey methodologies, targeting the same indicator taxon, may identify different patterns and so lead to different conclusions. Here we investigated whether two different but commonly used survey methodologies used to assess amphibian communities, pitfall trapping and nocturnal transects, indicate the same or different responses of amphibian biodiversity to historic human induced habitat change. We did so in a regenerating rainforest study site located in one of the world's most biodiverse and important conservation areas: the Manu Biosphere Reserve. We show that the two survey methodologies tested identified contrasting biodiversity patterns in a human modified rainforest. Nocturnal transect surveys indicated biodiversity differences between forest with different human disturbance histories, whereas pitfall trap surveys suggested no differences between forest disturbance types, except for community composition. This pattern was true for species richness, diversity, overall abundance and community evenness and structure. For some fine scale metrics, such as species specific responses and abundances of family groups, both methods detected differences between disturbance types. However, the direction of differences was inconsistent between methods. We highlight that for assessments of rainforest recovery following disturbance, survey methods do matter and that different biodiversity survey methods can identify contrasting patterns in response to different types of historic disturbance. Our results contribute to a growing body of evidence that arboreal species might be more sensitive indicators than terrestrial communities. © 2016 Elsevier Ltd
An alarming and increasing deforestation rate threatens Amazon tropical ecosystems and subsequent degradation due to frequent fires. Agroforestry systems (AFS) may offer a sustainable alternative, reportedly mimicking the plant-soil interactions of the natural mature forest (MF). However, the role of microbial community in tropical AFS remains largely unknown. This knowledge is crucial for evaluating the sustainability of AFS and practices given the key role of microbes in the aboveground-belowground interactions. The current study, by comparing different AFS and successions of secondary and MFs, showed that AFS fostered distinct groups of bacterial community, diverging from the MFs, likely a result of management practices while secondary forests converged to the same soil microbiome found in the MF, by favoring the same groups of fungi. Model simulations reveal that AFS would require profound changes in aboveground biomass and in soil factors to reach the same microbiome found in MFs. In summary, AFS practices did not result in ecosystems mimicking natural forest plant-soil interactions but rather reshaped the ecosystem to a completely different relation between aboveground biomass, soil abiotic properties, and the soil microbiome.
Management intensification in cultivated, tropical forests drives changes in the microclimate that can threaten native forest flora and fauna. In this study, we use epiphytic bryophytes, known to be sensitive to microclimatic changes due to their lack of a protective cuticle and the exposed habitat, to investigate the predictive power of microclimate for changes in species richness and composition. Bryophytes were sampled from understory trees in natural forest and cacao (Theobroma cacao L.) trees in two types of cacao agroforests (natural shade trees and planted shade trees) in Central Sulawesi, Indonesia. The microclimate in the agroforests was characterised by low air humidity and high air temperature during the afternoon. Bryophyte species richness did not differ between habitat types but species composition changed markedly from the natural forest to the cacao agroforests. Although no correlation between species richness and microclimate values could be found, a series of matrix-based analyses revealed a significantly positive relationship between similarities in species composition and in maximum values for temperature and minimum values for humidity, which suggests that microclimatic changes are a good predictor for high turnover of bryophyte community composition from natural forests to cacao agroforests. © CSIRO 2009.
Plantations are frequently established on abandoned pasture lands to speed forest recovery. This strategy requires matching a tree species mix with the prevailing microenvironmental conditions. In four degraded pastures of the Mexican Lacandon rainforest, we planted 2,400 trees of 6 species (Guazuma ulmifolia, Inga vera, Ochroma pyramidale, Trichospermum mexicanum, Bursera simaruba, and Spondias mombin) to (1) test survival, initial growth, and establishment costs; (2) evaluate whether vegetative cuttings outperform direct seeding or transplants of nursery-raised seedlings; (3) determine tree response to herbaceous dominance and soil compaction; and (4) scrutinize the results' consistency across sites and sampling scales of tree-microenvironment interactions (individual tree vs. averaged plot responses). After 2 years, overall survival and growth rates were high for 2 of 3 nursery-raised species. Contrary to expectations, all seedlings outperformed the cuttings while direct seeding resulted in a cost-effective option of intermediate efficacy. The impact of soil resistance to root penetration on tree biomass accumulation was species dependent while bulk density was not relevant. Soil-covering, herbaceous vegetation accelerated growth in 3 of 4 tested species during the dry season. At this initial stage of forest restoration in abandoned pastures, Guazuma and Trichospermum were the most restoration-effective species. Costs can be reduced by using direct-seeding Inga and avoiding weeding during the dry season. Finally, our results demonstrate how species selection trials can be misleading due to site variations in tree response and to sampling scales that fail to account for small-scale environmental heterogeneity. We recommend ways to improve the design of restoration trials. © 2015 Society for Ecological Restoration.
Ecological restoration is a viable strategy to recover floristic, structural, and functional attributes of the very vulnerable and widely degraded tropical mountain forests. Most restoration efforts in these highly diverse and narrowly distributed systems involve unassisted forest regeneration or enrichment planting with a small number of species, usually those with commercial value and success evaluated after a few years. We assessed changes in soil attributes, forest composition and structure in four sites with plots under unassisted forest regeneration or enrichment planting. The sites are in the limestone massif of the central highlands of Chiapas (Mexico) and share geological, edaphic and climatic conditions, but differ in level of previous disturbance and the time elapsed since the enrichment planting (16–30 years). No changes in soil variables (contents of C, N, P, and K, cation exchange capacity, and pH) were detected. Total density of juveniles was not consistently related to unassisted forest regeneration or enrichment planting but was highest in the two sites that had severe disturbance level. Influence of enrichment planting on forest regeneration depended on the composition and structure of the surrounding stands, and more so when opportunistic trees like pines and other shade-intolerant species are available. Yet long-lived shade-tolerant species, including oaks, which may have synergistic effects during forest recovery, were well represented in sites with original severe disturbance level. © 2022 Society for Ecological Restoration.
Human activity endangers tropical forests in different parts of the world. The conflicting interests of nature conservation on the one hand, and the livelihood of farmers living at the forest margins, on the other, clash noticeably in so-called hotspots of biodiversity, such as the Lore Lindu region of Central Sulawesi, Indonesia. Biodiversity generally decreases along a land use gradient from natural forest to agroforestry and annual crop systems. Thus, before solutions for a sustainable balance between conservation and the needs of people living at the forest margins can be sought, changing land use strategies and the factors that influence them must be analyzed. While similar studies often concentrate on economic indicators of land use change only, this chapter highlights the importance of two cultural realities, namely migration and ethnicity. We will demonstrate the great influence of these two factors on land use decisions and on the accessibility of land in the Lore Lindu region. Based on results from previous qualitative studies, we selected three upland villages, which represent a continuum that leads, in terms of migration history, from a pre-transition village, to a transitional village, to a post-transition village. We used quantitative and qualitative methods for our analysis. The results show a general land use change in the region, ranging from a strategy that places food first (e.g., rice) to one that places cash first, especially by the cultivation of cacao. This change cannot be observed to the same extent in the study region as a whole. It varies from village to village, depending on the share of households belonging to the Bugis migrants. Bugis as an ethnic group and as migrants have an enormous effect on the land use decisions of local ethnic groups in their respective villages. Strong ethnic networks among Bugis migrants play an important role not only with respect to their village preferences, but also with respect to the transfer of knowledge regarding agricultural management. A lack of interaction between local and migrant ethnic groups results in differences in the efficiency of cacao cultivation. While the Bugis migrants mainly buy their agricultural land from local farmers or, depending on the village’s migration history, from other Bugis households, members of the autochthonous ethnic group usually clear the primary forest. The findings of the present study reveal that an analysis of migration and ethnicity is a crucial precondition to finding sustainable solutions for ensuring that the margins of the rainforest in the Lore Lindu region remain stable. This chapter will emphasize that, in addition to economic considerations, an analysis of the cultural forces that influence land use changes cannot be neglected. © 2007, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Despite the urgent demand for sustainable mining, the revegetation and rehabilitation of areas degraded by mining activities remain challenging. Uncertainties about species selection, the management and control of alien invasive species and monitoring procedures require ongoing multidisciplinary research. Modern functional and phylogenetic approaches in community ecology represent powerful tools to enhance the entire rehabilitation process and to overcome these challenges, but methodologies that incorporate up-to-date phylogenetic information or knowledge about intraspecific variation along rehabilitation trajectories must be developed. Functional and phylogenetic criteria may play an especially important role in guiding the definition of faster-growing, more resistant species mixtures that can be applied in mine land revegetation and rehabilitation. Limiting similarity approaches may help to reduce biological invasions, enabling native vegetation to outcompete alien invasive species and aiding in the development of enduring mechanisms for controlling such species in rehabilitated mine land. Finally, incorporating phylogenetic and functional aspects into monitoring of the success of mine land rehabilitation with additional tools, such as remote sensing or metabarcoding, can enrich scientific knowledge about ecosystem functions such as nutrient cycling, community assembly and resource availability while providing sound information about the success of revegetation activities. In the middle to long term, research activities on these topics can provide valuable technical recommendations for all aspects of the management of rehabilitated ecosystems, thus contributing to more sustainable mining. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Mining is one of the main economic activities in the Amazon region, contributing substantially to the economy of countries that share its territory. This activity, however, brings environmental aftermaths as vegetation suppression, soil destruction, hydrological instability, and faunal displacement, making restoration of degraded ecosystems a challenge. In this sense, the objective of our study was to present the economic importance, the main restoration methods, and the bottlenecks to obtain successful restoration trajectories in degraded areas by industrial mining in the Amazon. We listed eight possible relevant procedures for successful restoration after mining and discussed worldwide adopted restoration methods such as seedling planting, inducing natural regeneration, hydroseeding, and nucleation. Despite the great development of restoration methods after mining, there are still barriers to obtain inputs, which include seedlings, and qualified labor to plan and develop restoration projects. These issues come in addition to operational restrictions, technical incapacity, deficient or inflexible legal basis, and lack of law enforcement. We suggest the selection of key species for planting, associated with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and biochar, establishment of lists with ecological indicators and reference values, usage of organic waste, and monitoring through unmanned aerial vehicles with high sensors resolution to correct revegetation failures and estimate aboveground biomass and carbon.
Accurate biomass estimation is critical to quantify the changes in biomass and carbon stocks following the restoration of degraded landscapes. However, there is lack of site-specific allometric equations for the estimation of aboveground biomass (AGB), which consequently limits our understanding of the contributions of restoration efforts in mitigating climate change. This study was conducted in northwestern Ethiopia to develop a multi-species allometric equation and investigate the spatial and temporal variation of C-stocks following the restoration of degraded landscapes. We harvested and weighed 84 trees from eleven dominant species from six grazing exclosures and adjacent communal grazing land. We observed that AGB correlates significantly with diameter at stump height D-30 (R-2 = 0.78; P<0.01), and tree height H (R-2 = 0.41, P<0.05). Our best model, which includes D-30 and H as predictors explained 82% of the variations in AGB. This model produced the lowest bias with narrow ranges of errors across different diameter classes. Estimated C-stock showed a significant positive correlation with stem density (R-2 = 0.80, P<0.01) and basal area (R-2 = 0.84, P<0.01). At the watershed level, the mean C-stock was 3.8 (+/- 0.5) MgCha(-1). Plot-level C-stocks varied between 0.1 and 13.7MgCha(-1). Estimated C-stocks in three-and seven-year-old exclosures exceeded estimated C-stock in the communal grazing land by 50%. The species that contribute most to C-stocks were Leucaena sp. (28%), Calpurnia aurea (21%), Euclea racemosa (20.9%), and Dodonaea angustifolia (15.8%). The equations developed in this study allow monitoring changes in C-stocks and C-sequestration following the implementation of restoration practices in northern Ethiopia over space and time. The estimated C-stocks can be used as a reference against which future changes in C-stocks can be compared.
Conversion of structurally complex rainforests into simplified oil palm monocultures leads to dramatic losses of biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. To alleviate negative ecological impacts, enrichment with native tree species may rapidly restore structural complexity in existing oil palm plantations. However, the mechanisms underlying the recovery of structural complexity in mixed-species tree plantings remain poorly understood. We measured structural complexity from terrestrial laser scanning in a biodiversity enrichment experiment with multiple tree species planted in an oil palm monoculture, forming agroforestry plots of varying tree species diversity and plot size. We find that three years after tree planting, structural complexity in oil palm increased by one third, representing 25% of the increase needed to restore the structural complexity of tropical forests. Changes in structural complexity were associated with denser and more complex filling of three-dimensional space, whereas vertical stratification was mainly influenced by oil palm. Furthermore, structural complexity increased with tree species diversity in the agroforestry plots. This relationship was mainly due the presence of well-performing species that contributed to higher levels of structural complexity. However, interactions among multiple species independently from the species identity were also detected. Finally, increasing plot size had a positive effect on a scale-independent measure of structural complexity. Our results provide evidence that planting multiple tree species in large agroforestry plots is a suitable strategy to rapidly enhance structural complexity in oil palm plantations. © 2019 Elsevier B.V.
A two-year experiment assessed herbage production and above- and below-ground characteristics of a highly productive monoculture (‘BRS Zuri’ guineagrass [Panicum maximum Jacq.]) and two mixtures of three grasses (Mixture 1: ‘BRS Zuri’ guineagrass, ‘BRS Xaraés’ palisadegrass [Brachiaria brizantha Stapf.], and ‘Basilisk’ signalgrass [Brachiaria decumbens Stapf.]; Mixture 2: ‘BRS Quênia’ guineagrass [Panicum maximum Jacq.], ‘Marandu’ palisadegrass [Brachiaria brizantha Stapf.], and ‘BRS Paiaguás’ palisadegrass [Brachiaria brizantha Stapf.]), cultivated in the Brazilian tropical savanna. Mixtures 1 and 2 were subjected to two grazing intensities (removal of 40 or 60% of pre-grazing height) and ‘BRS Zuri’ guineagrass monoculture was defoliated to a single grazing intensity of 50%. Treatments were randomly assigned to fifteen 0.25-ha plots and managed under intermittent stocking by cattle. Herbage accumulation rate was similar among pastures and years (p >.1). The root mass in the tussocks did not differ (p >.1), with mean values ranging between 0.62 to 1.81 kg DM m−2. Root density in the tussock interspaces was greater in the mixtures (p <.001), regardless of seasons (p =.405) and years (p =.292). The mixtures were dominated by guineagrass (70%) and palisadegrass (30%) at the end of the experiment, with the population of ‘Basilisk’ and ‘BRS Paiaguás’ being completely suppressed throughout the experimental period. Mixing guineagrass and brachiariagrasses can be an alternative to the traditional pastoral systems in the tropics, as it does not compromise herbage production and presents a capacity to produce more roots than a very productive monoculture of ‘BRS Zuri’ guineagrass. © 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Uganda, located in the Tropical region of Africa, is blessed with natural forests that serve enormous environmental ecosystems and biodiversity. Moreover, the country is known for its tropical rain forests and various hardwood, birds, and animal species. Over the years, the Trend in the natural forest land has declined at an alarming rate; hence need to investigate the possible drivers. The loss of such biodiversity and ecosystems risks desertification and extreme climatic condition. As the world moves towards Zero Deforestation 2030, understanding the determinants of deforestation and forest degradation is paramount. Therefore, the main objective of this study is to understand the impact and relationships between net forest conversion, energy emission, agriculture, and forest production of Roundwood. We used data from FAO for the period 2004-2016. Using the ADF and KPSS test, we checked for the unit root presence in the variables. Also, the study used two different regression models; ordinary multiple linear and dynamic linear regressions. The results showed that there were unit roots in the selected regressors. To analyze the determinants of deforestation, we used net forest conversion in Uganda. There was 94 % variation in the dependent variable (Net Forest conversion). The outcome of the dynamic linear regression showed that agriculture and energy emission positively impact net forest conversion, whereas forest production of Roundwood has a negative effect. Based on our findings, this study recommended the modernization of agriculture by the government of Uganda to stop cutting down the forests on a big scale. Also, the study suggested that, as Roundwood production has a negative impact on net forest conversion, there is a need for the government to strictly legislate to ensure effective and efficient management and production of Roundwood products towards total forest conservation by 2030. © 2022 Public Recreation and Landscape Protection - With Environment Hand in Hand? Proceedings of the 13th Conference. All rights reserved.
The present study used temporal remote sensing data for 1990, 2001 and 2006 to assess spatio-temporal patterns of forest cover changes in Shiwalik range of the Himalaya, Dehradun forest division. Forests are innately associated to human well-being. However, with the increasing anthropogenic activities, deforestation has increased. Quantitative change analysis of the forest cover for the past two decades provides valuable insight into the forest conservation vis-A -vis anthropogenic activities in the region. Spatio-temporal datasets along with biotic and abiotic variables provide opportunities to model the forest cover change further. The present study investigates forest cover change and predicts status of forest cover in the Dehradun forest division. Land Change Modeller (LCM) was used to predict status of forest cover for 2010 and 2015 using current disturbance scenarios. Comparing actual LULC of 2006 with the predicted LULC of 2006 validated change prediction model and agreement was 61.03%. The forested areas are getting degraded due to anthropogenic activities, but deforestation/degradation does not contribute much in expanding urban area. Agricultural areas and fallow lands are the main contributors to increased urban area. The study demonstrates the potential of geospatial tools to understand spatio-temporal forest cover change and generate the future scenarios.
Key message Models for quantifying tree biometric properties, imperative for forest management decision-making, including height, diameter, bark thickness and volume were developed, and wood basic density was documented for dry Afromontane forests of south-central Ethiopia. Tree biometric properties such as height (ht), diameter at breast height (dbh), bark thickness (bt), volume and wood basic density (wbd) are imperative for forest management decision-making. For dry Afromontane forests in south-central Ethiopia, models for quantifying such tree properties are totally lacking. This study, therefore, aimed at developing models for ht based on dbh, for dbh based on stump height diameter (dsh), for bt based on dbh,for volume based on dbh, ht and crown width (crw), as well as documenting wbd data. Comprehensive and representative datasets were collected from Degaga-Gambo and Wondo Genet forests. The ht, dbh and bt modelling were based on 1345 sampled trees during forest inventories, while the volume modelling and wbd documentation were based on 63 destructively sampled trees from 30 species covering 87% of the total basal area in the study sites. Weighted least squares regression was applied for modelling and leave one out cross-validation was used for evaluation. The ht-dbh and dbh-dsh models performed well (pseudo-R-2 = 0.72 and 0.98), while bt-dbh performed poorer (pseudo-R-2 = 0.42). Models for the total tree, merchantable stem and branches volume were developed with different options for independent variables, where pseudo-R(2)varied from 0.74 to 0.98, with smallest values for the branches models The models may be applied to forests outside the present study sites provided that the growing conditions are carefully evaluated. The species-wise wbd was ranging from 0.426 to 0.979 g cm(-3), with the overall mean of 0.588 g cm(-3). The wbd data will be useful for building up a national wbd database and may also be included in the Global Wood Density database. The study represents a significant step towards sustainable forest management including REDD + MRV practices in the dry Afromontane forests of south-central Ethiopia.
This study used time series remote sensing data from 1973, 1990 and 2004 to assess spatial forest cover change patterns in the Kalakad-Mundanthurai Tiger Reserve (KMTR), South Western Ghats (India). Analysis of forest cover changes and its causes are the most challenging areas of landscape ecology, especially due to the absence of temporal ground data and comparable space platform based data. Comparing remotely sensed data from three different sources with sensors having different spatial and spectral resolution presented a technical challenge. Quantitative change analysis over a long period provided a valuable insight into forest cover dynamics in this area. Time-series maps were combined within a geographical information system (GIS) with biotic and abiotic factors for modelling its future change. The land-cover change has been modelled using GEOMOD and predicted for year 2020 using the current disturbance scenario. Comparison of the forest change maps over the 31-year period shows that evergreen forest being degraded (16%) primarily in the form of selective logging and clear felling to raise plantations of coffee, tea and cardamom. The natural disturbances such as forest fire, wildlife grazing, invasions after clearance and soil erosion induced by anthropogenic pressure over the decades are the reasons of forest cover change in KMTR. The study demonstrates the role of remote sensing and GIS in monitoring of large-coverage of forest area continuously for a given region over time more precisely and in cost-effective manner which will be ideal for conservation planning and prioritization.
Land use change by the intensification of agriculture contributes to tropical forest fragmen- tation and biodiversity loss. In this sense, in comparison with traditional agroforestry systems (AFS), modern AFS are considered irrelevant for the conservation of biodiversity of tropical forest fragments. However, there is an increasing trend toward the establishment of different types of modern AFS. Owing to the sensitivity to environmental changes, we evaluated the biodiversity of butterflies in AFS with Coffea arabica and Erythrina poeppigiana (CP), and intermixed with Musa spp. (CPM) or Cordia alliodora (the only native species of AFS) (CPL), as well as premontane very humid forest fragments in the Volcánica Central-Talamanca Biological Corridor, Costa Rica. In six representative sites of each system we set up three parallel 80 m line-transects, separated by a distance of 25 m. Each coffee farm and forest fragment (FR) was surveyed during 1.5 hours to record butterflies. All sites were sampled once a month from May to July 2007. We obtained 4.5 hours of sampling/ site, and 27 hours of sampling/habitat. Both CP and CPM together had a butterflies’ species composition which differed from CPL and FR. The indicator species of both CP and CPM together were Hermeuptychia hermes and Anartia jatrophae which are typical of open areas. CPL resulted with the species of secondary forests Heliconius erato petiverana and Pareuptychia ocirrhoe as indicators. In contrast, FR resulted with several indicator species typical of closed canopy forests such as Pierella helvina incanescens, Caligo eurilochus, and Morpho peleides limpida. Moreover, the richness of species was similar among coffee AFS. Furthermore, the richness of species of each coffee AFS was lower in comparison with FR. However, among coffee AFS, CPL harbored higher diversity (Exp(H’)) of forest butterflies than CP. Also, CPM was higher in abundance of frugivorous butterflies in relation with CP and CPL. In fragmented forests, coffee farms with exotic shade species combined at least with a native tree or fruit species, can be a better habitat for forest butterflies than those dominated by an exotic monospecific shade. © 2018, Universidad de Costa Rica. All rights reserved.
Reducing carbon emissions from deforestation and degradation in developing countries is of central importance in efforts to combat climate change. Key scientific challenges must be addressed to prevent any policy roadblocks. Foremost among the challenges is quantifying nations' carbon emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, which requires information on forest clearing and carbon storage. Here we review a range of methods available to estimate national-level forest carbon stocks in developing countries. While there are no practical methods to directly measure all forest carbon stocks across a country, both ground-based and remote-sensing measurements of forest attributes can be converted into estimates of national carbon stocks using allometric relationships. Here we synthesize, map and update prominent forest biomass carbon databases to create the first complete set of national-level forest carbon stock estimates. These forest carbon estimates expand on the default values recommended by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's National Greenhouse Gas Inventory Guidelines and provide a range of globally consistent estimates. © IOP Publishing Ltd.
Tropical forests are facing threats that may affect the dynamics of seed dispersers which participate in the forest regeneration. To implement appropriate conservation programs, it appears necessary to monitor seed dispersers and to estimate their response to local changes. Here, we used non-invasive ecoacoustic methods to monitor the activity of a canopy bird, the White-throated toucan, Ramphastos tucanus, a major seed disperser and flagship species of the Amazonian forest. We deployed nine acoustic recorders over 29 days along a road that connects French Guiana to Brazil. We used template matching to automatically detect the vocalizations of R. tucanus. This method, which can easily be repeated with limited human expertise, detected 1748 recordings with R. tucanus vocalizations. A GLMM analysis was applied to test for a possible effect of habitat type and human activity, while accounting for time of the day and rainfall. The number of vocalizations varied according to time of the day with peaks at dawn and dusk. The number of vocalizations did not differ significantly among sites, they were not affected by habitat type, and they were only marginally influenced by human activity. These results indicate that the vocal activity of a key conservation species can be monitored automatically in a non-invasive way. The species targeted, R. tucanus, does not seem to be significantly impacted by the road and local human activity. This might be related to the mobility of the species, which can easily cross the road, as well as low local forestry pressure. © 2020 Elsevier Ltd
Clearing of native forest for plantation expansion is a significant component of land use change in many tropical regions. The continuing expansion of plantations has many environmental consequences, including the loss and fragmentation of habitat, alteration of nutrient cycling processes, reduction in environmentally sequestered carbon, increased soil erosion and land degradation, and loss of biodiversity. The primary goal of this research was to develop and test remote sensing methods to detect the expansion of plantations in the southern part of the Lao People's Democratic Republic (PDR). We used Landsat satellite imagery acquired between 2003 and 2012. Principal component analysis (PCA) was applied to three Landsat temporal image pairs (2003-2006, 2006-2009 and 2009-2012) to identify areas of change. Change identification accuracy was evaluated by comparison against 1,240 random sample locations which had been independently classified from Google Earth imagery from 2006 and 2012. It was found that one of the principal components detected change in areas of plantation in the study area, with producer's accuracy of 92% and user's accuracy of 79%. This method was relatively easy to implement, involved no image purchase costs, and could be used by ecologists or forestry managers seeking to monitor forest loss or plantation expansion. © 2014 SPIE.
The Atlantic Forest biome is a biodiversity hotspot with only 13% of its native vegetation cover remaining in Brazil. Forest restoration is an important process for the re-establishment of biodiversity and the preservation of water resources in degraded areas, like riparian forests. Monitoring is an essential step of restoration, because the periodic evaluation of indicators allows researchers to analyze the effectiveness of applied techniques. This study aimed to evaluate the environmental quality of a seedling planting (active restoration) in a Permanent Preservation Area (PPA) of the Southeast Atlantic Forest biome, through a monitoring protocol, within a year. More specifically, we aimed to investigate the following questions: (1) do some ecological groups or families grow more than others? and (2) is the cover of exotic grasses negatively influencing forest regeneration? Data were collected during November 2017 and April (interval represents five months of wet season) and October 2018 (six months of dry season). Eight plots of 9 × 18 m were established and all individuals were identified and measured (diameter at ground level (DGL), height (H), and canopy diameter (CD)). Exotic grass cover and richness of regenerating species were also recorded. We registered 119 individuals during the three inventories, distributed in 35 species and 14 families. Results indicate an inverse association between exotic grasses and the presence of recruits in the area. Thus, exotic grass control may be needed while the forest canopy is not closed. A significant growth of individuals in the whole study period, especially during the wet season, was detected. Legumes grew more in trunk and canopy diameter (Anadenanthera colubrina (Vell.) Brenan and Inga vera Willd. subsp. affinis (DC.) T. D. Penn. had the biggest growth, respectively) than non-legumes during wetter months and within a year. Pioneers had greater height increase compared to non-pioneers only during wetter months. Legumes may be important species to be used in other young tropical forest restoration areas. © 2019 by the authors.
Given the importance of species diversity as a tool for assessing recovery during forest regeneration and active restoration, robust approaches for assessing changes in tree species diversity over time are urgently needed. We assessed changes in tree species diversity during natural regeneration over 12-20 years in eight 1-ha monitoring plots in NE Costa Rica, six second-growth forests and two old-growth reference forests. We used diversity profiles to show successional trajectories in measures of observed, asymptotic and standardized tree diversity and evenness as well as sample completeness. We randomly subsampled 1-ha plot data to evaluate how well smaller spatial subsamples would have captured temporal trajectories. Annual surveys in eight 1-ha plots were missing substantial numbers of rare or infrequent species. Older second-growth sites showed consistent declines in tree diversity, whereas younger sites showed fluctuating patterns or increases. Subsample areas of 0.5 ha or greater were sufficient to infer the diversity of abundant species, but smaller subsamples failed to capture temporal trajectories of species richness and yielded positively biased estimates of evenness. In tropical forest regions with high levels of diversity, species diversity from small sample plots should be assessed using methods that incorporate abundance information and that standardize for sample coverage. This article is part of the theme issue 'Understanding forest landscape restoration: reinforcing scientific foundations for the UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration'.  © 2022 The Authors.
The implementation of rewilding initiatives is crucial for biodiversity recovery, particularly in biodiversity hotspots such as the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. Long-term monitoring of rewilding initiatives is critical for assessing progress and informing management choices. This study assesses the efficiency of different reforestation practices for biodiversity recovery, including passive restoration, active reforestation with different native seedlings, and plantations of exotic species. We applied an ecosystem approach to estimate the tree and mammal diversity, collected through forest plots and camera traps. We selected differently managed areas and included the oldest forest patches as reference points for the assessment of biodiversity; a naturally disturbed montane forest in the area was included as a control category for the disturbance analysis. Moreover, we investigated the influence of ecological variables, such as biodiversity, aboveground biomass, and altitude, on rewilding processes. Our results suggest that Eucalyptus plantations, a simplified ecosystem made up of monocultures of exotic species, support lower biodiversity. On the contrary, active reforestation with different native species resulted in an ecological status comparable to naturally regrown secondary forests. We show that active reforestation can reduce the time required for rewilding. We also found a positive correlation between tree and mammal species richness. These results underscore the importance and potential of responsible restoration efforts in recovering local biodiversity, contributing to the vision of a future where the Brazilian Atlantic Forest can be acknowledged not only as a biodiversity hotspot but also as a "hopespot."
We are in an unprecedented moment for promoting forest restoration globally, with international and regional pledges to restore at least 350 million hectares by 2030. To achieve these ambitious goals, it is necessary to go beyond traditional plot-scale assessments and develop cost-effective technologies that can monitor the structure and function of restored forests at much broader scales. Lidar remote sensing in unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) platforms can be an agile and autonomous method for monitoring forest restoration projects, especially under conditions when information updates are frequently needed in relatively small areas or, when using an airplane borne lidar system may be not financially viable. Here, we explored the potential of an UAV-borne lidar system to assess the outcomes of a mixed-species restoration plantation experiment, designed to maximize aboveground biomass (AGB) accumulation. The experiment was established in Brazil's Atlantic Forest, with 20 native tree species, by combining two levels of planting density and two management levels, totaling four treatment combinations and one control (plots left over for natural regeneration). We analyzed three structural variables from lidar data (canopy height, gap fraction and leaf area index) and one from field inventory data (AGB). Structural differences between the treatments and the control plots were reliably distinguished by the UAV-borne lidar system. AGB was strongly correlated with canopy height, allowing us to elaborate a predictive equation to use the UAV-borne lidar system for monitoring structural features in other restoration plantations in the region. UAV-borne lidar systems showed enormous potential for monitoring relatively broad-scale (thousands of hectares) forest restoration projects, providing an important tool to aid decision making and accountability in forest landscape restoration.
Anthropogenic disturbance has led to widespread clearance and degradation of tropical forests, and tree planting has been promoted as an effective solution for recovery. However, trees have been overwhelmingly planted in monocultures or low-diversity mixes and this is expected to have profound, lasting impacts on forest structure, diversity, and functioning. In this study, we tested the extent to which historical vegetation transition types (VTTs) constrain forest recovery in a secondary tropical landscape in Hong Kong, South China. To do so, we overlaid vegetation types (forest, shrubland, pine plantation, grassland) identified in aerial photographs taken in 1956 and 1963 of a 20-ha plot situated in Tai Po Kau Nature Reserve, allowing us to define six historic VTTs, namely: FF (forest to forest), GP (grassland to plantation), GS (grassland to shrubland), SS (shrubland to shrubland), SF (shrubland to forest), and SP (shrubland to plantation). We compared present-day forest structure and species diversity among these VTTs, as determined from a census conducted in 2015, using incidence- and abundance-based rarefaction and extrapolation, and we assessed species’ association within VTTs using a torus translation test. Our results reveal that stem density and species diversity in naturally regenerated forests were more similar to those of old-growth forest, whereas species diversity in areas occupied by pine plantations was significantly lower as compared with naturally regenerated areas. Despite 60 years of recovery, pine plantations were characterised by a significantly greater proportion of negatively associated species, and late-seral species were still predominantly confined to old-growth patches. Present-day species distribution is chiefly explained by the combined effects of topography and VTT (17.1%), with VTT alone explaining 4.4%. Our study demonstrates that VTT has a significant long-term impact on forest regeneration and community assembly and, importantly, that monocultural plantations (forest plantation) can greatly impede forest recovery. Remnant old-growth forest patches merit priority protection, and active restoration, including thinning and enhancement planting, is necessary to facilitate forest succession. Copyright © 2023 Zhu, Zhang, Cheuk, Hau, Fischer and Gale.
Bess beetles are important components on tropical forest dead wood nutrient cycling, since they act as direct consumers and ease the consumption by another organism (indirect). Studies of bess beetle ecology are scarce and have focused on communities responses to environmental changes on alimentary resources. We characterized the bess beetles guild composition in an elevation gradient, according to their differential use of resources (microhabitat) and morphological traits quantification (geometric and lineal), as a potential tool to improve our understanding on resource use and functional ecology of beetles. Three guilds (underbark, sapwood-heartwood and generalists feeders), five species and 198 familiar groups were recognized; their richness decreased as elevation increased. Changes in linear morphometric measures were influenced by elevation; morphogeometrical measures were not associated with the elevation gradient, only grouping at guild level were observed. Morphological markers analysis (morphometric) provided information to guild delimitation. Body and metatibiae shape contributed with the best information to guild grouping. Quantification of those structural markers proved the relationship between resource repartition, because they are involved in movement on wood galleries and wood consumption, this fact allowed to propose specific functional roles. The identified patterns have contributed on the understanding of functional processes in Passalidae communities and their role in ecosystem function. © 2016, Universidad de Costa Rica. All rights reserved.
With the increasing occurrence of natural hazards, deterioration of our physical environment and also climate change, there has been an increased consciousness in the conservation of our forests. Forest cover and density have proven to be important indicators of ecological stability and they play a major role in the preservation of the natural world. In tropical regions, deforestation and forest degradation are gradual progressive processes that are advancing at worrisome rate, resulting in a consequent conversion of forest area into a mosaic of mature forest fragments, pasture, degraded soil and loss of biodiversity. Hence, increase in research that assesses the vulnerability of forests to changing environmental conditions. This study was carried out using geo-information techniques in evaluating various physical factors contributing to the degradation of forests in Ogun State. Datasets acquired include landuse/landcover data, soil data, population data, meteorological data such as Mean annual rainfall map, Rainfall intensity, Mean Onset of rainfall map, Mean Cessation dates of rainfall, and Hydrologic ratio. Weighted linear combination was used to analyze factors and implemented in a GIS system. A grid model was developed to partition the study area into equal grid cells and this serves as a platform for combining criterion weights, scale values, data evaluation and vulnerability values.     The total land area studied was 1798.88km(2), using 2301 grid cells (900m by 900m). The very highly vulnerable zone was 20.65% (386.27 km(2)), highly vulnerable zone, 41.63% (760.86km(2)), moderate vulnerable zone, 17.27% (323.09km(2)) and the low vulnerable zone was 20.45% (328.66km(2)) of the total land area. The evaluation of biophysical factors with multi-criteria techniques reveals that the current land uses promote environmental degradation. Therefore to avoid further degradation sustainable land uses such as agro forestry, reforestation of degraded habitat, supervised logging, use of alternative sources for energy other than firewood should be encouraged.
Ecosystem restoration is a global priority, currently promoted by several ambitious commitments. Most of the research to guide restoration practices was so far put on the recovery of above-ground functions and services, although soil health is increasingly recognized as a fundamental condition to restoration success. Soil restoration is particularly needed in mining areas, in which the surface soil layers are removed and the left over, highly deprived substrate does not support vegetation recovery. Here, we evaluated the potential of active restoration to recover soil attributes after bauxite mining in the Brazil's Atlantic Forest. We specifically studied how physical, chemical and microbiological soil attributes down to 40 cm depth respond to restoration (i.e. topsoil spreading and tree planting) by comparing newly mined areas, areas undergoing restoration for ~7 years and conserved forests. We further explored the associations between microbiological and physico-chemical soil attributes. Restoration interventions resulted in a 10-fold increase in the soil organic matter content compared to mined areas, as well as in the recovery of P content. Restoration was also shown to be associated with the recovery of the activity and diversity of soil bacterial communities, reaching similar levels to those observed in conserved forest. Restored and conserved forests were characterized by a higher proportion of Acidobacteria, Planctomycetes and Verrucomicrobia. All bacterial attributes were correlated with soil physical attributes, except for microporosity, and with organic matter and cation exchange capacity. Within a few years, restoration allowed recovering crucial physical, chemical and microbiological soil attributes, reaching levels comparable to those found in conserved forests. Synthesis and applications. We demonstrate that intensive management can result in the fast restoration of tropical forest soils after mining, at least at small scales. Our results stress the need to consider soil recovery both as a driver and a measure of ecosystem restoration success, and support the development of more holistic monitoring protocols to be used during the United Nations Decade on Ecosystem Restoration. © 2021 British Ecological Society.
Second-growth forests (SGF) are critical components for limiting biodiversity loss and climate change mitigation. However, these forests were established after anthropic disturbances such as land use for planting, and in highly human-modified landscapes. These interventions can decrease the ability of biological communities to recover naturally, and it is necessary to understand how multiple drivers, from local scale to landscape scale influence the diversity and carbon stock of these forests in natural regeneration. For this, we used data from 37 SGF growing on areas previously used for eucalyptus plantations in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest, after the last cut cycle. For each SGF, the forest tree species diversity was calculated based on the Hills number, and we also calculated the above-ground carbon stock. Then, we evaluated the influence of multiple environmental factors on these indexes: soil properties, past-management intensity, patch configuration, and landscape composition. Little influence of soil properties was found, only soil fertility negatively influenced above-ground carbon stock. However, past-management intensity negatively influenced tree species diversity and carbon stock. The isolation of other forests and tree species propagules source distance (>500 ha) also negatively influenced the diversity of species. This is probably due to the favoring of tree pioneer species in highly human-modified landscapes because they are more tolerant of environmental changes, less dependent on animal dispersal, and have low carbon stock capacity. Thus, areas with higher past-management intensity and more isolated areas are less effective for passive restoration and may require intervention to recover tree diversity and carbon stock in the Atlantic Forest. The approach, which had not yet been applied in the Atlantic Forest, brought similar results to that found in other forests, and serves as a theoretical basis for choosing priority areas for passive restoration in the biome. © 2022 Elsevier Ltd
Understanding the relative importance of factors driving savanna-forest dynamics is vital as changes in the extent of tropical forests can have major impacts on global climate and carbon balance, biodiversity, and human well-being. Comparison of aerial photographs for 50 rainforest patches in Kakadu National Park had previously revealed a landscape wide expansion of rainforest boundaries between 1964 and 2004. Here, we used generalized linear and mixed effects models to assess the role of fire, buffalo impact, and patch characteristics in determining the rate of boundary change. The analysis was conducted at both the patch scale, and within-patch ( plot) scale, to capture the different processes operating. At the patch scale, the rate of change was best explained by rainforest type and historical buffalo impact. Fire activity, patch size, and fragmentation were not important predictors of the rate of change. At the plot scale, distance from rainforest edge was the most important predictor of the probability of change, while the fragmentation and aspect of the boundary were unimportant. Rainforest expansion has occurred through a process of margin extension rather than eruption of new patches. The rainforest expansion is consistent with having been driven primarily by shifts in global change phenomena, such as increased rainfall and atmospheric CO2, rather than changes in disturbance regime. It appears that the current fire regimes are not sufficiently destructive to limit the overall expansion of the rainforest patches. Rainforest type and historical buffalo impact have mediated the rate of change at the patch scale.
Reforestation and restoration offer critical contributions to addressing climate change and biodiversity decline. Enabling carbon credits to be derived from these activities is important for reforestation, particularly since reforestation does not come cheaply. Australia's Carbon Farming Initiative is a world-leading policy that allows carbon credits to be obtained by using published methods-based approaches. Here we apply two different approaches to a young mixed species reforestation project in the wet tropics of Queensland, Australia. One approach assesses carbon sequestration from published allometric equations requiring direct field measurements, and the other applies a national carbon accounting model, FullCAM. Using allometric equations, we found above-ground biomass was influenced significantly by family, species, size class, and the interaction of family and size class. Species in the family Proteaceae out-performed species in other families. Selection of species according to soil nutrient status could enhance growth rates, but if soil nutrients and species responses are not known, then a bet-hedging strategy using mixed species from a variety of families is probably the best option. For three year old forest plots, FullCAM modelled significantly more carbon mass of trees than published allometric models for mixed tropical forests, suggesting that FullCAM needs adjustment to more accurately reflect species, families, local conditions and small-scale sites. Current policy settings are at odds with the needs of carbon farmers, considering the importance of forests and landscape restoration in fighting climate change and biodiversity decline. Legislated national methods allowing the development of species-specific allometrics for small mixed plantations do not account for the costs of developing these allometrics, especially in markets that are marginal. © 2017 Elsevier B.V.
A round table discussion was convened to explore divergent views on the potential for natural forest management (NFM) for timber to contribute to wide-scale maintenance of forest cover and biological diversity in tropical forests The general argument for NFM for timber is that, by conferring relatively more economic value on forests than alternative forest uses, NFM for timber is a necessary, though imperfect, means by which extensive areas of forest cover and a large measure of their biological diversity would be maintained outside nature reserves. The discussion centred on five topics: the biological-diversity-related benefits and drawbacks of instituting NFM for timber, the biological and economic constraints on successful NFM for timber, the alternatives to NFM for timber, and the relative merits of community versus industrial concessions as mechanisms by which to institute NFM for limber. Both proponents and critics of NFM for timber should recognise that, first, NFM for timber can be carried out in ways that mitigate the negative effects on biological diversity and, second, there is a common set of conditions necessary to maintain forest cover for any use, including NFM for timber or nature reserves.
A better understanding of the natural regeneration in tropical forests could help develop more effective restoration strategies. This study examined relationships in structural and diversity attributes of natural regeneration in five forest fallow ages after slash-and-burn agriculture (6 months, 2 years, 5 years, 10 years, and 15 years) in the Republic of Congo. For each fallow age, all stems with a diameter ≥1 cm and below 5 cm (height ≥ 130 cm), corresponding to natural forest regeneration, were identified to the species level, and measured (diameter and height) in 12 plots (10 m × 10 m). Three structural attributes (stem density, maximum diameter, and maximum height) and five diversity indices (species richness, Shannon diversity, Simpson diversity, Fisher's alpha and Pielou's evenness) were estimated at the plot level. Our results revealed an increase in structural and diversity attributes with fallow ages, except stem density. The young fallow (6 months, 2 years and 5 years) had greater stem density (61 ± 48 stems), while the old fallow (10 years and 15 years) had higher maximum height (5.39 ± 2.36 m) and Shannon's index (0.94 ± 0.18). These results provided new insights into natural regeneration between young and old secondary forests. © 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
The paucity of biodiversity assessments in the Palaeotropics has constrained recommendations for tropical forest conservation in areas such as Siberut, one of the Mentawai Islands in Indonesia known for its high endemicity. Taking advantage of information from museum collections amassed from the Indo-Malaya archipelago from the early 20th century onwards, we show how species records available through online databases of natural history collections can be used to assess the state of biodiversity when used in conjunction with a field survey, using bat species on Siberut as a study case. We obtained a total of 15 years of records from 1903 to 2013 (following searches of databases up to 2020), documenting 20 bat species on Siberut. Of these, our field survey contributed records of three additional species not previously recorded on the island. The species accumulation curve has not levelled off, suggesting that future surveys may discover additional bat species and highlighting Siberut's importance as bat habitat and source of tropical biodiversity.  © The Author(s), 2022. Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of Fauna & Flora International.
Forested tropical peatlands in Southeast Asia are important global carbon stores and for biodiversity conservation, yet are being rapidly converted to agriculture or degraded into fire-prone non-forest vegetation. Although large areas previously cleared for agriculture have been abandoned, there is little evidence of subsequent forest recovery. We assessed the composition of non-forest regrowth in a degraded peatland in the former Mega Rice Project: a failed attempt to convert 1 million hectares of tropical peatland for rice production in Central Kalimantan, Indonesia. Regrowth was assessed in 223 20m×20m plots distributed at 100m intervals along transects through the deforested area. Individual woody plants ≥0.5m in height were counted and identified. A total of 6085 woody plants 0.5-3m high and 2720 woody plants >3m were counted from 79 morphospecies. The mean density of woody plants was 0.09 individuals m-2, with a range of 0.005-0.53 individuals m-2 across plots. Most woody species also grew in mature forest, but regrowth was dominated by a few abundant wind-dispersed species (particularly Combretocarpus rotundatus) and most other species were potentially dispersed by bulbuls (Pycnonotidae) and other small- to medium-sized birds. Most regeneration reflects the availability of dispersal agents, with additional woody species probably sprouting from vegetative remnants of the previous forest cover, although a role for additional dispersal agents cannot be ruled out. Ground cover was dominated by fern species not typically found in mature forest and may be inhibiting woody plant regrowth. Continuous woody canopy cover is probably achievable by unassisted regeneration in degraded peatlands, but it will be slow and patchy with low species diversity. We recommend enrichment planting with species from intact peat swamp forest, but only after an initial survey of the existing regrowth. © 2014 Elsevier B.V.
The dynamics of tropical forests are highly dependent on the forest understorey. Understanding its diversity and composition is essential to ensure sustainable management of forest ecosystems. In this study, following a gradient of human disturbance, we analysed the density, diversity and floristic composition of the forest understorey in three land use types of south-eastern Cameroon: a protected area, a selective logging concession and community forests. Vegetation was inventoried in thirty-three permanent one-hectare plots. Woody individuals (tree, shrub, liana) were classified in four strata depending on their diameter: seedling (dbh < 1 cm), sapling (1–9.9 cm), small trees (10–29.9 cm), large tree (≥30 cm). A total of 4,159 individuals (dbh < 10 cm) belonging to 418 species and 232 genera were recorded. They mainly represent tree species (65%) and shade tolerant plants (77%), with diaspores disseminated by animals (74%). Life forms and modes of dissemination were significantly different between land use types. Abundance, species richness and diversity of juveniles varied significantly between strata and land use types: they were globally the highest in plots that have been logged less than five years before inventory. In terms of species composition, the different land use types were not clearly separated, indicating some resilience to disturbance. A low similarity between strata was observed. In all types, most canopy species are light demanding and cannot regenerate in the understorey. This indicates a natural evolution of the forest stands in the absence of silviculture. The presence of species that currently dominate the canopy of these forests will be gradually reduced without human intervention. © 2023 Elsevier B.V.
The gallery forest along the stream in the Cerrado region of Brazil is the most rich and diverse community of the biome, mainly due to remarkable variations on their physical environment. The Pitoco gallery forest is located at the IBGE Ecological Reserve, in the Federal District, Brazil, and had its tree regeneration evaluated six years after an accidental fire. For this purpose 100 plots were placed in contiguous transects from the stream right margin to the forest-savanna boundary. Within these plots, 5×5m2 sub-plots were allocated to sample saplings, 1,0m or higher individuals showing basal diameter, Db 30cm≥5cm. Within the lasts there were placed 2×2m2 sub-plots to sample seedlings, individuals lower than 1m height. The assessment was based on comparisons among saplings, seedlings and trees floristic composition and phytossociology. Trees were assessed before the 1994 fire. In the total 118 species of 47 families were found, among which 77 seedling species of 38 families and 111 sapling species of 45 families. The most important (DR+FR) seedling species were: Symplocos mosenii, Inga alba, Alibertia macrophylla, Myrcia rostrata, Copaifera langsdorffii, Xilopia sericea, Cardiopetalum calophyllum, Maprounea guianensis, Pera glabrata and Vitexpolygama. Among saplings the most important (IVI) were Siparuna guianensis, Matayba guianensis, Symplocos mosenii, Cupania vernalis, Cheiloclinium cognatum, Myrcia rostrata, C. langsdorffii, I. alba, Tapura amazonica and Pseudolmedia laevigata. The Shannon & Wiener diversity index were 3,22 (seedlings) and 3,93 (saplings). There were considerable floristic differences among seedlings saplings and trees layers. The reduced representation of tolerant species and increased representation of light demanding species after the fire suggests changes in the light balance within the gallery forest.
This study assessed whether a natural regeneration or active tree-planting reforestation strategy better restored the C and N-cycle processes and associated microbiota within soils after 18 years in a Premontane Wet Life zone site in Monteverde, Costa Rica, compared to adjacent old secondary forest and pasture soils (both >60 years). Our findings apply to small-scale restoration sites (<0.5 ha plots) commonly used in Monteverde. Both restoration strategies showed recovering soil C and N-cycle processes with similar levels of TN, NH4+, NO3-, Biomass-C, and efficiency of organic C use. Both strategies appeared to positively influence the recovery of the levels and community compositional stability of the Actinobacterial, Acidobacterial, N-fixing (N-Fixer) bacterial, ammonium-oxidizing bacterial, and complex organic C-degrading fungal communities. The main differences between the two strategies were that the tree-planted and pasture soils had similar compositions of the Actinobacterial, N-Fixer, and Fungal complex organic C degrader, while the natural regeneration and pasture soils had similar compositions of these groups and the Acidobacteria. However, the community compositions of all five microbial groups were different between restored forest and the old secondary forest soils. These results suggest that while the soil ecosystems from both reforestation strategies are recovering, after 18 years, there is still more recovery to occur. Lastly, possible indicators of post-restoration soil ecosystem enhancement included increasing constancy of critical microbial group composition, efficiency of organic C conversion to biomass, Biomass-C,NH4+, NO3-, and levels of Acidothermus, Acidobacteria subgroups 2, 3, and 5, Archaeorhizomyces, Anaeromyxobacter, Bradyrhizobium, Nitrosomonas, Flavobacterium, and Nitrospira.
In tropical forest the biodiversity is in a constant threat, some species are listed in the IUCN as vulnerable, endangered or threatened with extinction. Thus, a fast method for biodiversity determination or monitoring can contribute to its conservation. Remote sensing has demonstrated to be a powerful tool, and together with the vegetation indexes, can determine the vegetation state of forest. Recently researches have correlated the normalized differentiated vegetation index (NDVI) with species richness, structure and biodiversity of forests obtaining successful results. This study, conducted in a Tropical Montane Cloud Forest (TMCF) of Ecuador, aims to correlate NDVI with alpha diversity estimators to understand its relationships. NDVI of Landsat OLI 8 Level 1 images in five months was determined. We considered a scene as valid in case of cloud coverage in the areas of interest below 25%. Radiometric and atmospheric corrections, with flaash tool, and the delimitation of the study site (ROI) were developed in ENVI 5.3 program. NDVI was calculated with ENVI 5.3 program (histograms allowed the determination of mean, maximum and minimum NDVI), and with ArcGIS 10.3 (for classification index). In field, species richness, Chao1, Shannon index, Simpson index, and biomass of three plots were quantified for trees with DBH ≥ 10 cm. Then, we calculate Pearson coefficient to correlate and disentangle the effects of altitude, diversity, richness, biomass and NDVI. A positive relationship was observed between Mean NDVI and Chao1 (p < 0.10) and Mean NDVI - richness (p < 0.05). In conclusion, NDVI can be considered useful to estimate richness and biodiversity and even to detect ecotone as was the case in this research. The application of this methodology could allow biodiversity assessment and monitoring in real time and low cost, which contributes in forest conservation programs. © 2022.
Natural resource management research has to evolve from a focus on plans, maps, and regulations to an acknowledgment of the complex, sometimes chaotic, reality in the field, with a large number of actors making their own decisions. As outside actors, we can only try to facilitate and support a process of negotiation among the stakeholders. Such negotiation involves understanding the perspectives of all stakeholders, analyzing complementarities in views, identifying where differences may be settled by "science," where science and social action can bring innovative alternatives for reconciliation, and where compromises will be necessary to move ahead. We distinguish between natural resource management problems at village level, within country, or transboundary, and those that relate local stakeholder decisions to global issues such as biodiversity conservation. Tree-based systems at plot or landscape level can minimize conflicts between private and public interests in local environmental services, but spatial segregation of functions is an imperative for the core of global biodiversity values. The complex agroforests developed by farmers as alternatives to food-crop-based agriculture integrate local and global environmental functions, but intensification and specialization may diminish these non-local values. For local biodiversity functions, a medium-intensity "integrate" option such as agroforests may be superior in terms of resilience and risk management. Major options exist for increasing carbon stocks by expanding tree-based production systems on grasslands and in degraded watersheds through a coherent approach to the market, policy, and institutional bottlenecks to application of existing rehabilitation technologies. Agroforestry mosaics may be an acceptable replacement of forests in upper watersheds, provided they evolve into multistrata systems with a protective litter layer. Challenges to INRM research remain: how should the opportunities for adaptive response among diverse interest groups, at a number of hierarchical levels, be included in the assessment of impacts on the livelihoods of rural people? Copyright © 2001 by the author(s). Published here under license by The Resilience Alliance.
The Tijuca Forest results from a reforestation project executed in the second half of the nineteenth century, with native and exotic species planted in the mountains of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Aiming at a theoretical reflection, the use of integrated methodologies from different areas of knowledge was evaluated to expand the research of the environmental history of a tropical forest in south-eastern Brazil, using everything from the search for historical documents to the counting of tree growth rings. It was possible to find some of the trees from the initial reforestation efforts, to circumscribe the locations of the first plantations, hitherto unknown, as well as the original intentions of tree selection: A reflection of the silvicultural model of the period that incorporated the tropical identity of the forest without giving up the market demand. The project area indicates that the planted forest would cover approximately 330 ha, prioritizing restoration by micro basins. In the 33 years analysed, about 155,000 trees were planted (110,000 with success) from a repertoire of at least 107 species, prioritizing the native ones. The quality of the wood, mainly for the naval segment, was prioritized, but other purposes were also met. The model and selection criteria for planting areas and species characterize a strategic plan that foresaw the recovery of water sources simultaneously with the generation of wealth in the medium and long term, diversifying the use of the soil and inaugurating a cycle of silvicultural exploitation in the country. This study re-signifies the understanding of the Tijuca Forest ecology, not only in space but mainly in time, revealing the subtle relationships between tropical nature and society in formation. © The Author(s) 2023.
Seagrasses are hugely valuable to human life, but the global extent of seagrass meadows remains unclear. As evidence of their value, a United Nations program exists (http://data.unep-wcmc.org/datasets/7) to try and assess their distribution and there has been a call from 122 scientists across 28 countries for more work to manage, protect and monitor seagrass meadows (http://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-37606827). Emerging from the 12th International Seagrass Biology Workshop, held in October 2016, has been the view that grazing marine megafauna may play a useful role in helping to identify previously unknown seagrass habitats. Here we describe this concept, showing how detailed information on the distribution of both dugongs (Dugong dugon) and green sea turtles (Chelonia mydas) obtained, for example, by aerial surveys and satellite tracking, can reveal new information on the location of seagrass meadows. We show examples of how marine megaherbivores have been effective habitat indicators, revealing major, new, deep-water seagrass meadows and offering the potential for more informed estimates of seagrass extent in tropical and sub-tropical regions where current information is often lacking. © 2018 Hays, Alcoverro, Christianen, Duarte, Hamann, Macreadie, Marsh, Rasheed, Thums, Unsworth, York and Esteban.
Niche convergence or conservatism have been proposed as essential mechanisms underlying elevational plant community assembly in tropical mountain ecosystems. Subtropical mountains, compared to tropical mountains, are likely to be shaped by a mixing of different geographic affinities of species and remain somehow unclear. Here, we used 31 0.1-ha permanent plots distributed in subtropical forests on the eastern and western aspects of the Gaoligong Mountains, southwest China between 1498 m and 3204 m a.sl. to evaluate how niche-based and biogeographic processes shape tree community assembly along elevational gradients. We analyzed the elevational patterns of taxonomic, phylogenetic and functional diversity, as well as of individual traits, and assessed the relative importance of environmental effects on these diversity measures. We then classified tree species as being either tropical affiliated or temperate affiliated and estimated their contribution to the composition of biogeographic affinities. Species richness decreased with elevation, and species composition showed apparent turnover across the aspects and elevations. Most traits exhibited convergent patterns across the entire elevational gradient. Phylogenetic and functional diversity showed opposing patterns, with phylogenetic diversity increasing and functional diversity decreasing with elevation. Soil nutrients, especially phosphorus and nitrogen, appeared to be the main abiotic variables driving the elevational diversity patterns. Communities at lower elevations were occupied by tropical genera, while highlands contained species of tropical and temperate biogeographic affinities. Moreover, the high phylogenetic diversity at high elevations were likely due to differences in evolutionary history between temperate and tropical species. Our results highlight the importance of niche convergence of tropical species and the legacy of biogeographic history on the composition and structure of subtropical mountain forests. Furthermore, limited soil phosphorus caused traits divergence and the partitioning for different forms of phosphorus may explain the high biodiversity found in phosphorus-limited subtropical forests. © 2024 Elsevier B.V.
Understanding human impacts on drylands is crucial in a global scenario of forest degradation and biodiversity loss. This study analyzed foliar concentrations of nitrogen (N) and phosphorous (P) in the Brazilian seasonally dry tropical forests (Caatinga). Foliar patterns of N, P, and the N/P ratio were assessed both within and among botanical families. To do this, 10 plots were established in an anthropized area and 10 in a conserved area. Within each plot, leaves from all tree species and soil samples from four random points were collected. Stoichiometric analyses were performed on the leaves of 136 trees from 14 botanical families. Significant differences were observed in soil P concentrations, organic matter content, and cation exchange capacity, with the highest values found in the conserved area. Foliar N and P concentrations and N/P were also higher in the conserved area for the F+ (nitrogen-fixing Fabaceae), F- (non-nitrogen-fixing Fabaceae), and NF (non-Fabaceae) groups, indicating greater efficiency in nutrient retention and cycling. When comparing species found in both areas, Aspidosperma pyrifolium (NF), Bauhinia forficata (F-), and Mimosa ophthalmocentra (F+) showed significant differences in foliar N concentrations and foliar P (for A. pyrifolium and B. forficata only). Degradation of the Caatinga directly impacts nutrient cycling. © 2024 Elsevier Ltd
We considered whether ecological restoration using high diversity of native tree species serves to restore nitrogen dynamics in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. We measured δ15N and N content in green foliage and soil; vegetation N:P ratio; and soil N mineralization in a preserved natural forest and restored forests of ages 21 and 52years. Green foliage δ15N values, N content, N:P ratio, inorganic N and net mineralization and nitrification rates were all higher, the older the forest. Our findings indicate that the recuperation of N cycling has not been achieved yet in the restored forests even after 52years, but show that they are following a trajectory of development that is characterized by their N cycling intensity becoming similar to a natural mature forest of the same original forest formation. This study demonstrated that some young restored forests are more limited by N compared to mature natural forests. We document that the recuperation of N cycling in tropical forests can be achieved through ecological restoration actions. © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
Establishing Protected areas (PAs) could displace or cause 'leakage' of deforestation into adjacent areas. Such leakage would potentially offset PAs' conservation effort by jeopardizing forest conservation goals and impeding financial mechanisms such as Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation -REDD+. Here we investigate forest loss inside PAs' borders and whether leakage occurred following the establishment of new PAs (n = 425) within the Amazon and the Atlantic forests in Brazil between 2004 and 2017. We applied a Before -After-Control-Intervention statistical design with a matching approach to evaluate deforestation leakage from PAs' establishment using a spatial (inside and outside PAs)- temporal (before and after PA establishment) measure of deforestation rates. We also used "Random Forest " to investigate the drivers of the effect of PAs' establishment on their surrounding areas. We found that when PAs' establishment led to reducing deforestation inside their boundaries, their surrounding also experienced a reduction in deforestation ( "blockage "). Similarly, when PAs' establishment could not reduce deforestation inside their boundaries, their surroundings also experienced increased deforestation. Such a pattern was most common for Indigenous territories, especially in the deforestation arch in the Amazon. However, we did not find significant evidence for leakage as PAs' surroundings with a significant increase in deforestation were associated with PAs unable to significantly reduce deforestation within their boundaries. Therefore, "leakage " should not limit the establishment of new PAs. Instead, greater investments into reinforcement are needed for existing PAs, with high priority given to Indigenous Territories.
Litter decomposition is not fully explained by the general triangle of climate, litter quality and soil decomposers. Therefore, other theoretical frameworks, such as Home-Field Advantage (HFA), have emerged to explain the remaining variation of decomposition. HFA states that litter decomposes faster in their site of origin (home) than far from it (away). However, there are no consistent patterns of HFA and this can varies depending the ecosystem and plant species analyzed. One of the most variable ecosystems in terms of species biodiversity turnover, topography, and soil conditions are the Upper Andean Tropical Forests (UATF), but to date there is no study testing HFA in this ecosystem. Here, HFA was tested through a reciprocal litterbag translocation field experiment across different UATF. The experiment comprised 2520 litterbags placed in 14 20 × 20 m plots that belonged to four sites to analyze decomposition of 15 plant species for 18 months. Of these 15 species, seven were present at only one site. The mean decomposition was calculated for all 15 species to determine the relative decomposition at each site and the decomposition of the seven species at home and away sites was analyzed through two-way ANOVA (sites × species) and linear mixed models. I contrasted environmental charcteristics between sites including litter depth, slope, leaf area index, canopy openness, and microclimatic variables. The results showed that the pattern of decomposition was always the same, no matter the origin of the species and the decomposition period. Microclimate, litter depth, and slope varied between sites, yet these differences were not enough to influence affinity effects of decomposition, as relative decay rates were similar between home and away sites. Overall, no HFA was found in UATF possibly because: (i) strong environmental filters along montane forests homogenize decomposer communities; (ii) high diversity in litters drive decomposers with high ability to degrade different organic compounds; (iii) little adaptation of decomposers to recurrent litter as they respond mainly to changes in litter quality. These results imply that changes in species composition by current anthropogenic pressures could have profound impacts on carbon cycle and nutrient fluxes depending on the identity of species arriving in UATF. © SISEF.
Termites and earthworms are the main groups of invertebrates in dry tropical ecosystems and exert significant effects on bioturbation and soil reorganization. The dynamics of microbial communities, enzymes and substrates associated with the flux of energy and nutrients induced by their diverse biogenic structures are still under-investigated in agroecological-based cropping systems. The objective of this study was to determine whether the biogenic structures produced by a grass-woody forager termite (Nasutitermes torquatus) and an endogeic earthworm (Millsonia inermis) shift soil organic C (OC), nutrients, enzyme activities and microbial communities in soils amended with woody residues. The experiment was a randomized block design conducted in a Sudano-Sahelian cropping system that was amended annually with woody residues (3 Mg ha−1) or not amended (control soils) for six consecutive years. Samples were taken from fresh sheetings and casts (produced respectively by N. torquatus and M. inermis) and bulk soils in amended plots as well as from control soils in nonamended plots. Samples were analyzed for soil texture, OC, total nitrogen (N), available phosphorus (P), pH, enzyme activity and microbial composition. The results showed that sheetings and casts altered soil biochemical properties significantly. Sheetings and casts were remarkably enriched in OC (45–55% and 82–94%, respectively) and P (20–55% and 73–130%) compared to bulk soils and control soils. Sheetings and casts substantially stimulated β-glucosidase (153–178% and 158–183%, respectively) and N-acetyl-β-glucosaminidase (43–53% and 84–93%) activity, likely due to gut mucus excretions and favorable physicochemical conditions. Sheetings and casts did not fundamentally alter the microbial diversity but raised soil conditions favorable to selective microbial growth. Overall, casts exhibited higher nutrient content (N, P), enzyme activity, and larger total microbial biomass than sheetings. Both structures stimulated soil microbial communities and enzyme activity associated with the increase of pH, OC and nutrients. Earthworm casts and termite sheetings have ecological significance in OC dynamics in plant residues amended soils. © 2021 Elsevier Masson SAS
Multi-temporal change detection over decades including the pre-satellite era is challenging due to the different image types available over time, and this explains the scarcity of long-term studies of vegetation succession which can play a pivotal role in the restoration of biodiversity in regenerating forests. This study describes a semi-automated, object-based habitat classification method for change detection of tropical forest succession since 1945. The study uses a set of black and white aerial photographs and high-resolution satellite images which differ in quality and resolution, to investigate forest successional patterns and their implications for informed ecosystem and land rehabilitation management. For optimized habitat boundary delineation from black and white aerial photographs and panchromatic satellite images, three levels of hierarchical image object primitives were created. The minimum object sizes of 50 m2, 500 m2, and 1000 m2 maximized inter-object and minimized intra-object variability according to the scale of habitat patches and imagery used. Object-Based Image Analysis (OBIA) provided additional Grey-Level Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM) textural features of segmented objects which helped to incorporate knowledge-based rule-sets into the final habitat classification which was done manually. Results show accuracies for grassland greater than 94%, monoculture plantations were distinguished from natural forest with 95% accuracy, and isolated mature stands of natural forest achieved 75% accuracy. Consideration of multi-date images increased the accuracy of distinguishing between mixed plantations and natural forest as well as between shrubland and young secondary forest. The resulting maps of vegetation structure at five time periods from 1945 to present gave new insights into the ecological processes of secondary forest succession. These include the surprising rapid rate of natural forest regeneration, at an annual rate of 7.7% from 1945 to 2014, and an even faster rate of 11% during a period when hill fires were controlled. The last areas to succeed to forest are those which are still, or at some time have been under exotic mono-cultural plantations. This suggests that long term protection from hill fire would be a better option for assisting natural succession in the landscape than plantations, which are both costly, and act as barriers to natural succession. Overall, with more than 92% mapping accuracy, the method can be adapted for other multi-temporal, multi-sensor studies as it enables inclusion of spatial theories by dividing the satellite image into time-consistent geographic entities according to the scale of target objects and image resolution. The accurate maps of forest cover patches at different successional stages can also help in site specific management of the recovering forest, such as introduction of shrub seedlings to bridge bottlenecks in seed dispersal according to shrub density and dispersal distances for forest birds. Late successional tree species can also be introduced in areas where only early successional species are present after 50 years of succession. © 2018
Ecological restoration aims to recover the structure, biodiversity, and function of degraded ecosystems. However, open ecosystems have been largely overlooked in restoration, and the extent of theory-based restoration is unclear. We systematically review papers on open ecosystems restoration from 2011 to 2021, examining publication trends with data on restored site age, size, indicators, and assessment frequency. We also explore the relationships between interventions, indicators, and ecological concepts. By analyzing 343 papers, we found that open ecosystems restoration is concentrated in North America and Europe, with nearly 75% of restored areas originating in these continents. Restored areas are small, assessed for a short duration, with a plethora of indicators and no establishment of clear control or reference areas for meaningful comparisons. Common open ecosystems restoration sites interventions involved trees and shrubs management, soil management, seeding, and transfer of plant material as the main interventions. From our analyzed papers, we found that 30% of them mentioned any ecological concepts, with community assembly and succession being the most mentioned ones. Furthermore, our exploratory analysis revealed no relationship between interventions, indicators, and ecological concepts, suggesting a widespread mismatch between theory and practice. As the Decade for Ecosystem Restoration unfolds, we call practitioners, researchers, and stakeholders working on open ecosystems to address challenges and curtail widespread biases. Despite the uniqueness of each restoration project, a clear, well-planned design encompassing site-specific variables and solid theoretical bases is expected to enhance restoration outcomes, optimizing costs and biodiversity gains. © 2024 Society for Ecological Restoration.
Seasonally dry tropical forest ecosystems have been greatly reduced in areas through conversions to alternate land uses such as grazing and crop production. The U.N. Decade on Restoration has focused attention on both restoration globally, and also regional attention on tropical dry forests, as they are excellent candidates for regeneration and reforestation. As such, the science of how we restore dry forests is advancing; however, few studies of dry forest restoration include collaborations with social scientists. This is unfortunate, because restoration projects that embrace a people-centered approach have the highest chances of success. Here, I review recent studies that have incorporated aspects of social science and human dimensions into the study and design of dry forest restoration practices. I focus on three key topics that merit a closer integration of restoration research and practice and social science: (1) recognizing that local people are central to project success, (2) cost benefit or effectiveness analyses that evaluate the relative costs of alternative management strategies, and (3) identification of land-use tradeoffs, synergisms and priority mapping. I conclude that closer collaborations among dry forest restoration researchers and a wider group of partners including social scientists, local communities, environmental educators, and geographers will increase the value of restoration research and the likelihood that such projects achieve multiple ecological and societal benefits. © 2022 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+) has been identified as a potentially cost-effective climate change mitigation strategy. The success of REDD+ in preventing deforestation and degradation in dry forests will depend partly on whether financial incentives for forest conservation can cover smallholders' opportunity costs of forgone uses of the forest. We therefore compared the opportunity costs of the main forest use activities (slash-and-burn agriculture or charcoal production) with potential benefits from the sale of carbon credits under REDD+ from a smallholder perspective for a case study in southwestern Madagascar. Calculations are based on an assessment of carbon stocks in the dry spiny forests as well as benefit and cost data from interviews with smallholders. To assess the risks and uncertainties associated with opportunity costs and the REDD+ benefits, we used a Monte Carlo modeling approach. We compare net present values for opportunity costs and potential community profits from REDD+ at discount rates of 5% and 20% over a project period of 25 years. Our results show that REDD+ community profits can outweigh the profits from charcoal production and the profits from slash-and-burn agriculture in 54–57% of the cases, despite opportunity costs being highly variable for both land uses. Charcoal production in particular has low opportunity costs as smallholders only engage in this activity when no other sources of income are available. The case study shows that potential REDD+ payments can provide sufficient financial incentives to preserve dry forests with low carbon stocks but relatively low opportunity costs of preservation. © 2018 Elsevier B.V.
Forests with intensive management past are kept unmanaged to restore diversity and ecosystem functioning. Before perpetuating abandonment after protracted restitution, understanding its effect on forest vegetation is desirable. We studied plant diversity and its relation with environmental variables and stand structure in northern Indian unmanaged tropical moist deciduous forest. We hypothesized that post-abandonment species richness would have increased, and the structure of contemporary forest would be heterogeneous. Vegetation structure, composition, and diversity were recorded, in forty 0.1 ha plots selected randomly in four forest ranges. Three soil samples per 0.1 ha were assessed for physicochemistry, fine sand, and clay mineralogy. Contemporary forest had less species richness than pre-abandonment reference period. Fourteen species were recorded as either seedling or sapling, suggesting reappearance or immigration. For most species, regeneration was either absent or impaired. Ordination and multiple regression results showed that exchangeable base cations and phosphorous affected maximum tree diversity and structure variables. Significant correlations between soil moisture and temperature, and shrub layer was observed, besides tree layer correspondence with shrub richness, suggesting that dense overstory resulting from abandonment through its effect on soil conditions, is responsible for dense shrub layer. Herb layer diversity was negatively associated with tree layer and shrub overgrowth (i,e. Mallotus spp.). Protracted abandonment may not reinforce species richness and heterogeneity; perhaps result in high tree and shrub density in moist deciduous forests, which can impede immigrating or reappearing plant species establishment. This can be overcome by density/basal area reduction strategies, albeit for both tree and shrub layer. (C) 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
The diversification of tropical pastures with legumes (trees) for increased forage and animal productivity has been advocated. Nevertheless, effects on soil quality and belowground biodiversity, and the implications for sustainable intensification remain poorly documented, particularly when cattle grazing is included in the study. We evaluated the impact of forage system diversification with herbaceous and woody legumes on soil properties and soil macrofauna communities and their spatial heterogeneity in a three-year-old field trial in Cauca Valley, Colombia. Three forage-based systems were compared: (i) a conventional monoculture-species grass pasture system of Brachiaria hybrid cv. Cayman (CP); (ii) a mixed pasture system consisting of Brachiaria grass with the leguminous herb Canavalia brasiliensis (LP); and (iii) a silvopastoral system with rows of the legume tree Leucaena diversifolia planted within LP pastures (SPS). The experiment was arranged in a complete randomized block design with three replicates and grazing cattle rotating across blocks. Plots were grazed by three (treatments CP and LP) or four bulls (SPS) aiming to reflect the expected cattle intensification in SPS systems. Physico-chemical soil properties and macrofauna abundance and their spatial heterogeneity as affected by the distance from the tree rows in SPS, were assessed. Herbaceous legumes positively affected the abundance and diversity of soil macrofauna and soil physical properties in LP and the alleys between tree rows in SPS, as compared to CP. In the SPS, the highest soil quality and macrofauna abundance occurred at the edge of the tree lines, while the highest soil compaction and the lowest abundance of soil macrofauna occurred in the tree rows, probably due to the behavioral change of the grazing cattle in combination with the higher stocking rate in SPS. Soil properties in LP and in the alleys between the tree rows of SPS were comparable despite higher stocking rate in SPS. Overall, the SPS and LP systems, proved to be suitable alternatives to CP allowing for sustainable intensification of pastures although careful evaluation of possible trade-offs associated with increased spatial heterogeneity in SPS is recommended to avoid localized soil compaction. Soil macrofauna, particularly functional groups (classified by feeding habits) proved to be a sensitive soil quality indicator in response to contrasting pasture systems. © 2020 Elsevier B.V.
Active restoration to rehabilitate degraded tropical lands often involves planting tree seedlings, an effective but expensive approach if large areas are planted. Planting small patches of vegetation (tens to a few hundred square metres) has recently been suggested as a more economical restoration technique that mimics natural regeneration processes. However, few studies have examined the consequences of restoration patch size on animals, whose presence and activities are often key to successful ecosystem recovery. We examined the effects of patch size on the foraging behaviour of four resident tropical bird species in a replicated forest restoration experiment in southern Costa Rica. We also measured arthropod abundance and anti-predator vigilance behaviour to assess whether variation in food availability or predation risk could explain patch size effects on foraging behaviour. Prey attack rates were highest, and the effort required to find prey was lowest, in larger patches for three of the four bird species. Arthropod density was approximately twice as great in larger patches (>3500 m2) compared with smaller patches (<350 m2). Evidence for patch size differences in predation risk was more limited but risk may be higher in smaller patches. The results indicate that food availability is the primary mechanism driving patch size effects on foraging behaviour, with predation risk being an additional influence for some species in some years. Synthesis and applications. As demonstrated in this study, patches of tens to a few hundreds of metres squared are likely to provide fewer food resources and potentially less cover from predators for vertebrates that use woody habitat, compared with patches of a few thousand square metres. The more limited resources in smaller patches are likely to have short-term and, potentially, long-term consequences for the fitness of organisms. When considering restoration project design, the potential economic and other benefits of planting in smaller patches must be weighed with the potentially negative ecological effects on some taxonomic groups. To increase the probability that patches provide adequate habitat for the largest number of species, we recommend that when financial resources are available, patches of at least a few thousand square metres be planted. © 2009 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2009 British Ecological Society.
Neotropical landscapes are often characterized as mosaics of actively grazed pastures and forest fragments at various stages of succession. Restoring abandoned pastures requires intervening with actions informed by local ecological succession. Here we evaluate how litter production, a key component of nutrient cycling in forests, varies between physiographic landscapes (hill and lowland mountain), among stand age groups (early-secondary: 0–20 year, intermediate-secondary: 20–40 year, and old-growth forests: > 40 year), and in response to climatic (precipitation and irradiation) and forest structure and biodiversity variables (stand density, basal area, species density, diversity), in a tropical humid forest chronosequence. Total and leaf litter production was higher in the lower elevation hill landscape. Leaf litter production increased with stand age in both landscapes but only correlated positively with forest structure and biodiversity in the hill landscape. Lack of correlation in the mountain landscape is attributed to greater variance in structure and species composition in the subset of plots selected from this landscape for this study. Both landscapes exhibited an asynchronous, bimodal regime of leaf fall in response to precipitation. Leaf litter peaks prior to the wet season likely occur in response to water stress, while peaks after the wet season that coincided with increasing solar irradiation are likely the result of a leaf turnover strategy to optimize photosynthesis. Ecological succession in these landscapes does not appear limited in leaf litter production, but further research on the drivers of leaf litter production recovery is necessary to adequately guide intervention efforts. © 2023, The Author(s).
Deadwood is a key component of nutrient cycling in natural tropical forests, serving as a globally important carbon storage and habitat for a high number of species. The conversion of tropical forests to agriculture modifies deadwood pools, but we know little about deadwood dynamics in forests recovering from human disturbance. Here we quantified the volume and diversity of coarse woody debris (CWD, >= 7 cm diameter) and the mass of fine woody debris (FWD, < 7 cm) along a chronosequence of natural forest recovery in the lowlands of the Ecuadorian Choc & oacute; region. We sampled forest plots ranging from 1-37 years of recovery post-cessation of agricultural use as either cacao plantation or cattle pasture, as well as actively managed cacao plantations and cattle pastures, and old-growth forests. In contrast to our expectation, we found no significant increase in deadwood volume with recovery time. The diversity in size, decay stage and type of CWD increased along the recovery gradient, with no effect of previous land use type. The mass of FWD increased overall across the recovery gradient, but these results were driven by a steep increase in former pastures, with no change observed in former cacao plantations. We suggest that the range of sizes and decomposition stages of deadwood found in these two major tropical agricultural systems could provide suitable resources for saproxylic organisms and an overlooked carbon storage outside old-growth forests. Our estimates of deadwood in agricultural systems and recovering forests can help improve global assessments of carbon storage and release in the tropics.
In tropical forest conservation, areas with full statutory protection are often surrounded by buffer zones. Information on the patterns of tree community structure differences in these zones is helpful to evaluate the conservation efficacy. Our study was implemented within a biodiversity hotspot, in the Ta Xua Nature Reserve of north-western Vietnam, which has a statutorily protected core zone and a buffer zone, where local H'Mong people are permitted low intensity forest use. The forests are rich in tree species (249 observed). Many of these tree species provide non-timber forest products (NTFPs) (48%) or valuable timber (22%), and 18 species are red-listed. Overall tree density was not different in the two zones, but tree diameter and species richness were lower in the buffer zone. At the tree level, logistic regression analysis indicated that red-listed status, large diameter, and low density of conspecifics increased the probability of tree absence from the buffer zone but not the potential use as a NTFP. However, most NTFP species had different densities in the core and buffer zones, and this correlated with signs of human interference. At the species level, the density of species was the most important variable, and rarity strongly increased the probability of species absence. Our results also indicate that rare and red-listed trees were depleted in the buffer zone. In consideration of conservation goals, the future monitoring of these species at the Ta Xua Nature Reserve and other protected areas is needed, and conservation measures most likely need to be improved. © 2016 The Authors
Tropical deforestation remains one of the major global challenges of the twenty-first century driven to a large extent by the conversion of land for agricultural purposes, such as palm oil production. Malaysia is one of the world's largest palm oil producers and has seen widespread conversion to oil palm from primary forest, including peat swamp forest (PSF). This study investigates the rate and extent of pervasive oil palm expansion in and around North Selangor Peat Swamp Forest (NSPSF) over the last three decades, exploring how land conversion has affected the region's tropical forests, and assessing the relative success of PSF conservation measures. Time-series Landsat imagery was used to assess thematic land cover change and improvement in vegetation condition since NSPSF was given protected status in 1990. The results show a near tripling in oil palm cover throughout North Selangor, from 24,930ha in 1989 to 70,070ha in 2016; while at the same time tropical forest cover shrank from 145,570ha to 88,400ha. Despite concerns over the sustainability and environmental impact of such rapid oil palm conversion at a regional level, at the local scale, NSPSF represents a relative conservation success story. Effective land stewardship by government and non-governmental organization (NGO) management actors has limited illegal encroachment of oil palm around the reserve boundary. PSF rehabilitation measures have also markedly improved vegetation condition in NSPFS's interior. These findings have broad significance for how oil palm agriculture is managed and especially for PSF stewardship and conservation, and the approaches described here may be usefully adopted elsewhere in Southeast Asia and around the world.
Tree planting is both a promising and controversial solution to climate change and biodiversity loss. However, this controversy is largely theoretical because we lack detailed information of how tree planting is proceeding onthe-ground. Here, we compiled a pantropical dataset of 174 tree planting organizations to determine the type of organizations involved in tree planting, their geographic locations and tree planting approaches. We found that the number of organizations have increased by 288% in the past 30 years, especially for-profit organizations. These organizations reported planting nearly 1.4 billion trees across 74 countries since 1961. Most frequently organizations reported establishing agroforestry systems or mixed species and single species plantations or using assisted natural regeneration, suggesting that tree planting programs are designed to support local communities as well as environmental objectives. Moreover, the most frequently reported species were commercial or utilitarian, with the top five including cacao, teak, moringa, mango and coffee. Finally, despite widespread efforts to plant more trees, there was a pronounced lack of monitoring on websites and in reports; only 18% of organizations mention monitoring at all, and only 5% mention measuring survival rate of plantings. Greater transparency and greater communication are needed between planting organizations and researchers to apply the most effective ways to restore forest cover. Further, while organizations often aimed to counter environmental problems, the use of the same sets of commercially useful species to meet economic development goals across the global indicates a need for greater coordination among organizations to avoid biotic homogenization.
Exotic tree species predominate in reforestation in tropical regions worldwide. However, some native species are suitable for plantations, providing a wider variety of products. Adequate government programs of incentives, coupled with good technical advice to farmers, are needed to stimulate reforestation, especially among small and medium-sized farmers with limited financial resources. This project evaluates growth of native and exotic tree species on plantations in small and medium-sized farms in the Atlantic humid lowlands of Costa Rica, Central America. A total of 210 pure plantations, ranging in age from 6 to 11 years, were evaluated on 123 farms that had used government incentives for reforestation, and had received technical advice from local non-government organizations. For each species, seven plantations were chosen at random for study. In each plantation, plots of 15 trees each were chosen systematically for evaluation of diameter at breast height (dbh), total height, number of trees per hectare, tree form and spacing. Terminalia amazonia (J.E Gmel) Exell, Hieronyma alchorneoides Allemao, and Vochysia guatemalensis Donn. Sm. were the most frequent species found in plantations in the region of study. Gmelina arborea Roxb. (exotic) and V. guatemalensis (native) had the highest mean annual diameter increment with 2.90 and 2.59 cm, respectively. Calophyllum brasiliense Cambess. (native) had the lowest mean annual diameter increment (1.48 cm). G. arborea and V. guatemalensis had the highest mean annual volume increment, followed by Tectona grandis (L.f) Lam. (exotic), and T. amazonia and Cordia alliodora (R&P) Cham. (both native). Although G. arborea had the greatest mean annual diameter increment, it had the lowest plantation density and problems with form. V. guatemalensis and T. amazonia, two native species, were the most promising species for reforestation, due to good growth in volume, good form, and adaptability to a variety of sites. The poor form of exotic species was related to the low intensity management methods of small farmers. Exotic species had the highest performance variability between sites, while native species showed relatively high growth homogeneity. Therefore, native species seem more promising than exotics for general use across varying ecological conditions. © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
In arid regions, biodiversity and biomass are limited by water availability. The Pleurotus species being indigenous to hot subtropical and tropical regions can play a key role in water sequestration, nutrient cycling, human nutrition and bioremediation of waste materials. Identification of suitable substrate material is crucial for successful oyster mushroom cultivation. The performance of five putative Pleurotus species on selected lignocellulosic agro-waste substrates under two temperature regimes was evaluated. Irrespective of Pleurotus species and or substrate tested, the complete spawn was achieved relatively faster when spawning was done in October as compared to December month except in P. florida. All the Pleurotus species produced the maximum mushroom yield with the highest BE on wheat straw which was statistically at par with BE obtained on moth bean substrate under both the growing conditions with the maximum being of P. sapidus. Based on fruit body BE patterns, P. sapidus and P. florida can be grown right from mid of October to mid of February, whereas, P. sajor-caju can be grown with economical yields from October to December months. P. flabellatus was not found suitable for cultivation in this arid region due to least BE in both the growing seasons. Copyright@ EM International Pleurotus species Cultivation Lignocellulosic Agro-waste Biological efficiency. Copyright © EM International.
Large-scale reforestation is promoted as an important strategy to mitigate climate change and biodiversity loss. A persistent challenge for efforts to restore ecosystems at scale is how to accelerate ecological processes, particularly natural regeneration. Yet, despite being recognized as an important barrier to the recovery of diverse plant communities in tropical agricultural landscapes, the impacts of dispersal limitation on natural regeneration in secondary forests—and especially how this changes as these forests grow older—are still poorly studied. In a region where animals have been shown to be the dominant seed dispersers, we evaluate the impacts of proximity to a connected network of narrow streamside strips of forest (SSF) on recruitment in 1–40-year-old secondary forests. We used 8 years of annual census data from 45 sites with paired plots, one directly adjoining an SSF and the other further uphill (henceforth “landscape context”), and a null model approach to test the effects of proximity to SSFs and basal area, while accounting for variation in soil, topography, and distance between plots and stand structure. In general, we found that landscape context affects multiple aspects of recruitment, including species diversity and the proportion of rarer and less-widely distributed species among the recruits. Unexpectedly, this effect did not weaken over time, despite a fast increase in stand basal area and diversity. This suggests that forest development over the first decades of succession may not be sufficient to attract the animals that disperse rarer tree species. Our results provide empirical evidence to guide restoration initiatives in agricultural landscapes in tropical regions, principally prioritizing the restoration of forest corridor networks along streams, while also highlighting the knowledge gap about restoring animal dispersers in secondary forests. Global Change Biology© 2025 The Author(s). Global Change Biology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Biodiversity is declining on a global scale. Especially tropical ecosystems, containing most of the planetary biodiversity, are at risk. Agricultural monocrop systems contribute to this decline as they replace original hab-itats and depend on extensive use of synthetic pesticides that impact ecosystems. In this review we use large-scale banana production for export purposes in Costa Rica as an example for pesticide impacts, as it is in production for over a century and uses pesticides extensively for more than fifty years. We summarise the research on pesticide exposure, effects and risks for aquatic and terrestrial environment, as well as for human health. We show that exposure to pesticides is high and relatively well-studied for aquatic systems and humans, but hardly any data are available for the terrestrial compartment including adjacent non target ecosystems such as rainforest fragments. Ecological effects are demonstrated on an organismic level for various aquatic species and processes but are not available at the population and community level. For human health studies exposure evaluation is crucial and recognised effects include various types of cancer and neurobiological dysfunctions particularly in children. With the many synthetic pesticides involved in banana production, the focus on insecticides, revealing highest aquatic risks, and partly herbicides should be extended to fungicides, which are applied aerially over larger areas. The risk assessment and regulation of pesticides so far relies on temperate models and test species and is therefore likely underestimating the risk of pesticide use in tropical ecosystems, with crops such as banana. We highlight further research approaches to improve risk assessment and, in parallel, urge to follow other strategies to reduce pesticides use and especially hazardous substances.
Understanding phenological responses of tropical forest plant communities is crucial for identifying climate-induced changes in ecosystem dynamics. Monitoring phenology across diverse species in natural habitats provides cost-effective insights for conserving both species and forests. We studied tree phenology in a lowland evergreen dipterocarp forest in the Western Ghats, India. About 719 tree individuals representing 95 species were monitored for their vegetative and reproductive phenology from April 2021 to September 2023. Circular statistics detected seasonality in phenological events and Generalized Linear Mixed Modelling (GLMM) identified influence of climate variables on the phenological responses of the tree community. We also assessed how the activity and intensity of phenophases vary over the study period. Our results showed that leaf flushing and flowering peaked during the dry season, with mass flowering observed in two dominant dipterocarps. Fruit production peaked before the monsoon. We also observed diversity in vegetative and reproductive phenodynamics across species groups (forest strata, sexual system, and seed size). Leaf flushing was positively correlated with maximum relative humidity and negatively correlated with maximum temperature and the number of rainy days. Flowering had negative correlations with maximum relative humidity, rainfall days, and maximum temperature but showed a positive correlation with minimum temperature. Fruiting was positively correlated with maximum temperature and negatively correlated with rainy days. This detailed phenological information provides critical knowledge on resource availability and insights into how climate and seasonal changes affect plant growth cycles thereby aiding reforestation and biodiversity conservation strategies in vulnerable forest areas. © The Author(s) under exclusive licence to International Society of Biometeorology 2024.
The reasons that forest vertebrates differ in their response to selective timber extraction in tropical forests remain poorly characterized. Understanding what determines response and sensitivity can indicate how forest management might yield greater conservation benefits, and help us identify which lesser-known species may be especially vulnerable. We assessed the response of 41 Bornean mammals to selective timber harvest and tested eight hypotheses regarding the correlation between those responses and a range of species characteristics. Multivariate analyses show that phylogenetic species age is a key variable determining sensitivity. Older species are less able to cope with the effects of selective timber harvest. Most of these species are endemic to insular southeast Asia, and do not occur on the Asian mainland. These species are more specialized, and appear less able to cope with habitat change. In contrast, species tolerant to logging evolved more recently. This group tends to be omnivorous or herbivorous, to use all vegetation strata, and to be regionally widespread. This finding allows the sensitivity to habitat disturbance of lesser-known species to be predicted, and therefore has important conservation implications. These new insights also help in the design of large-scale forest landscapes that combine sustainable forest management and species conservation requirements. We recognize that these functions can be compatible, but that some species still need completely protected areas for their survival.
Chronic disturbances, such as selective logging, firewood extraction and extensive grazing, may lead to the taxonomic and phylogenetic impoverishment of remaining old-growth forest communities worldwide; however, the empirical evidence on this topic is limited. We tested this hypothesis in the Caatinga vegetation - A seasonally dry tropical forest restricted to northeast Brazil. We sampled 11,653 individuals (adults, saplings, and seedlings) from 51 species in 29 plots distributed along a gradient of chronic disturbance. The gradient was assessed using a chronic disturbance index (CDI) based on five recognized indicators of chronic disturbances: proximity to urban center, houses and roads and the density of both people and livestock. We used linear models to test if mean effective number of lineages, mean phylogenetic distance and phylogenetic dispersion decreased with CDI and if such relationships differed among ontogenetic stages. As expected, the mean effective number of lineages and the mean phylogenetic distance were negatively related to CDI, and such diversity losses occurred irrespective of ontogeny. Yet the increase in phylogenetic clustering in more disturbed plots was only evident in seedlings and saplings, mostly because clades with more descendent taxa than expected by chance (e.g., Euphorbiaceae) thrived in more disturbed plots. This novel study indicates that chronic human disturbances are promoting the phylogenetic impoverishment of the irreplaceable woody flora of the Brazilian Caatinga forest. The highest impoverishment was observed in seedlings and saplings, indicating that if current chronic disturbances remain, they will result in increasingly poorer phylogenetically forests. This loss of evolutionary history will potentially limit the capacity of this ecosystem to respond to human disturbances (i.e., lower ecological resilience) and particularly their ability to adapt to rapid climatic changes in the region. © 2016 by the Ecological Society of America.
We explored systematic patterns in predictability of phytoplankton species from 83 lakes over a gradient ranging from subpolar to tropical regions in South America. We estimated the explained variance (proxy of predictability) of the presence and biomass (estimated as biovolume) of species using multiple regressions from commonly measured environmental variables such as nutrient levels, light, mixing depth, temperature, and zooplankton biomass. Both the presence and biomass of species occurring at least in 10 lakes were quite well predicted from the environmental variables, with average values of 35% and 58%, respectively. Predictability was not systematically related to phylogenetic affiliation or particular functional groups as defined by morphology. However, biomass predictability decreased with increasing occurrence, and improved with larger species size (maximum linear dimension). Species that were predictable in terms of biomass (R-2 >= 0.5, p <= 0.05) had, on average, a larger volume, and were relatively more frequent in lakes from warmer regions, with high water temperature, low chlorophyll a, low nutrient concentrations, and low total zooplankton biomass. Although we cannot diagnose the mechanisms involved, our finding that the number of predictable species increases towards warmer regions resembles situations where competition for nutrients and grazing are likely to be less severe, and may imply that in a future warmer world phytoplankton will be easier to predict.
In Brazil, specifically in São Paulo State, there are guidelines based on the high diversity of tropical forests that instructs the restoration projects in the state (current SMA 32/2014). The main goal of this study was verify the importance and effectiveness of the high diversity of arboreal species originated from a reforestation, and its influence in a woody regenerating composition. We developed a phytosociologic study in a woody regenerating stratum of a nine year old reforestation at a Private Reserve of Natural Heritage (RPPN), in Mogi-Guaçu, São Paulo State. All specimens with height ≥ 30 cm and Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) < 5 cm were evaluated. The woody regenerating diversity was smaller than the overstory diversity and the species composition was similar to the overstory. The Simpson index (1-D) was 0.85, Shannon index (H’) was 2.46 and the Pielou index (J’) was 0.60. The zoochoric dispersion syndrome was major among the species. Our results suggest that the use of high diversity of native seedlings in a reforestation leads to high diversity of species in woody regeneration stratum, after one decade of planting. © 2016, Sociedade de Investigacoes Florestais. All rights reserved.
Plant and bird diversity in the Indonesian jungle rubber agroforestry system was compared to that in primary forest and rubber plantations by integrating new and existing data from a lowland rain forest area in Sumatra. Jungle rubber gardens are low-input rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) agroforests that structurally resemble secondary forest and in which wild species are tolerated by the farmer. As primary forests have almost completely disappeared from the lowlands of the Sumatra peneplain, our aim was to assess the contribution of jungle rubber as a land use type to the conservation of plant and bird species, especially those that are associated with the forest interior of primary and old secondary forest. Species-accumulation curves were compiled for terrestrial and epiphytic pteridophytes, trees and birds, and for subsets of 'forest species' of terrestrial pteridophytes and birds. Comparing jungle rubber and primary forest, groups differed in relative species richness patterns. Species richness in jungle rubber was slightly higher (terrestrial pteridophytes), similar (birds) or lower (epiphytic pteridophytes, trees, vascular plants as a whole) than in primary forest. For subsets of 'forest species' of terrestrial pteridophytes and birds, species richness in jungle rubber was lower than in primary forest. For all groups, species richness in jungle rubber was generally higher than in rubber plantations. Although species conservation in jungle rubber is limited by management practices and by a slash-and-burn cycle for replanting of about 40 years, this forest-like land use does support species diversity in an impoverished landscape increasingly dominated by monoculture plantations.
The oriental beech forests along the southern Caspian Sea shores of Iran are characterized by high biodiversity and high ecological value. However, there is little information concerning factors governing community composition and the presence and abundance of invasive plants. In the present study we aimed to evaluate the main drivers of community composition, diversity, and establishment of invasive plants in disturbed and undisturbed Fagus orientalis communities.     We sampled 104 vegetation releves in undisturbed and disturbed sites of the "Kheiroud Investigation Forest" in northern Iran and collected data on a large number of environmental variables concerning soil properties, light conditions, and topography. Data analysis consisted of a forward selection of significant explanatory variables followed by partial CCA analyses. Additionally, we carried out indicator species analysis of groups of releves affected by different disturbance types and analyzed effects of disturbance on species richness, diversity, and evenness using general linear models.     CCA results showed that disturbance, soil properties, light conditions and elevation explained 22.6% of the total variation in floristic composition. Gap and gap + grazing were the most important disturbance types affecting community composition. Disturbance had significant but rather weak effects on species richness, evenness, and the Shannon index. The most obvious effect of disturbance was on species composition, as revealed by significant groups of indicator species for different disturbance types. Most of the indicator species in grazed sites were unpalatable, poisonous, and creeping species, which are avoided by cattle. Grazing led to decreased abundance of indicator species and species characteristic of old-growth Fagus forests. The most intensive disturbance type "harvesting + gap + grazing" was associated with invasion by native vascular plant species not typically found in beech forests (apophytes).
Agroforestry home gardens are integrated arrangements of common vegetable plants near residences, resembling tropical forests. They cultivate multiple species to meet families’ basic needs, including food, medicine, and family activities. This study aimed to assess the composition and use of plant species in agroforestry home gardens in three municipalities in the western region of Pará. The study analyzed 119 home gardens in Belterra, Mojuí dos Campos, and Santarém in Pará, Brazilian Amazonia. These home gardens span peri-urban, urban, floodplain, indigenous, and tourist land zones. Data were collected through questionnaires and visits, surveying 5323 plants from 188 species and 62 plant families. The findings revealed that 80.5% of plants concentrated in just 18.6% of the species, with no significant difference in species per home garden across zones. Notably, food species, particularly fruit-bearing plants, dominated these home gardens. This indicates a potential emphasis on incentive programs and public policies. Most home gardens contained up to 17 plant species, while less than half included medicinal plants. Native and exotic species were equally represented, with native plants valued for shading benefits. Agroforestry home gardens are vital for conserving and cultivating food species. Their specific purposes influence species distribution and selection, showcasing their socioeconomic and environmental significance. Thus, recognizing and investing in these land-use systems is crucial to maintain and enhance regional benefits. © 2023 by the authors.
Forest vegetation is an important component of forest ecosystems, contributing to terrestrial plant diversity while also providing a variety of ecological services. In managed landscapes, plantations emerge as dominant kinds after stand-replacing disturbances. However, the dynamics of vegetation cover, diversity, and composition in plantation forests remains poorly understood in the subtropical region. Our study recorded a rich floral diversity with 173 angiosperm species, characterized by varying life forms and distinct flowering phenology. The uneven distribution of species across families demonstrated the complexity of the ecosystem, with Poaceae being dominant. Diversity patterns among different plantation types varied, with Dalbergia sissoo and Populus nigra plantations exhibiting higher species richness and diversity. Conversely, Eucalyptus camaldulensis and Morus alba plantations displayed lower diversity, emphasizing the influence of plantation type on biodiversity. Non-metric multidimensional scaling (nMDS) and PERMANOVA analyses revealed significant dissimilarity patterns of vegetation composition. Indicator species analysis identified unique compositions within each plantation type, emphasizing the importance of conserving specific types to protect indicator species and maintained ecological distinctiveness. Canonical Correspondence Analysis (CCA) demonstrated that road accessibility, stem cutting, and fire significantly influenced plant distribution patterns. The present research underscored the importance of considering plantation type in forest management for biodiversity conservation and highlighted the environmental variables’ influence on the formation of plant communities. These results provided major implications for sustainable forest management and conservation efforts in tropical regions. Copyright © 2024 Waheed, Haq, Arshad, Bussmann, Hashem and Abd_Allah.
The emergence of variety of land-use changes due to continuous anthropogenic pressure in peri-urban areas may concomitantly result in modification of the structure of associated plant communities for their sustainable growth. In the present study, plant diversity, and above- and belowground biomass distribution among species were investigated to understand their dynamics across different season, soil, and site conditions in a dry tropical peri-urban region in India. From four study sites that covered contrasting land uses: abandoned brick kiln (ABK), grazing land (GL), Kali river bank (KRB), and agricultural land (AL), a total of 360 monoliths were randomly extracted in three seasons, and dry weights were estimated for aboveground and belowground parts of species individuals. Seasonal soil samples of the sites were analyzed for physico-chemical characteristics. Of the total 87 recorded species that were mainly annual weeds and ruderals, 77% were forbs and 23% grasses. The ranges of plant biomass recorded across all sites and seasons were: aboveground 228-738 g m(-2), belowground 83-288 g m(-2), and a total of 344-1,026 g m(-2). The dominance of species differed between above- and belowground; some species dominated only above- or belowground, and others dominated in both layers. Above- and belowground biomass of the sites, differential community-biomass allocation to above- and belowground parts and species dominants varied significantly with site and season. ABK and AL sites showed lower species diversity and soil nutrients compared to GL and KRB sites. Belowground biomass significantly declined with increasing soil organic C and total N, indicating altered dry matter allocation under resource-scarce habitat conditions. Higher diversity occurred at both low- and high-biomass sites, reflective of enhanced ability of these plant communities to exploit resources maximally in spatio-temporal pattern.
One of the challenges in predicting the effects of biodiversity on ecosystem functioning is understanding the balance between the importance of various diversity components and variations in the environment. In mega-diverse tropical forests, these relationships between plant diversity and ecosystem processes, such as litter decomposition, are poorly explored. While the direct effects of plant diversity on litter decomposition are relatively well known, the indirect effects of diversity, and the local community and microenvironment have rarely been investigated. We evaluated the indirect effects of plant diversity on litter decomposition in a tropical forest. We assessed diversity using different components (plant species richness, functional composition, and functional diversity), evaluated the environmental gradient (soil attributes, topography and canopy cover) and related it to the dynamics of litter decomposition. A 230-day in situ experiment was performed in the southern areas of the Brazilian Atlantic forest using litterbags filled with standard substrate (to test the indirect effects) to evaluate the decomposition rates. In parallel, we also conducted a taxonomic and functional survey of the vegetation in the area of influence of the decomposition experiment. We demonstrated that there is an indirect effect of plant diversity, via taxonomic and functional diversities, on litter decomposition. The indirect effect is more pronounced at the beginning of the decomposition process, and the influences of different components of diversity and ecological mechanisms (niche complementarity, mass effect and selection effect) vary over time. Our study revealed the importance of not only small-scale variations in the biotic component but also those of soil in ecosystem functioning in a megadiverse forest. In this way, we have contributed to a better understanding of the determinants of the decomposition process, in addition to those suggested by classical theoretical models (i.e., climate, litter composition and decomposers). © 2018 Elsevier B.V.
Studying the patterns of changes in species diversity and soil properties can improve our knowledge of community succession. However, there is still a gap in understanding how soil conditions are related to plant diversity in tropical coastal secondary forests. We sampled plant diversity and soil nutrients spanning two different years (2012 and 2019) to assess the patterns of species diversity and relationships of soil nutrients and species diversity on Hainan Island, southern China. Results showed that the soil pH and total nitrogen (TN) significantly decreased while the soil organic matter (OM) and total phosphorus (TP) significantly increased from 2012 to 2019. Plant species diversity was significantly higher in 2012 than in 2019, and the dominant species significantly changed in two different years. Using multiple regression analysis, we determined that soil TP and TN were significantly related to plant diversity in 2012 and 2019, respectively. Using CCA analysis, TN and OM were the strongest predictors for dominant species in 2012, whereas the soil TP and TN were the strongest predictors for dominant species in 2019. Our findings show a significant change in plant diversity and dominant species after 7 years of development in the tropical coastal secondary forest. The patterns of plant diversity and soil nutrients increase our knowledge of forest restoration in coastal areas. © 2022 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Biodiversity-rich tropical ultramafic areas are currently being impacted by land clearing and particularly by mine activities. The reclamation of ultramafic degraded areas requires a knowledge of pioneer plant species. The objective of this study is to highlight the functional traits of plants that colonize ultramafic areas after disturbance by fire or mining activities. This information will allow trait-assisted selection of candidate species for reclamation. Fifteen plots were established on ultramafic soils in Sabah (Borneo, Malaysia) disturbed by recurrent fires (FIRE plots) or by soil excavation and quarrying (MINE plots). In each plot, soil samples were collected and plant cover as well as species abundances were estimated. Fifteen functional traits related to revegetation, nutrient improvement, or Ni phytomining were measured in sampled plants. Vegetation of both FIRE and MINE plots was dominated by perennials with lateral spreading capacity (mainly by rhizomes). Plant communities displayed a conservative growth strategy, which is an adaptation to low nutrient availability on ultramafic soils. Plant height was higher in FIRE than in MINE plots, whereas the number of stems per plant was higher in MINE plots. Perennial plants with lateral spreading capacity and a conservative growth strategy would be the first choice for the reclamation of ultramafic degraded areas. Additional notes for increasing nutrient cycling, managing competition, and implementing of Ni-phytomining are also provided. © 2020 by the authors.
Evaluating plant functional traits helps to understand how plants respond to changing environmental conditions and resource availability associated with disturbance events. Livestock production is one of the primary drivers of tropical forest loss and degradation. Livestock alter environmental conditions within the forest by grazing, trampling and nutrient inputs, which in turn can influence species composition and functional traits of species. Understanding how livestock influence functional traits along a successional gradient is poorly understood. Here, we studied the effect of cattle grazing and fallow age on plant functional traits and soil nutrients in secondary and old-growth tropical dry forests. We analyzed plant functional traits of the most important species in successional and old-growth forest communities in both cattle present and cattle excluded plots. Our results showed the effects of cattle grazing and fallow age on plant functional traits, with fallow age explaining more variation than cattle grazing. In early succession, functional traits were associated with water conservation (thicker leaves, lower specific leaf area), and in later successional they were linked with sunlight conservation (larger height, higher specific leaf area). The presence of large fruits and seeds in advanced successional sites suggests high resource availability, which may help plants to successfully reproduce. Moreover, under cattle grazing some functional traits are associated with herbivory defense (high foliar dry weight and thick leaves). Even though N and C increased as succession advanced, the sites with cattle grazing had higher NH4 and NO3 concentrations as a result of fecal deposition. Plant functional traits responded to fallow age than to cattle grazing. Our study showed that cattle exclusion, as a management and biodiversity conservation strategy, contributes positively to soil nutrition. Thus, fallow age and cattle exclusion facilitate soil recovery and allows establishing species with suitable functional attributes for overcoming environmental filters in abandoned cattle fields. © 2022 The Authors
Functional traits and species richness have been used to assess variation in ecological functions in multiple ecosystems. However, biodiversity effects on ecosystem functioning could differ between ecosystem types and evaluating these associations could help assess ecosystem recovery in restoration sites. The objective of this study was to analyze the effect of species richness and plant functional traits on ecological processes related to nutrient cycling, productivity and regeneration in subtropical forest ecosystems. The study was performed in three sites (each site containing a reference forest and a forest undergoing restoration) located in the south of Brazil. We collected data on understory abundance, aboveground biomass, litter stock, decomposition, soil feeding activity, litter and soil quality and evaluated the association with tree species richness and plant traits (both community-weighted mean trait values—CWM, and functional diversity measures). Variables related to plant functional traits, especially CWM measures, were associated with most of the ecological processes analyzed. Leaf traits showed the strongest effect on the processes, especially for aboveground biomass, litter stock and understory abundance. Most relationships did not differ between reference and restoration sites. Our results support the mass-ratio theory, suggesting that dominant species traits are the ones that strongly affect ecosystem functioning, and suggest a secondary role of species number on the ecological processes analyzed. Our study provides evidence for the usefulness of functional traits to assess changes in ecological processes in forest ecosystems, with similar patterns in reference forests and forests undergoing restoration. © 2019, Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.
Central to the success of restoration is how applied activities influence community assembly mechanisms. Phylogenetic and trait-based approaches to community ecology are increasingly being used to test for non-random community assembly and are now being applied to assessments of habitat restoration. A critical question for the restoration of tropical forests is how plantings influence the recruitment of new species, and specifically the phylogenetic and functional diversity of restored habitats. We examined 8 years (2006–2014) of tropical-forest recruitment in two restoration planting compositions (12 animal-dispersed and 12 wind-dispersed tree species), with a control (no planting) in 24 plots in Los Tuxtlas, Mexico. Specifically, we assessed the influence of plantings on newly arriving individuals’ phylogenetic, functional, taxonomic diversity, abundance and the change of these measures during early succession. The recruiting individuals’ phylogenetic, functional, taxonomic diversity and abundance increased through succession. Both animal-dispersed planting and wind-dispersed planting appeared to accelerate forest succession more than controls (natural succession), and diversity in the animal-dispersed plantings was marginally higher after 8 years. We did not find any difference in recruiting individuals’ phylogenetic and functional dispersion (measured as standardized effect sizes) in any given year, or when measured as turnover between successive pairs of years, measuring planting composition and control plots. Recruiting individuals were phylogenetically clustered during early forest restoration regardless of treatment. At the same time, the recruits transitioned from appearing randomly constructed to clustering according to functional traits, which suggests an increase in recruits’ functional similarity during early succession. Synthesis and applications. Both the animal and wind-dispersed plantings accelerated the increase of recruiting individuals’ phylogenetic, functional, taxonomic diversity and abundance during early succession. However, planting treatment did not appear to alter community assembly mechanisms of recruiting individuals. Our findings support restoration planting by showing that planting trees with animal dispersal syndrome could accelerate forest restoration more than unassisted forest regeneration. Furthermore, communities appeared to be phylogenetically and functionally clustered during early succession regardless of initial planted composition. Thus, while overall diversity increased with planting, if a restoration goal is to maximize phylogenetic or functional dispersion, the planting composition tested did not provide means to achieve this goal, at least during early succession. © 2017 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology © 2017 British Ecological Society
Planting tree seedlings in small patches (islands) has been proposed as a method to facilitate forest recovery that is less expensive than planting large areas and better simulates the nucleation process of recovery. We planted seedlings of four tree species at 12 formerly agricultural sites in southern Costa Rica in two designs: plantation (entire 50 × 50 m area planted) and island (six patches of three sizes). We monitored seedling survival, height, and canopy area over 3 years. To elucidate mechanisms influencing survival and growth, we measured soil and foliar nutrients, soil compaction, and photosynthesis. Survival of all species was similar in the two planting designs. Seedling height and canopy area were greater in plantations than islands at most sites, and more seedlings in islands decreased in height due to damage incurred during plot maintenance. Survival, height, and canopy area were both site- and species-specific with the two N-fixing species (Inga edulis and Erythrina poeppigiana) greater than the other species (Terminalia amazonia and Vochysia guatemalensis). Foliar N was higher in Terminalia and Vochysia in sites where Inga growth was greater. Soil nutrients, however, explained a small amount of the large differences in growth across sites. Leaf mass per area was higher in islands, and P use efficiency was higher in plantations. Our results show advantages (good seedling survival, cheaper) and disadvantages (more seedling damage, slightly lower growth) to the island planting design. Our study highlights the importance of replicating restoration strategies at several sites to make widespread management recommendations. © 2010 Society for Ecological Restoration International.
Plant regeneration is essential for maintaining forest biodiversity and ecosystem functioning, which are globally threatened by human disturbance. Here we present the first integrative meta-analysis on how forest disturbance affects multiple ecological processes of plant regeneration including pollination, seed dispersal, seed predation, recruitment and herbivory. We analysed 408 pairwise comparisons of these processes between near-natural and disturbed forests. Human impacts overall reduced plant regeneration. Importantly, only processes early in the regeneration cycle that often depend on plant-animal interactions, i.e. pollination and seed dispersal, were negatively affected. Later processes, i.e. seed predation, recruitment and herbivory, showed overall no significant response to human disturbance. Conserving pollination and seed dispersal, including the animals that provide these services to plants, should become a priority in forest conservation efforts globally.
Liana cutting is a management practice currently applied to encourage seedling regeneration and tree growth in some logged tropical forests. However, there is limited empirical evidence of its effects on forest demographic rates in Southeast Asia. We used 22 four-hectare plots in the Sabah Biodiversity Experiment (a reduced impact logging site) enrichment line planted with 16 dipterocarp species to assess the effects of complete liana cutting on tree growth and survival. We compared plots where lianas were only cut along planting lines (standard enrichment line planting) with those with one (2014) or two rounds (2011 and 2014) of complete liana cutting. We found increased seedling growth following the first complete liana cut in 2011 relative to the enrichment line planting, consistent with previous studies. The response after 3 years to the cutting in 2014 depended on whether lianas had been previously cut or not: in twice-cut plots, seedling growth was not significantly different from the standard enrichment planting controls, whereas growth in plots with only one complete cut in 2014 was significantly slower. Seedling survival decreased through time for both once- and twice-cut liana treatments but remained stable in controls. Sapling growth after the 2014 liana cutting showed a similar pattern to seedling growth, while tree growth following the 2014 liana cutting was significantly lower than controls regardless of whether lianas were cut twice (2011 and 2014) or once (2014). Differences in response between the two rounds of liana cutting were likely due to changes in precipitation—2011 was followed by consistent rainfall while 2014 was followed by two severe droughts within 2 years. Synthesis and applications. Our results generally support the widely reported positive effects of liana cutting on tree growth and survival. However, reduced growth and survival after the 2015/2016 El Niño suggests that drought may temporarily undermine the benefits of liana cutting in logged tropical forests. Managers of similar areas in SE Asia should consider halting liana cutting during El Niño events. In other tropical areas, seedling survival should be monitored to assess to what extent results from SE Asia are transferable. © 2019 The Authors Journal of Applied Ecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Ecological Society.
Agroforestry systems have increased in area in tropical regions in recent decades and many studies have sought to evaluate their impact on native biodiversity. Yet, few have assessed the impact of perennial plantations such as rubber-tree harvesting on native biodiversity. The goal of our study was to assess the effect of rubber tree plantations on fruit-feeding butterflies of the endangered Brazilian Atlantic Forest in Brazil. To do so, we sampled fruit- feeding butterfly species in a landscape mosaic composed of primary forest, rubber tree plantations under two management regimes (active production with intense management and undergrowth suppression and low management plantations with no undergrowth suppression), and forest fragments immersed in rubber tree plantation matrix. By trap-baiting butterflies for a year, we captured 5800 individuals of 85 butterfly species. Species richness was higher in unmanaged (no growth suppression) plantation and forest fragments (57–60 species) and lower in managed plantation (with growth suppression) (47) and primary forest (43). Ordination analysis suggests three main community groups formed by primary forest samples, a cluster combining unmanaged plantation and fragments, and managed plantation. There was substantial variation in butterfly abundance in the landscape, but our data suggest that several forest specialists species are able to occur along the mosaic on the landscape, and despite differences in management the entire landscape can contribute for a rich biota. Loss of understory vegetation led to simplified communities, with skewed dominance of a few species. By allowing understory development, a low impact management can provide adequate habitat for native butterflies. Yet, current rubber tree plantation technology does not normally use this method, opting to use the high management approach instead. We hypothesize that these minimally benign plantations may serve as conduits for butterflies in forest patches. Thus, we suggest that rubber tree plantations near Atlantic forest fragments should encourage understory development and establish a landscape mosaic, allowing forest fragments immersed in plantation matrix to be able to exchange individuals and colonize more complex plantation habitat. Intensive suppression of undergrowth should be avoided, except for trail maintenance, and isolation of fragments in this matrix should be kept to a minimum. If undergrowth suppression cannot be avoided, then establishment of stepping stones in plantation matrix should be encouraged to reduce isolation of fragments. © 2017
Several recent meta-analyses have aimed to determine whether natural regeneration is more effective at recovering tropical forests than active restoration (for example, tree planting). We reviewed this literature and found that comparisons between strategies are biased by positive site selection. Studies of natural forest regeneration are generally conducted at sites where a secondary forest was already present, whereas tree planting studies are done in a broad range of site conditions, including non-forested sites that may not have regenerated in the absence of planting. Thus, a level of success in forest regeneration is guaranteed for many studies representing natural regeneration, but not for those representing active restoration. The complexity of optimizing forest restoration is best addressed by paired experimentation at the same site, replicated across landscapes. Studies that have taken this approach reach different conclusions than those arising from meta-analyses; the results of paired experimental comparisons emphasize that natural regeneration is a highly variable process and that active restoration and natural regeneration are complementary strategies. © 2018 The Authors.
Given the current global destruction of tropical rain forests, it is a great challenge for ecologists to understand processes underlying successional pathways and their associated changes in forest structure and biodiversity. In this study, we intensively surveyed forest composition and structure along a chronosequence of old fields, which were abandoned from 5 to 30 years ago, and compared them with the adjacent stands of both undisturbed and disturbed 'primary' forest. All stands (N = 80) were included into an old-growth forest matrix (Sanaimbo forest, Ivory Coast) among 2 soil types (ferralitic and hydromorphic). We recorded vascular plant species of each vegetation layer into randomly disposed nested-plots (1500 m2), following a phytosociological approach and distinguishing two spatio-temporal organization levels: synusia and phytocoenosis. All relevés were submitted to hierarchical clustering and detrended correspondence analysis, as a help into successively grouping relevés into synusiae, and synusiae into phytocoenoses. Finally, a qualitative modelisation of postcultural secondary succession was built up using a space-for-time substitution procedure and a systemic approach. Undershrub species quickly invaded old fields and initiated forest regeneration. Secondary succession accumulated species rapidly and overlaid structural compartments. Clear discontinuities appeared along the chronosequence, that allowed us to distinguish several synusiae and phytocoenoses. Within 30 years following agriculture discontinuation, the structure of the young secondary forest showed a closer resemblance to the primary forest on ferralitic soils than did the floristic composition and richness. We conclude that the regenerative power of semi-deciduous tropical forests is high on ferralitic soils, even if the time taken for secondary forests to revert to 'primary' forests probably exceeds several centuries, and if we cannot fully exclude an alternative successional pathway. Conversely, old-growth forests on hydromorphic soils appeared to be weakly resilient and their destruction might be irreversible. Thus, these species-rich forests should be targeted as a conservation priority. © 2007 Gebrüder Borntraeger, D-14129 Berlin.
Humid tropical forests are increasingly exposed to devastating wildfires. Major efforts are needed to prevent fire-related tipping points and to enable the effective recovery of fire-affected areas. Here, we provide a synthesis of the most common forest restoration strategies, thereby focusing on post-fire forest dynamics in the humid tropics. A variety of restoration strategies can be adopted in restoring humid tropical forests, including natural regeneration, assisted natural regeneration (i.e. fire breaks, weed control, erosion control, topsoil replacement, peatland rewetting), enrichment planting (i.e. planting nursery-raised seedlings, direct seeding) and commercial restoration (i.e. plantation forests, agroforestry). Our analysis shows that while natural regeneration can be effective under favourable ecological conditions, humid tropical forests are often ill-adapted to fire, and therefore less likely to recover unassisted after a wildfire event. Active restoration practices may be more effective, but can be costly and challenging to implement. We also identify gaps in knowledge needed for effective restoration of humid tropical forests after fire, hereby taking into account the ecosystems and socio-economic conditions in which these fires occur. We suggest to incorporate fire severity in future studies, to better understand and predict post-fire ecosystem responses. In addition, as fire poses a recurring and intensifying threat throughout the recovery process, more emphasis should be placed on post-restoration management and the prevention of fire throughout the different phases of the restoration process. Furthermore, as tropical wildfires are increasing in scale, establishing collaborative capacity and setting priorities for efficient resource allocation should become a major priority for restoration practitioners in the humid tropics. Finally, as global fire regimes are changing and expected to intensify in the context of climate change, land use and land cover change, we suggest to put continuous effort into fire monitoring and modelling to inform the development of effective restoration strategies in the long-run. © 2021 The Authors
Tree regeneration was compared in burned and unburned portions of a tropical dry forest (1110 mm ppt/year) and a tropical humid forest (1542 mm ppt/year) in southeastern Bolivia. Both forests burned 5 years prior to our study, and both forests were also lightly selectively logged (intensity <1 m3/ha) - the dry forest during the 1970 and 1980s and the humid forest just prior to the wildfire. The objective of this study was to compare abundance, size, and mode (seedling or resprout) of tree regeneration in burned and unburned areas of these forests, focusing on the most common canopy tree species and the commercial timber species at each site. Regeneration of 13 species of trees was quantified in the humid forest and 12 species in the dry forest. Tree regeneration <5 cm basal diameter but >20 cm tall was more abundant in the dry forest (x̄ = 1807 stems/ha) than in the wet forest (x = 490 stems/ha). In both forests, resprouts were generally larger but less abundant than seedlings. In the dry forest, regeneration of the following commercial tree species was significantly more abundant in the burned areas: Cedrela fissilis, Anadenanthera colubrina, Astronium urundueva, and Centrolobium microchaete. However, Acosmium cardenasii, a canopy tree species not marketed for timber in Bolivia, represented the majority of regeneration (63%) in the dry forest and was equally abundant in burned and unburned areas (∼1100 stems/ha). In the humid forest, only one timber species, Aspidosperma rigidum, was more abundant in burned than unburned areas (51 vs. 0 stems/ha, respectively). Another timber species that is rarely harvested in the region, Pseudolmedia laevis, was significantly less abundant in the burned than unburned area (22 vs. 173 stems/ha, respectively). The results of this study suggest that controlled burning could increase the abundance of timber tree regeneration at the dry forest site and to a lesser extent at the humid forest site. No data were collected to assess the likelihood that this increased density of regeneration will result in increased harvestable timber. However, local forest management institutions do not presently appear capable or motivated to conduct fire management - whether for enhancing timber regeneration or for limiting the damage caused by accidental wildfires. © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Logging represents one of the main threats to bird populations breeding in subtropical forests because the resulting changes in forest structure influence nesting sites and predator-prey interactions. Nest site selection in birds is critical to their survival and reproductive success, because site characteristics can affect predation rates. The aim of this study is to evaluate the abundance of avian nest predators and the rate of predation on artificial nests in post-logging piedmont forests from the southern Yungas. Predation rate on artificial nests was lower in logged forest when compared to unlogged forest. This result may not only be explained by the influence of both micro- and meso-site which provided greater nest concealment, but also by the decrease in density of generalist predators at logged sites. As generalist predators were associated with vegetation cover, lower coverage may be affecting predator density at logging forests. The density of nestling predators, however, was higher in logging forests and was associated with this treatment. Our study suggests that post-logging effects changes the nesting sites and reduce the predation rate on artificial nests as well as the density of nest avian predators like Plushcrested Jay (Cyanocorax chrysops).
Fire activity in the Peruvian Andes has increased significantly in recent decades, but climatic parameters associated with drought, which may indirectly contribute to the occurrence of severe forest fires, have not yet been investigated. Because fire prevention tools are scarce, strategies for deterring burning are necessary in order to reduce impacts in regions where forest fires usually result from human activity. This study explores the conditions conducive to forest fire in the Andes of Peru. Daily precipitation and temperature observed data from the PISCO gridded dataset for the 2002-2016 period were used. In addition, MODIS satellite images (MOD09A1 product) were collected to characterise Andean vegetation using spectral indices. Analysis of daily temperature and rainfall indicates that climatic parameters such as cumulative precipitation, dry-day frequency and hot-day frequency are statistically associated with conditions that could contribute to increased forest fire occurrence. Our findings suggest that a decrease in the water content of vegetation, estimated by the Global Vegetation Moisture Index during the dry period and wet period onset, can be used to identify potential conditions for forest fire occurrence. This study suggests that forest managers should consider implementing prevention strategies that include continuous monitoring of climate and vegetation parameters.
This chapter provides a review of the statistical and modelling disciplines, their techniques and potential contribution to sustainable forest management (SFM). The main topics covered are: Mensuration and models for SFM Inventory and monitoring for forest sustainability: criteria and indicators Models of tropical forests for the conservation of biodiversity Integrating information and models across spatial and temporal scales for SFM Climate and carbon models in relation to sustainability New techniques for the statistical analysis of sustainability data Uncertainty analysis in modelling and monitoring for SFM Forest data, information and model archives There are major contributions to be made, in particular in the areas of information and model integration, where a synthesis of information and models across both spatial and temporal scales is required. There is a great need for international collaboration on the development of open and shared forest data and model repositories/archives, as well as continued development of forest information systems. © CAB International 2007.
Plantation in riverine sandbars offers an excellent opportunity for restoration of ecosystem with a vast potential for enhancing carbon stock. Afforestation on barren islands is challenging task; however, Padmashree Jadav Payeng has single-handedly transformed a sandbar of the river Brahmaputra into a forested landscape in India's northeastern state of Assam. Such inspiring initiative needs more attention in terms of scientific assessment to quantify ecosystem value and services that can be enriched through such activities. This study uses remote sensing data viz., Landsat4-5TM and Sentinel 2 A data to provide a detailed information on spatio-temporal variability of land use land cover of study region from 1990 to 2021. It aims to conduct a scientific and systematic assessment of biophysical changes that have occurred in the sandbars, understand the status of afforestation, and evaluate the current levels of aboveground biomass (AGB), belowground biomass (BGB), and carbon stock in the selected sandbars. The spatial distribution of AGB, BGB and carbon stock is derived using linear regression model between SAR backscatter and field-based AGB. The results demonstrate that forest cover increased by 31.92 % and sandbar area is reduced by 26.87 % from 1990 to 2021. Spatially derived AGB ranges from 9 to 1295.89 Mg per ha, BGB from 2.35 to 290.50 Mg per ha and carbon stock from 6.18 to 763.34 Mg per ha. Ficus religiosa exhibits a high biomass, ranging from 564.7 Mg per ha to 994.7 Mg per ha, and a high carbon stock, ranging from 8 to 557.30 Mg per ha, attributed to its larger diameter at breast height (DBH). Moreover, phytosociological assessment was conducted for the studied forest, which reveal a total tree species richness of 79. The forest exhibits a total tree density of 395 individuals per hectare. Different biodiversity indices provide a comprehensive understanding of species composition; where results show a Shannon diversity index of 2.81, a Simpson's index of 0.08, a Menhinick's richness index of 2.7, and a Margalef's richness index of 5.26. The article provides detailed information on change in forest cover and present status of AGB, BGB and Carbon stock, providing evidence-based narratives on ecosystem restoration. The initiative by a single person has created a forested landscape and habitat for a large number of wild animals, contributing to better carbon stock and a healthier ecosystem. With regard to the current debate of carbon market, the study suggests the need of instrumentalization of carbon credits for such restoration activities to encourage increase in carbon stock. It also concludes that in-depth research should be taken up on long-term effectiveness of such plantation activities and the potential for scaling up these initiatives for ecosystem restoration in view of climate change mitigation and sustainable forest development.
Improving the livelihoods of communities living in fragile ecosystems, such as tropical forests, is among the main strategies to promote their conservation and preserve wildlife. In the Ecuadorian Amazon, farmers’ cooperatives are recognized as an important mechanism to improve the socioeconomic conditions of local communities. This study analyzes the integration of pyrolysis processes to convert agricultural waste into biochar as a way to implement the bioeconomy in these organizations. We found that post-harvesting processes in the studied farmers’ cooperatives are similar, and coffee husks are a potential feedstock to produce biochar. Although the environmental policies in Ecuador consider the valorization of agricultural waste, we did not find any specific standard to regulate the operation of pyrolysis facilities. Nonetheless, conversion of agricultural waste into biochar can contribute to (i) replacement of subsidized fossil fuels used in drying processes, (ii) prevention of environmental pollution caused by accumulation of waste, (iii) emergence of new income sources linked with the provision of carbon sequestration services, and (iv) the long-term maintenance of soil fertility. Currently, demonstration projects are needed to stimulate collaboration among farmers’ cooperatives, academia, the government, international cooperation agencies, and existing forest conservation initiatives. © 2021 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Restoring tropical forests still relies on expensive tree planting. Timber production from native trees offers a promising opportunity to make restoration financially viable, but species growth data are lacking. We assessed the potential of tropical forest restoration plantations for producing native timber in the Atlantic Forest. For that we inventoried a chronosequence of unmanaged restoration plantation sites with ten commercial native tree species. Then we developed growth models and used the Growth-Oriented Logging (GOL) method to inform targeted management decisions, including an optimized timber-focused scenario, based on growth and bole quality assessment. Usually, growth-rate classes for saw wood production would be defined according to the time necessary for achieving 35 cm in DBH. Harvesting age was markedly reduced using GOL for species of fast-growth (from <50 to <25 years), intermediate-growth (from 50 to 70 to 25–50 years), slow-growth (from >70 to 50–75 years). Following GOL, basal area was 42 ± 30% larger at harvest (taking 35 ± 23% more time) or 60 ± 16.5% smaller (taking 66 ± 16% less time). The optimized scenario speeded tree-size achievement and anticipated harvesting in an average of 58 years. Species selection, individualization, and silvicultural management are critical for producing timber in forest restoration programs. © 2023 Associação Brasileira de Ciência Ecológica e Conservação
Identifying deforested areas with high potential for natural forest recovery can be used as an aid for ecological restoration projects at large-scale. However, accurate predictions that infer the resilience (i.e. recovery rate after deforestation) and stability (i.e. the ability of the ecosystem to maintain its functions) of early second-growth forests are scarce at a regional scale. Here, we investigated the effect of climate, soil and topography on the resilience and stability of 165 early second-growth forests throughout the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. We also built prediction maps of potential resilience and stability to identify where reforestation could be optimized in the early stages of forest succession. We assessed the resilience and stability through an interannual plant primary productivity time series using a normalized difference vegetation index. Our analysis reveals that resilience was mainly associated with isothermality (i.e. diurnal temperature oscillation relative to the annual temperature oscillation) and precipitation of the warmest quarter. In turn, stability was mainly associated with the probability of bedrock occurrence, annual precipitation and precipitation seasonality. The prediction maps show a spatial pattern in which potential resilience and stability increase from north to south of the Atlantic Forest. Forest restoration can be optimized in regions with high potential resilience and stability, such as an isolated area on the north coast in the Bahia state and the southern region. However, restoration may require active practices and management in regions with low potential for both ecosystem properties, such as the north inland in the Bahia and Minas Gerais states. This ecosystemic approach can help achieve Atlantic Forest restoration commitments. © 2022 The Authors. Remote Sensing in Ecology and Conservation published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Zoological Society of London.
We measured the terminal velocity of helicopter-like fruit from the Dipterocarpaceae family and present a model predicting the terminal velocities for all dipterocarp species in the Malesiana region. A ballistic model of seed dispersal using the observed terminal velocities predicted dispersal distances of 17-77m under normal atmospheric conditions. These data are of applied use in parametizing models of species coexistence, forest regeneration and habitat connectivity in Southeast Asian tropical forests.     Abstrak Kami telah melakukan pengiraan untuk menguji halaju terminal (terminal velocity) pada buah dari keluarga Dipterocarpaceae di Malaysia dan membentangan kertas kerja ini bagi tujuan untuk menunjukkan keputusan yang telah diperolehi. Dengan menggunakan Model Ballistik, penyebaran biji melalui pemerhatian halaju terminal (terminal velocitiy), penyebaran biji mampu dilakukan pada jarak 17m hingga 77m dalam keadaan cuaca yang normal. Data-data yang dihasilkan dari penelitian ini dapat digunakan untuk menguji species coexistence, pertumbuhan semula hutan dan pertalian habitat (habitat connectivity) Hutan Tropika di Asia Tenggara.
We present an analysis of local species richness in neotropical forests, based on a number of 0.1 ha samples of woody plants collected by the late Alwyn Gentry. For each of 69 forests, soils were analysed and climatic data were collated. Using transformed independent variables and interaction terms, multiple regression equations were developed that explained the greatest possible amount of variation in species richness, and the best equations were selected on the basis of regression diagnostics. The best models are presented for (a) all neotropical forests, (b) forests west of the Andes (transandean) and (c) east of the Andes (cisandean), and for various subsets based on elevation and annual rainfall. For the whole dataset, and for most subsets, annual rainfall and rainfall seasonality were the most important variables for explaining species richness. Soil variables were correlated with precipitation - drier forests have more nutrient-rich soils. After the inclusion of rainfall variables, available soil nutrient concentrations contributed little to explaining or accounting for additional variation in species numbers, indicating that tropical forest species richness is surprisingly independent of soil quality. The results are consistent with the hypothesis that plants in mature tropical forests may obtain nutrients through the process of direct cycling, in which mineral nutrients are extracted from litterfall before they enter the soil. The strong relationship between community species richness and rainfall patterns has implications for biodiversity conservation. Wet forests with an ample year-round moisture supply harbour the greatest number of woody plant species and should be a focus of conservation efforts. © 1995 Chapman & Hall.
Summary: There are concerns that frequent intense fires are reducing biodiversity on the Arnhem Plateau within Kakadu National Park, northern Australia. Since the 1980s, prescribed burning in the early dry season has aimed to reduce the extent of late dry season wildfires. A programme of more strategic prescribed burning has been undertaken since 2007, aiming to increase intervals between fires affecting heathland and rain forest communities. We assess the effectiveness of prescribed burning in Kakadu's Stone Country using a Landsat satellite-derived fire history (1980-2011), in terms of achieving 'tolerable fire intervals' for dominant plant communities. Our analysis indicates that fire regimes have become substantially more favourable for biodiversity since the early 1980s. Although annual extent of burning has remained unchanged, two significant changes in fire regimes have occurred over the long term: (i) a switch from late dry season dominance to early dry season dominance and (ii) an increase in the abundance of long-unburnt vegetation, both of which are likely to benefit biodiversity. Demonstrating the statistical significance of changes associated with recent, more strategic fire management (2007-2011) is limited by the short duration of this management approach, although there is evidence of increasing abundance of long-unburnt vegetation during this time. The view that the Arnhem Plateau's fire regimes are increasingly driving biodiversity loss (due to frequent late dry season wildfires) is erroneous; they are in a more benign state now than at any time over the last three decades, most likely due to extensive use of prescribed burning. Synthesis and applications. In highly fire-prone landscapes, such as savannas, prescribed burning can be an effective means of: (i) bringing forward peak fire activity to the time of year when fire conditions are relatively mild and (ii) increasing abundance of long-unburnt vegetation. These changes are likely to favour persistence of a range of fire-sensitive communities. Our case study supports the strategic use of prescribed burning to protect fire-sensitive biota within highly fire-prone landscapes throughout the world. In highly fire-prone landscapes, such as savannas, prescribed burning can be an effective means of: (i) bringing forward peak fire activity to the time of year when fire conditions are relatively mild and (ii) increasing abundance of long-unburnt vegetation. These changes are likely to favour persistence of a range of fire-sensitive communities. Our case study supports the strategic use of prescribed burning to protect fire-sensitive biota within highly fire-prone landscapes throughout the world. Journal of Applied Ecology © 2015 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology © 2015 British Ecological Society.
Because of continuing degradation or deforestation in areas of undisturbed primary forest, there is a need to study the relative merit of strategies that mitigate their impacts on biodiversity and associated ecological functionality. Here, we provide a global synthesis of forest degradation or deforestation using 48 studies published in peer-reviewed journals that use dung beetles as indicators given their sensitivity to anthropogenic disturbance and their relevance in performing essential ecological functions in terrestrial ecosystems. We evaluated forest cover associated with undisturbed primary forest degradation (i.e. degraded primary forest) and undisturbed primary forest deforestation (i.e. secondary forest, forestry plantations and forestry restoration implementation) on species richness, total abundance, biomass, functional groups' presence and ecological functions provided by dung beetles. Additionally, we determined whether if dung beetle responses to forest disturbances were geographically dependent. We found lower diversity and a decrease in ecological functions associated with all classes of disturbance in primary forest. However, the effects were less severe in the case of forest degradation compared to complete deforestation with natural regeneration of secondary forest, development of forest plantations or active forest restoration by planting indigenous trees. The Neotropical and Oriental regions are particularly vulnerable, given the elevated rates of undisturbed primary forest deforestation and its negative impact on their assemblages' diversity and ecological functions. Synthesis and applications. Our results show that efforts for the conservation of remaining undisturbed primary forests need to be prioritized, especially in tropical latitudes. However, in regions where primary forest conservation is not feasible, logging management programs in degraded primary forest may have a potential role in reducing negative impacts for dung beetle diversity and ecological functions. Moreover, we conclude that despite the negative effect of primary forest deforestation and implementation of secondary forest, forestry plantation and forestry restoration, they can be useful for partial recovery of diversity and ecological functions performed by dung beetles in areas lacking any primary forest (undisturbed or degraded) vegetation cover.
The diversity of plant life forms in tropical forests affords the opportunity for assembly of plant combinations, both natural and managed, that make full use of resources and sustain high productivity. The influence of combining life forms on productivity and resource use was evaluated using three fast-growing tree species (Hyeronima alchorneoides, Cedrela odorata, and Cordia alliodora); each species was grown alone and with two perennial, large-stature, self-supporting monocots (Euterpe oleracea and Heliconia imbricata). Aboveground net primary productivity was extremely high in all stands. The monocots did not contribute significantly to the productivity of the Hyeronima polycultures, which was 4.5-8.4 g · m-2 · d-1 between 18 and 36 mo. In contrast, the monocots accounted for 57% of the productivity (9.7 g · m-2 · d-1) of Cedrela polycultures and 67% of the productivity (6.8 g · m-2 · d-1) of the Cordia polycultures, by age 3 yr. The leaf area and density of fine roots in the Cedrela and Cordia polycultures were also significantly increased by the presence of the monocots, reaching or surpassing the levels found in the Hyeronima stands. The high productivity of Hyeronima, coupled with poor growth of its interplanted monocots, indicated that Hyeronima was able to achieve nearly complete use of resources. Ecosystem productivity and resource capture were increased when the monocots were grown with the other two tree species, and this occurred because of the inability of the tree species to completely utilize available resources, which provided an opportunity for the monocots to flourish in the understory. Monocot productivity in the Cedrela stands was additive to that of the trees, indicating complementary resource use between the monocots and this tree species. In the case of Cordia, tree productivity was slowed by the monocots, but this decline was more than compensated for by the high productivity of the associated monocots. Whether in natural forests or human-constructed agroforestry systems, the presence of dominant species that do not fully exploit all available resources allows the coexistence of other species and creates the potential for complementary resource use. The resource use characteristics of such species should be a key consideration in forest restoration efforts and in the design of sustainable land use systems.
Primate seed dispersal plays crucial roles in many ecological processes at various levels of biological organization: from plant population genetics and demography to community assembly and ecosystem function. Although research on primate seed dispersal has advanced significantly in the last 20-30years, many aspects are still poorly understood. Here, we discuss some new challenges that we need to address, as well as some old ones that still need our attention, highlighting examples from the Neotropics. Despite new analytical tools from network theory, research on primate seed dispersal rarely takes a community-wide approach, thus limiting our understanding of its evolutionary, ecological, and conservation implications. Of particular relevance for conservation are changes caused by landscape-scale processes (e.g., forest loss and fragmentation), but these effects need to be assessed using a landscape approach, which is currently absent in primate seed dispersal research. Agroecosystems can play a key role in maintaining primate seed dispersal in anthropogenic landscapes, but this topic remains poorly studied. Primate seed dispersal research will need to play a role in refaunation projects aimed at restoring plant-animal interactions. Old challenges that we still need to address include the long-term effects of primate declines on plant populations and communities, and the role of primate seed dispersal in the regeneration of degraded habitats. If we take advantage of all tools provided by modern science, from powerful methods of data analyses to molecular techniques, and combine them with strong multidisciplinary collaborations, the future of primate seed dispersal research will indeed be exciting.
The establishment of buffer zones as part of protected areas – within biosphere reserves but also national parks – is central to conservation strategies designed to safeguard remaining biodiversity, mainly left in tropical forests. However, the real-world situation of protected areas reveals a range of problems. This study seeks to identify the diverse ways of thinking among relevant actors in order to address these issues. In the present work, characteristics of the global perspective of managers are contrasted with findings from a field study in the forest biosphere reserve Lore Lindu, Central Sulawesi, Indonesia. In this context, the differences between the villagers’ point of view regarding the implementation of sustainabledevelopment activities in the buffer zones and the managers’ perspective on the sustainability of human uses in the same areas are highlighted. This paper follows two complementary approaches, combining quantitative and qualitative research tools when examining the respective positions of both managers and villagers. Quantitative analysis of a global survey among biosphere reserve managers revealed that human uses in the buffer zones are generally considered to be sustainable (mean value for evaluation of 6.4 on a scale from 1 to 10). Besides a significant negative correlation (-0.3) between number of residents in the buffer zone and accordance to sustainability of human uses, no meaningful relation was computed either in respect to country income or tropical forest regions. Because of this lack of conclusive data, we zoomed in on the local level and included the villagers’ perspective. Factors influencing the implementation of sustainable-development activities in the buffer zone were the central issue of the field study. A completely different perception was found in Lore Lindu. The villagers expressed the opinion that basic management activities such as nonexistence of boundary demarcation and lack of law enforcement are the most crucial factors in regard to how sustainable-development activities are implemented. Further barriers are insufficient awareness of forest conservation needs among groups of villagers and the ever-increasing number of immigrants. Furthermore, the results of this study point to the high relevance of a mediator in the communication process between the management body and local people. Clearly formulated rules and laws and abidance by enforcement of the law seem to play a major role in buffer-zone management. Moreover, the different ethnic groups have to be taken into account by the park management in communication processes. Local people should be considered as partners (in buffer-zone management) rather than as passive objects in this process. © 2010, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Throughout the world, previously extensive areas of natural habitats have been degraded and fragmented, and improving habitat connectivity may help the long-term persistence of species, and their ability to adapt to climate changes. We focused on Borneo, where many remaining areas of tropical forest are highly fragmented, and we assessed the extent to which Protected Areas (PAs) protect highly-connected forest sites. We analysed remotely-sensed land cover data (0.86 km(2) grid cell resolution) using 'Zonation' reserve design software, and we ranked grid cells (rank 0-1) according to forest extent and connectivity. PAs currently cover 9% of Borneo, but <20% of highly-connected cells (i.e. cells with Zonation ranks >= 0.9) lie within PAs. Approximately 65% of highly-connected cells were located above 400 m elevation, although >60% of Borneo's total land area lies below 200 m and only 15% of highly-connected cells occurred in these low elevation areas. These findings were relatively insensitive to assumptions about species' dispersal ability (within the range 1-20 km; representing relatively mobile animal species). The percentage of highly-connected grid cells within PAs could rise from 20 to 50% under proposed new PAs (including the 'Heart of Borneo' project), although many other highly-connected sites will remain unprotected. On-going land-use changes mean that existing PAs in lowland areas are likely to become increasingly isolated within inhospitable agricultural landscapes, and improving connectivity through reforestation and rehabilitation of degraded forest may be required to maintain the conservation value of these PAs in future.
There is still large uncertainty over the status of global forest cover owing to the paucity of comprehensive and holistic studies related to long term forest cover change. The aim of the present work is to prepare a nation-wide multi-date forest cover database which describes and quantifies historical and recent changes in natural forests of India. This analysis facilitated the determination of the state of Indian forest cover changes over last eight decades. Here, we have mapped the total area under forest cover, evaluated the spatial tracking of changes in natural forests, estimated the rate of deforestation and afforestation, analysed the biogeographic zone wise and state wise forest cover change, existing land use in deforested area, influence of environmental factors such as terrain on deforestation and implication of different definitions of forest used by agencies reporting deforestation in India. The results indicated that forests covered an area of 869,012 km2 in 1930 which has decreased to 625,565 km2 in 2013, a net loss of 243,447 km2 (28 %) in eight decades. The highest annual average forest loss was found to be 4795 km2 during 1930–1975, 1476 km2 during 1975–1985, 767 km2 during 1985–1995, 356 km2 during 1995–2005 and 209 km2 during 2005–2013. Between 1930 and 1975, forest experienced large scale deforestation at gross annual rate of 0.77 % which has declined to 0.29 % and 0.14 % for the 1975–1985 and 1985–1995 periods respectively. Quantification of annual rate of gross deforestation for the recent period indicates 0.07 % during 1995–2005 and 0.05 % during 2005–2013. The lower rates of deforestation during recent period support effectiveness of conservation measures taken at national level. It was found that deforestation rate has decreased in many biogeographic zones by 2005, except for Andaman & Nicobar Islands and North East. The major deforestation has mostly occurred due to conversion of forests to agriculture. The construction of reservoirs contributed to 4.1 % of forest loss. The tropical forests have experienced large scale deforestation followed by subtropical forests. The findings of the study will be useful to prioritize conservation and protection of forest cover at the regional level. It shall also provide a base for future research on the impacts of deforestation on carbon flux and biodiversity. © 2015, Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht.
Non destructive methods for quantification of carbon sequestration in tropical trees are inadequately developed. We described a standardized method for estimating carbon stock in teak (Tectona grandis Linn. F.). We developed linear allometric equations using girth at breast height (GBH), height and age to quantify above ground biomass (AGB). We used AGB to estimate carbon stock for teak trees of different age groups (1.5, 3.5, 7.5, 13.5, 18.5 and 23.5 years). The regression equation with GBH, y = 3.174x - 21.27, r 2=0.898 (p <0.01), was found precise and convenient due to the difficulty in determination of height and age in dense natural forests of teak. The equation was evaluated in teak agroforestry systems that included Triticum aestivum (wheat), Cicer arietinum (gram), Withania somnifera (ashwagandha), Avena fatua (wild oat) and Hordeum vulgare (barley) as agricultural crops established at Tropical Forest Research Institute, Jabalpur, M.P. (India). The annual carbon stock gain in teak in different agroforestry systems was in the order: teak-barley (60.47%) > teak-wheat (56.92%) > teak-wild oat (54.94%) > teak-gram (37.15%) > teak-ashwagandha (11.86%). The results from GBH-based regression equations provided satisfactory estimates of carbon stock in tropical trees. © 2013 Northeast Forestry University and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
The quantification of carbon stocks is vital for decision making in forest management, carbon stock change assessment and scientific applications. We applied the land degradation surveillance framework (LDSF) method with a sentinel site of (10 km × 10 km) to assess carbon stock levels and tree diversity in the Marsabit Forest Reserve (MFR). The above ground (ABG) carbon stock was estimated at 12.42 t/ha, while soil organic carbon (SOC) was 12.51 t/ha, with SOC densities increasing with increasing depth. The mean ABG carbon and SOC densities were higher in the least disturbed strata than the disturbed strata. The estimated ABG carbon and SOC stocks were significantly lower than the range observed in a typical dry tropical forest. Twenty-one tree species were recorded belonging to twelve families with the disturbed areas recording nine tree species while the least disturbed recording twelve species. Rubiaceae and Rutaceae were the richest families with four species each while Boraginaceae, Capparaceae, Flacourtiaceae, Tiliaceae, Violaceae, and Ochnaceae the least frequent with one species each. The most common tree species were, Croton megalocarpus, Drypetes gerrardii, Ochna insculpta, Strychnos henningsii and Vangueria madagascariensis. The forest recorded a basal diameter of 14.09 ± 12.15 cm, basal area of 0.016 m 2/ha with a mean height of 8.69 m. The basal size class distribution declined monotonically indicative of a stable population. Livestock grazing, selective logging, and firewood collection were the primary forms of anthropogenic activities recorded in the MFR despite the moratorium imposed on consumptive utilisation of forest products by the Marsabit County security committee. The Pearson correlation coefficient returned an inverse relationship between forest disturbance with SOC and ABG carbon in the disturbed strata suggesting that anthropogenic activities reduced carbon stocks in the MFR. Concerted efforts to mitigate anthropogenic impacts on the MFR could significantly increase its terrestrial carbon sequestration potential and the provision of critical ecosystem goods and services. © 2018 The Authors
With the aim of quantitatively evaluating the usefulness of phyllostomid bats as ecological indicators, we compared intra-family levels and feeding guilds between tropical old-growth forest and patches of secondary vegetation growing where the land had been used for shifting agriculture. There were significant differences between vegetation types in bat species composition, with the frugivore guild most abundant in secondary vegetation and the animalivore guild most abundant in the old-growth forest. These results are congruent with the findings for other Neotropical zones and appear to be associated with the type of soil management that allows secondary vegetation to grow. Using the Indicator Value method, two subfamilies, five genera and five species were found to have a significant indicator value. However, these numbers only represent a small proportion of the five subfamilies, 20 genera and 28 species recorded, indicating that under the disturbance conditions that characterize the study area, phyllostomid bats were poor ecological indicators. Even so, some species and subfamilies are useful as disturbance detectors.
Quercus wutaishanica is the dominant tree species in the natural ecosystem restoration of temperate forests in China, and it plays an active role in maintaining ecological balance. However, little is known about how ecosystem versatility develops during the restoration of forest ecosystems dominated by Q. wutaishanica. In this study, we investigated the species composition of the Q. wutaishanica community, soil nutrients, and their functional traits at various restoration stages, and comprehensively analyzed the correlations among them. At the early stage of restoration (10 years of restoration), there were Spiraea pubescens and Syringa pubescens in Q. wutaishanica community (87% of the total species), while had a larger niche width. In the middle of restoration (30 years of restoration), shannon and evenness indices were the largest, while soil total carbon, ammonium nitrogen and chlorophyll content of Q. wutaishanica leaves were the highest; among them, soil total carbon was 15.7% higher than that in 10 years of restoration, 32.4% higher than that in 40 years of restoration, ammonium nitrogen was 71.7% higher than that in 40 years of restoration, and chlorophyll content was 217.9% higher than that in 10 years of restoration, and 51.8% higher than that in 40 years of restoration. At the later stage of restoration (40 years of restoration), Lonicera ferdinandii occupied the dominant ecological niche, and soil available nitrogen, available phosphorus content and leaf thickness were the largest; while AN was 10.9% higher than that of 10 years of restoration, 16.5% higher than that of 30 years of restoration, AP was 60.6% higher than that of 10 years of restoration, 21.6% higher than that of 30 years of restoration, leaf thickness was 22.3% higher than that of 10 years of restoration, 84.9% higher than that of 30 years of restoration. However, the restriction of various soil nutrients was reduced. Our study highlighted the effectiveness of soil resource availability in plant communities during restoration, reduced competition for light among plants, and altered species richness. Furthermore, changes in the interrelationship between plant community composition and leaf functional traits of the dominant species responded positively to community restoration. These results further deepen our understanding of forest management and restoration of forest communities. In the future, it is necessary to comprehensively consider the influence of various factors on forest community restoration.
In this paper, I explore the question of how the costs of undertaking an important type of climate change mitigation should be shared amongst states seeking an environmentally effective and equitable response to global climate change. While much of the normative literature on climate mitigation has focused on burden sharing within the context of reductions in emissions of greenhouse gas, I explore the question of how the costs of protecting tropical forests in order to harness their climate mitigation potential should be distributed amongst developing and developed states. In response to this question, I outline and defend a ‘beneficiary pays’ account of forestry mitigation burden sharing that requires affluent states to finance measures supporting avoided deforestation while less affluent states, within whose territory these forests tend to be located, implement these measures. The normative basis for this account, I argue, is a principle of ‘unjust enrichment’ according to which developed states must bear much of the cost of avoided deforestation for its climate mitigation potential because of the huge economic benefits their citizens have accumulated from productive activities that have contributed to climate change. © 2015, The Author(s).
Premise of the study: Pioneer species of tropical trees allocate wood specific gravity (SG) differently across the radius. Some species exhibit relatively uniform, low SG wood, whereas many others exhibit linear increases in SG across the radius. Here, we measured changes in SG across the radius of Schizolobium parahyba (Fabaceae-Caesalpinioideae), a wide-ranging, neotropical pioneer, used extensively in land reclamation and forest restoration in Brazil. Methods: Pith-to-bark radial wood cores were extracted with increment borers from 42 trees at five sites, in Central and South America. Cores were cut into 1-cm segments whose specific gravities were determined and analyzed via linear and nonlinear regression. Wood specific gravity, very low initially at 0.15-0.20, doubled or tripled across the tree radius to 0.45-0.65 for large adults. Key results: Unlike linear increases in other tropical pioneers, the increases in Schizolobium were nonlinear (convex up). At one site with even-aged trees, the magnitude of the radial increase was similar in all trees, despite a 4-fold difference in diameter among trees, implying that the radial increases in Schizolobium were regulated by tree age, not by tree size. Conclusions: This unique pattern of development should provide an extended period of growth when SG is low, facilitating hyper-extension of the bole, at some risk of structural failure. Later in growth, the SG rate of increase accelerates, reinforcing what was a precarious bole. Overall, these results suggest a third model for xylem allocation in tropical trees, a model that may be associated with monopodial stem development and limited life span. © 2012 Botanical Society of America.
Decline in rainforest cover in many areas of Australia is being countered by various methods of forest reestablishment, including ecological restoration plantings, timber plantations, and unmanaged regrowth. We used assemblages of soil-and litter-dwelling mites to determine which style most closely recaptures the assemblage structure of mites associated with intact rainforest at 84 tropical and subtropical sites in eastern Australia. The six habitat types surveyed were pasture (the typical 'pre-restoration' state), unmanaged regrowth, monoculture forestry, multi-species forestry, ecological restoration and intact rainforest (the 'target'state). Forestry and ecological restoration sites were 5-20 years old. Mites were extracted from soil/litter samples and (excluding Oribatida) identified to family or to finer levels. For two diverse but taxonomically difficult superfamilies characteristic of rainforest, Uropodoidea and Trombidioidea, identification was to morphotaxon. Presence/absence data were analyzed in several ways. First, we used our data to create a list of 'indicator taxa' for pasture and rainforest, and determined the abundance of these indicators in each of the four reforestation methods. We also calculatedmorphotaxon richness for uropodoids and trombidioids and compared these values among habitat types. In both of these analyses, ecological restoration was most similar to rainforest. We used ordination and ANOSIM to compare mite assemblages among habitat-types. Although mite assemblages clearly distinguished between rainforest and pasture sites, they did not identify any of the four reforestation methods as being consistently similar to rainforest. They did, however, indicate that monoculture forestry and multi-species forestry plantations were often not readily distinguishable from pasture. This may have as much to do with silvicultural methods common to these plantations (e.g., pruning, herbicide application, and maintenance of a relatively open canopy) as to the low diversity of trees present in plantations. We conclude with a brief discussion of the utility of mites in rapid bioassessment programs in Australia, and suggest that the most pragmatic approach involves focusing on a few easily recognized indicators rather than on entire assemblages.
Regrowing secondary forests dominate tropical regions today, and a mechanistic understanding of their recovery dynamics provides important insights for conservation. In particular, land-use legacy effects on the fauna have rarely been investigated. One of the most ecologically dominant and functionally important animal groups in tropical forests are the ants. Here, we investigated the recovery of ant communities in a forest–agricultural habitat mosaic in the Ecuadorian Chocó region. We used a replicated chronosequence of previously used cacao plantations and pastures with 1–34 years of regeneration time to study the recovery dynamics of species communities and functional diversity across the two land-use legacies. We compared two independent components of responses on these community properties: resistance, which is measured as the proportion of an initial property that remains following the disturbance; and resilience, which is the rate of recovery relative to its loss. We found that compositional and trait structure similarity to old-growth forest communities increased with regeneration age, whereas ant species richness remained always at a high level along the chronosequence. Land-use legacies influenced species composition, with former cacao plantations showing higher resemblance to old-growth forests than former pastures along the chronosequence. While resistance was low for species composition and high for species richness and traits, all community properties had similarly high resilience. In essence, our results show that ant communities of the Chocó recovery rapidly, with former cacao reaching predicted old-growth forest community levels after 21 years and pastures after 29 years. Recovery in this community was faster than reported from other ecosystems and was likely facilitated by the low-intensity farming in agricultural sites and their proximity to old-growth forest remnants. Our study indicates the great recovery potential for this otherwise highly threatened biodiversity hotspot. © 2022 The Authors. Ecological Applications published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of The Ecological Society of America.
Deforestation of tropical forests has led to widespread loss and extirpation of forest bird species around the world, including the Hawaiian Islands which have experienced a dramatic loss of forests over the last 200–800 years. Given the important role birds play in forest ecosystem functions via seed dispersal and pollination, a bird community's response to forest restoration is an important measure of the success of such conservation actions. We evaluated the bird response to reforestation at an important bird sanctuary, Hakalau Forest National Wildlife Refuge, Hawai′i Island, using 26 years of bird count data. We show that most species from within the diverse avian community increased significantly, but species colonized the restoration forest at different rates. Distance from intact forest and time since restoration were both important predictors of colonization rate, interacting such that for most species it took more time to colonize areas farther from the intact forest. In addition, both forest cover and understory diversity helped to explain bird densities, but the effect varied among species, suggesting that different habitat requirements may help drive variation in colonization rates. This article provides the first detailed evaluation of how a diverse community of birds has responded to one of the largest, ongoing reforestation projects in Hawai′i. © 2017 Society for Ecological Restoration
Shifting cultivation is a widespread land-use in the tropics that is considered a major threat to rainforest diversity and structure. In the Philippines, a country with rich biodiversity and high rates of species endemism, shifting cultivation, locally termed as kaingin, is a major land-use and has been for centuries. Despite the potential impact of shifting cultivation on forests and its importance to many people, it is not clear how biodiversity and forest structure recover after kaingin abandonment in the country, and how well these post-kaingin secondary forests can complement the old-growth forests. We investigated parameters of forest diversity and structure along a fallow age gradient in secondary forests regenerating after kaingin abandonment in Leyte Island, the Philippines (elevation range: 445–650 m asl). We first measured the tree diversity and forest structure indices in regenerating secondary forests and old-growth forest. We then measured the recovery of tree diversity and forest structure parameters in relation to the old-growth forest. Finally, using linear mixed effect models (LMM), we assessed the effect of different environmental variables on the recovery of forest diversity and structure. We found significantly higher species density in the oldest fallow sites, while Shannon’s index, species evenness, stem number, basal area, and leaf area index were higher in the old-growth forest. A homogeneous species composition was found across the sites of older fallow age. Multivariate analysis revealed patch size as a strong predictor of tree diversity and forest structure recovery after shifting cultivation. Our study suggests that, secondary forests regenerating after shifting cultivation abandonment can recover rapidly. Although recovery of forest structure was not as rapid as the tree diversity, our older fallow sites contained a similar number of species as the old-growth forest. Many of these species are also endemic to the Philippines. Novel and emerging ecosystems like tropical secondary forests are of high conservation importance and can act as a refuge for dwindling tropical forest biodiversity. © 2020 The Authors. Ecology and Evolution published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Due to agriculture and logging, Costa Rica has lost many primary forests, making reforestation an important task. To judge the progress of reforestation, it is important to follow the reassembly of organismal communities within restored habitats. The COBIGA project near La Gamba, in the Golfo Dulce region of Costa Rica, aims at reforestation of lowland sites with native tree species. Ants, as ubiquitous and highly abundant terrestrial organisms, have a substantial influence on tropical ecosystems. The multiple roles include scavenging, predation, herbivory, and mutualistic interactions. We examined ant community responses to reveal the status of community regeneration and functional integrity. We compared the composition and diversity of the ant assemblages at three different age reforestation sites (2, 8, and 10 years old) with those at an old-growth forest as a reference site. By offering canned tuna fish at ground level along replicated transects, we observed 43 ant species representing six functional groups during the 2 months of sampling. Most of the observed ant species were omnivorous, but old-growth forests harbored a substantial number of other functional groups, such as generalized predators, arboreal predators, and arboreal omnivores. In contrast, the youngest reforestation site harbored a severely impoverished ant assemblage comprising mostly generalized polygynous and polydomous ant species from lower trophic levels. The within-site heterogeneity of the ant assemblages increased from the youngest to the oldest forest. In addition, our results show the importance of monitoring the progress of forest recovery to avoid the spread of invasive species into primary habitats.
This paper analyses the policy changes occurring in the forest and palm oil sectors of Sabah, Malaysian Borneo, through the lens of the transformational change concept. The aim is to first examine whether Sabah is transforming and, if so, to identify the determinants enabling or hindering the change. To determine if Sabah is transforming, we used two criteria: - (i) an ambitious change in the policy framework, that promotes forest conservation and sustainable use, and is moving away from business-as-usual activities; and (ii) the level of implementation of the policies that we identified as supporting transformational change. We found that Sabah very likely did intend to transform. We made this conclusion based on comparing changes in policies occurring in Sabah, and we decided if it is ambitious by primarily comparing Sabah's policies with other Malaysian states, the federal government, and internationally. We showed that: (i) Sabah decided to use voluntary international certification standards (private market instruments) like FSC and RSPO, while the other Malaysian states did not; (ii) they decided to protect more forest compared to national and international targets; and (iii) Sabah is an early mover as the state is one of the first in the world to adopt the RSPO Jurisdictional Approach. But intention needs to be followed by implementation, and this is where the state falls short. The policies in Sabah were not fully implemented because of the patronage system where the more powerful actors used their power to continue with business-as-usual activities, there is frequent political turnover in Sabah, and the state faced difficulty in meeting international standards. Our research shows that local leadership and a local transformational change coalition (civil society actively working in Sabah) mainly prompted the transformational change, although the promises of economic gains and better reputation also played a role. We conclude by emphasising the change must be made more compelling for political leaders, as part of a broader institutional structure, not only through the narrow focus on reducing deforestation but through the development of a more sustainable and equitable national economy, and that consumer countries should play a role in reducing pressures on forest by providing incentives to a state that manages its natural resources sustainably.
Protecting aboveground carbon stocks in tropical forests is essential for mitigating global climate change and is assumed to simultaneously conserve biodiversity. Although the relationship between tree diversity and carbon stocks is generally positive, the relationship remains unclear for consumers or decomposers. We assessed this relationship for multiple trophic levels across the tree of life (10 organismal groups, 3 kingdoms) in lowland rainforests of the Congo Basin. Comparisons across regrowth and old-growth forests evinced the expected positive relationship for trees, but not for other organismal groups. Moreover, differences in species composition between forests increased with difference in carbon stock. These variable associations across the tree of life contradict the implicit assumption that maximum co-benefits to biodiversity are associated with conservation of forests with the highest carbon storage. Initiatives targeting climate change mitigation and biodiversity conservation should include both old-growth and regenerating forests to optimally benefit biodiversity and carbon storage. © 2018 The Authors.
Combining protected areas with natural forest timber concessions may sustain larger forest landscapes than is possible via protected areas alone. However, the role of timber concessions in maintaining natural forest remains poorly characterized. An estimated 57% (303,525 km(2)) of Kalimantan's land area (532,100 km(2)) was covered by natural forest in 2000. About 14,212 km(2) (4.7%) had been cleared by 2010. Forests in oil palm concessions had been reduced by 5,600 km(2) (14.1%), while the figures for timber concessions are 1,336 km(2) (1.5%), and for protected forests are 1,122 km(2) (1.2%). These deforestation rates explain little about the relative performance of the different land use categories under equivalent conversion risks due to the confounding effects of location. An estimated 25% of lands allocated for timber harvesting in 2000 had their status changed to industrial plantation concessions in 2010. Based on a sample of 3,391 forest plots (161 km; 100 ha), and matching statistical analyses, 2000-2010 deforestation was on average 17.6 ha lower (95% C. I.: -22.3 ha--212.9 ha) in timber concession plots than in oil palm concession plots. When location effects were accounted for, deforestation rates in timber concessions and protected areas were not significantly different (Mean difference: 0.35 ha; 95% C. I.: -0.002 ha-0.7 ha). Natural forest timber concessions in Kalimantan had similar ability as protected areas to maintain forest cover during 2000-2010, provided the former were not reclassified to industrial plantation concessions. Our study indicates the desirability of the Government of Indonesia designating its natural forest timber concessions as protected areas under the IUCN Protected Area Category VI to protect them from reclassification.
Cross-scale studies combining information on policy instruments and on drivers of deforestation and forest degradation are key to design and implement effective forest protection measures. We investigated the scale and country dependency of stakeholder perceptions about future threats to tropical forests (e.g. agriculture, logging, woodfuel) and preferred policy instruments (e.g. reforestation, protected areas, combat illegal logging), by interviewing 224 representatives of forest-related institutions. We conducted analysis of variance and principal component analysis for eighteen variables across three countries (Zambia, Ecuador and the Philippines) and four spatial levels (from international to local). We found that the overall alertness about commercial drivers and the confidence in policy instruments are significantly lower at subnational levels and also in Zambia. Stakeholder expectations about the most important drivers and the most effective policies in the coming decade follow regional narratives, suggesting that there are no one-size-fits-all solutions in international forest policy. However, we found an unexpected consensus across scales, indicating potential for collaboration between institutions operating at different geographical levels. Overall, agriculture remains the driver with the highest expected influence (43%), while a strong favoritism for reforestation and forest restoration (38%) suggests a paradigm shift from protected areas to a stronger focus on integrative approaches. © 2023, The Author(s).
Over 20% of the world's tropical forests have been selectively logged, and large expanses are allocated for future timber extraction. Reduced-impact logging (RIL) is being promoted as best practice forestry that increases sustainability and lowers CO2 emissions from logging, by reducing collateral damage associated with timber extraction. RIL is also expected to minimize the impacts of selective logging on biodiversity, although this is yet to be thoroughly tested. We undertake the most comprehensive study to date to investigate the biodiversity impacts of RIL across multiple taxonomic groups. We quantified birds, bats and large mammal assemblage structures, using a before-after control-impact (BACI) design across 20 sample sites over a 5-year period. Faunal surveys utilized point counts, mist nets and line transects and yielded >250 species. We examined assemblage responses to logging, as well as partitions of feeding guild and strata (understorey vs. canopy), and then tested for relationships with logging intensity to assess the primary determinants of community composition. Community analysis revealed little effect of RIL on overall assemblages, as structure and composition were similar before and after logging, and between logging and control sites. Variation in bird assemblages was explained by natural rates of change over time, and not logging intensity. However, when partitioned by feeding guild and strata, the frugivorous and canopy bird ensembles changed as a result of RIL, although the latter was also associated with change over time. Bats exhibited variable changes post-logging that were not related to logging, whereas large mammals showed no change at all. Indicator species analysis and correlations with logging intensities revealed that some species exhibited idiosyncratic responses to RIL, whilst abundance change of most others was associated with time. Synthesis and applications. Our study demonstrates the relatively benign effect of reduced-impact logging (RIL) on birds, bats and large mammals in a neotropical forest context, and therefore, we propose that forest managers should improve timber extraction techniques more widely. If RIL is extensively adopted, forestry concessions could represent sizeable and important additions to the global conservation estate - over 4 million km2. © 2015 The Authors.
Remote sensing based monitoring of deforestation in the tropics is crucial to better understand global land use change and related changes in ecosystem service provision and to inform governments and civil society on the effectiveness their forest protection policies. In Brazil, deforestation has been closely coupled to the expansion of grazing and cropping systems primarily in the tropical forest, but no spatially explicit high resolution database on deforestation exists that captures tropical forest clearing prior to 2000. The open Landsat archive provides >45 years of imagery and is well suited for wall-to-wall assessments of historic deforestation dynamics which are valuable to policy development and environmental impact assessments. Image analysis procedures for reconstructing long-term deforestation dynamics over large areas need to cope with regions and time periods for which the archive contains heterogeneous data densities on a yearly and decadal basis. We create for the first time yearly 30 m maps of long term, annual deforestation dynamics (LTAD) covering the period from 1984 to 2014 for Pará and Mato Grosso, two Brazilian federal states that cover much of the Brazilian arc-of-deforestation. Our results provide valuable insights into historic deforestation trends, with annually increasing deforestation from 1990 to 1999 for both Pará and Mato Grosso. Peak deforestation occurred in 2004 after which deforestation leveled off – with a more pronounced decrease in Mato Grosso than in Pará. Contrary to Mato Grosso, Pará again experienced increasing annual forest clearing in recent years. For the time period after 2000, we provide an in-depth comparison with two widely used products, the Brazilian PRODES and the Global Forest Change maps (GFC, Hansen et al., 2013). Our deforestation estimates (407,000 ± 42,000 km2 at 95% confidence level) are above those provided by PRODES, while GFC results are closer to our estimates for the comparison period. Recent PRODES estimates are consistently below our and the GFC results. Overall, our results exemplify the potential of open image archives for multi-decadal, wall-to-wall and fine grain reconstruction of forest change. The presented approach prototypes similar assessments of tropical forest dynamics globally faced with issues of data scarcity. © 2018 Elsevier Inc.
Afforestation is considered as an effective method for alleviating the rising of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO                             2                             ) concentration through the accumulation and long-term storage of carbon (C) in the vegetation and soil. However, it is still unknown whether soil C accumulation in the restored forests could eventually recover to the equivalent level of the undisturbed forests and much less is known about how afforestation will affect C stabilization. Here we conducted a field study in degraded tropical forests of south China. The aim was to evaluate the recovery of soil C stock following afforestation by comparing different C fractions in soils (0–10 cm and 10–20 cm) in two reforested forests [a restored secondary forest (RSF) and a managed Eucalyptus plantation (MEP)] to those in a bare land (BL) and a nearby undisturbed forest (UF). Results showed that after 56-year afforestation at the bare lands, C stocks in both soil layers were significantly increased with an increase greater in the RSF than the MEP, while C recalcitrant indices (RI) were reduced. Soil C stock in the RSF recovered to a similar level to the UF, but soil RI in the RSF was still lower than the UF particularly in the 10–20 cm layer. The calculated capacity of soil C sequestration with the product of soil C stock and its RI followed the order of UF > RSF > MEP > BL. Our results demonstrate that afforestation on degraded tropical lands could recover soil C stock within a few decades, but C stabilization would be reduced.                          © 2019
Understanding of how biodiversity can recover after anthropogenic disturbances, such as selective logging, is important for planning conservation strategies for tropical forests and for more sustainable timber harvest regimes. However, the knowledge of insect community compositions in regenerating logged forests is still limited, especially in the Afrotropics. Here, we evaluated the recovery patterns of fruit-feeding butterfly communities in four different-aged secondary forest compartments and one primary forest compartment in the Budongo Central Forest Reserve, Uganda. In each compartment, butterflies were sampled monthly for five consecutive months in 2017 using traps baited with fermented bananas. A total of 3,778 individuals, representing 82 species (78 identified at the species level and four morphogroups) were recorded. The fruit-feeding butterfly community composition differed among forest compartments and study months. Fruit-feeding butterfly communities of the oldest 72-year-old secondary forest compartment were similar to the primary forest compartment. In the younger secondary forest compartments the seasonal variation was large; especially the communities of the “core” rainy season months were distinct from the communities in primary and oldest secondary forest. The majority of individuals captured from both primary and secondary forests represented forest-dependent species. Primary forests are irreplaceable for preserving the diversity of tropical forests in the long-term. Nevertheless, our study demonstrates that selective logging can allow fruit-feeding butterfly community composition to recover if enough time (>70 years) is allowed for recovery. © 2021 The Authors
The relationship between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning is an important issue in ecology. Plant functional traits and their diversity are key determinants of ecosystem function in changing environments. Understanding the successional dynamics of functional features in forest ecosystems is a first step to their sustainable management. In this study, we tested the changes in functional community composition with succession in tropical monsoon forests in Xishuangbanna, China. We sampled 33 plots at three successional stages-~40-year-old secondary forests, ~60-year-old secondary forests, and old growth forests-following the abandonment of the shifting cultivation land. Community-level functional traits were calculated based on measurements of nine functional traits for 135 woody plant species. The results show that the community structures and species composition of the old-growth forests were significantly different to those of the secondary stands. The species diversity, including species richness (S), the Shannon-Weaver index (H), and Pielou's evenness (J), significantly increased during the recovery process after shifting cultivation. The seven studied leaf functional traits (deciduousness, specific leaf area, leaf dry matter content, leaf nitrogen content, leaf phosphorus content, leaf potassium content and leaf carbon content) changed from conservative to acquisitive syndromes during the recovery process, whereas wood density showed the opposite pattern, and seed mass showed no significant change, suggesting that leaf traits are more sensitive to environmental changes than wood or seed traits. The functional richness increased during the recovery process, whereas the functional evenness and divergence had the highest values in the 60-year-old secondary communities. Soil nutrients significantly influenced functional traits, but their effects on functional diversity were less obvious during the secondary succession after shifting cultivation. Our study indicates that the recovery of tropical monsoon forests is rather slow; secondary stands recover far less than the old growth stands in terms of community structure and species and functional diversity, even after about half a century of recovery, highlighting the importance of the conservation of old growth tropical monsoon forest ecosystems. © 2018 by the authors.
1. As mature tropical forests disappear, secondary forests with their potential to conserve mature tropical forest species are increasingly of interest in a conservation context. 2. We investigated the recovery of litter inhabiting beetle diversity and composition during natural forest regeneration in the coastal submontane forest of Southern Brazil, using chronosequences on two different soil types: cambisol and gleysol. Secondary forests, ranging in ages from 5 to 50 years, as well as old-growth forests were studied. Beetles were sifted from leaf litter and extracted using the Winkler technique. 3. Young secondary forests had a very low species density and a significantly different and heterogeneous species composition compared to old-growth forests. During forest regeneration, species density greatly increased and the species composition of older secondary forests was similar to that of old-growth forests. The recovery pattern of species density and composition differed between soil types; nonetheless, they showed the same tendencies generally. Thus, mature secondary forests of about 35-50 years can be assumed to contribute substantially to the maintenance of forest beetle species. 4. Litter quantity was not only significantly correlated with species density; but, even reflected the density pattern of both soil types. Thus, litter quantity is an important factor for maintaining or recovering high beetle densities. The composition of beetle assemblages was strongly affected by soil type. Thus, soil type should be considered in regional biodiversity monitoring and conservation actions. © 2010 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2010 The Royal Entomological Society.
Periodic flooding of trees in tropical floodplains and reservoirs where water levels fluctuate is a common phenomenon. The alternating terrestrial and aquatic periods with advancing and receding floods poses a variety of constraints to the plants growing in this habitat. If flooding is recurrent before the plants recover from previous flooding, injuries will accumulate and serious damage may occur. Therefore, when assessing plant resistance to flooding, it is important to consider the ability of plants to recover from transient waterlogging. The success of tree planting on floodplain and reservoir depends not only on the tree's tolerance to submersion, but also on their subsequent recovery. Previous studies on physiological and growth responses of tree species to flooding have mostly focused on the responses to continuous flooding, but little is known about the responses to subsequent recovery after the removal of the flooding stress. Recovery effects of gas exchange, chlorophyll fluorescence and membrane permeability of Melaleuca alternifolia seedlings, a tall shrub species used in floodplain and reservoir forest restoration in southern China, were studied after submersion. Throughout a 30-day submersion and another 70-day recovery period, the survival rates of M. alternifolia seedlings were 100%. After 30-day submersion, pronounced decrease of chlorophyll content, net photosynthetic rate (Pn), stomatal conductance(Gs), transpiration rate(Tr), the maximum quantum efficiency of the photosystem II (Fv/Fm), photochemical quenching coefficient (qP), and increase of non-photochemical quenching (NPQ), membrane permeability in the period after submersion, gradual increase of chlorophyll content, Pn, Gs, Tr, Fv/Fm, qP, and decrease of NPQ, membrane permeability in the recovered seedlings were found, and the above parameters in the recovered seedlings reached the levels similar to the control after 60-day recovery. Our study demonstrated that M. alternifolia seedlings is tolerant of flooding, and seedlings of this species would be suitable for afforestation in river banks and reservoir banks exposed to intermittent flooding.
As primary forest is cleared, pastures and secondary forest occupy an increasing space in the Amazonian landscape. We evaluated the effect of forest clearing on a soil macrofauna (invertebrate) community in a smallbolder farming system of southeastern Amazonia. We sampled the soil macrofauna in 22 plots of forest, upland rice fields, pastures, and fallows of different ages. In total, we collected 10, 728 invertebrates. In cleared plots the species richness per plot of the soil macrofauna fell from 76 to 30 species per plot immediately after forest clearance, and the composition of the new community was different. Ants, termites, and spiders were most affected by the disturbance. In plots deforested several years before, the effect of forest clearance was highly dependent on the type of land use (pasture or fallow). In fallows, the community was similar to the initial state. The species richness per plot in old fallows rose to 66, and the composition was closer to the primary forests than to the other types of land use. On the contrary, in the pastures the species richness per plot remained low at 47. In fallows, all the groups showed a richness close to that in primary forest, whereas in the forest only the richness of earthworms and Coleoptera recovered. Our results show that forest clearing constitutes a major disturbance for the soil macrofauna and that the recovery potential of the soil macrofauna after 6 or 7 years is much higher in fallows than in pastures. Thus, fallows may play a crucial role in the conservation of soil macrofauna.
Soil phosphorus (P) is a major driver of forest development and a critically limited nutrient in tropical soils, especially when topsoil is removed by mining. This nutrient can be present in soils in the form of different fractions, which have direct consequences for P availability to plants and, consequently, for restoration success. Therefore, understanding how the stocks of different soil P fractions change over the restoration process can be essential for guiding restoration interventions, monitoring, and adaptive management. Here, we investigated the recovery of soil P fractions by forest restoration interventions on bauxite mine sites in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. We assessed the concentration of different fractions of soil organic and inorganic P at (1) a bauxite mine prepared for restoration; (2) two former bauxite mines undergoing forest restoration for 6 and 24 years; and (3) an old-growth forest remnant. Overall, restored areas recovered levels of labile organic P (Po-NaHCO3) at 5–40 cm and of moderately labile organic P (Po-NaOH) at different depths, exhibiting concentrations similar to those found in a conserved forest. The use of P-rich fertilizers and forest topsoil may have greatly contributed to this outcome. Some other fractions, however, recovered only after 24 years of restoration. Other inorganic P fractions did not differ among mined, restored, and conserved sites: nonlabile Pi (residual P and P-HCl), labile Pi (Pi-NaHCO3), and moderately labile Pi (Pi-NaOH). Forest restoration was able to promote efficient recovery of important soil P fractions, highlighting the value of restoration efforts to mitigate soil degradation by mining. © 2020 Society for Ecological Restoration
Characterising the successional stages of secondary forests recovery is key to understanding and aiding forest landscape restoration. To determine the successional stages - and recovery pathways - for mixed dipterocarp forest in Dong Nai Biosphere Reserve (DNBR), Southern Vietnam, we used a dataset of 61 pairs of 1000 m2 plots, representing a range of recovery times (21–38 years), disturbances, and soil types with five categories: (1) Agent Orange affected + Logging (AO + Logging), (2) Logging, (3) Logging + Inundated, (4) Assisted Natural Regeneration + Logging (ANR + Logging) and (5) Protection. We first grouped recovered forest stands based on structure, composition, and dominant species. Each group was then identified by the dominant species types (bamboo, deciduous or evergreen) and indicator species. The forest stand characteristics, including species composition, basal area, tree size distribution, and species biodiversity were assessed for correlation with three site factors: soil type, disturbance type, and recovery time. Our results show that after 27 years recovery, logged mixed dipterocarp forest in DNBR can recover back to evergreen mixed dipterocarp forest, or change to bamboo or deciduous forests. The change in forest community depended on soil characteristics, especially soil water conditions, which are strongly correlated with topography. In addition, the recovered forest structures varied according to disturbance type and recovery time. By determining recovery stage, and the major drivers of the recovery process, site-specific ecological restoration techniques for seasonal tropical forest management can be suggested. Most recovered forest in DNBR is in a late or intermediate stage of vegetation development. However, retrogression and recovery deceleration were associated with invaders, such as grasses, climbers and bamboos, suggesting that their control is necessary in order to accelerate the natural development of native vegetation. © 2018 Elsevier B.V.
The interplay between disturbance and recovery has implications in understanding the dynamics of tropical forests. The high magnitude earthquake of 9.3Mw and the subsequent tsunami in Indian Ocean had severe impacts on the coastal biodiversity of Southeast Asia. Close vicinity of the Nicobar Islands to the earthquake epicenter has been attributed to the maximum damage levels in terms of coastal biodiversity as well as human lives. Littoral forests that are important for the survival of many endemic flora and fauna of Nicobar Islands were badly affected. We studied the recovery of littoral forest tree community from 25 sites on eight islands in Nicobar group during 2009-2011 where the tsunami had wiped out all the vegetation. Changes in woody plants≥3.2cm Diameter at breast height (DBH) were monitored for 62 plots of 50×20m (0.1ha.) for two consecutive years, 2009-2010 and 2010-2011. Two kinds of regenerating vegetation were identified namely, Rubble-affected Vegetation (RV) where substrate was found deposited with sand and coral rubbles during tsunami and Loamy Vegetation (LV) where the substrate remained as sand-loamy without any deposition. A total of 5528 tree individuals of 120 species and a total of 5843 tree individuals of 127 species were recorded during the first and the second year, respectively. Species diversity was high in the second year for both the vegetation types, where LV with 120 species had higher species diversity than RV (43 species). The species composition differed among vegetation types. Macaranga peltata and Ficus hispida were dominant in LV, and Casuarina equisetifolia and Hibiscus tiliaceus were dominant in RV. Mean species richness, stem density and basal area plot-1 varied significantly between RV and LV (P<0.0001). LV showed higher values for variables than RV. The values for all the variables increased during the second year, except for stem density in LV and show significant differences between the years for RV and LV (P<0.01). Species richness plot-1 in LV may reach the mature forest value in two years if the species accumulation proceeds at the observed rate. We inferred that the natural recovery of vegetation was higher in the soil substratum unaffected LV than the debris deposited RV. Hence, the restoration of soil at RV sites is important for promoting the natural colonization of pioneer and old-growth forest species. Continuous monitoring of these plots may provide useful information on the long lasting impacts and recovery of littoral forest after tsunami. © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
Oil palm plantations are intensively managed agricultural systems that increasingly dominate certain tropical regions. Oil palm monocultures have been criticized because of their reduced biodiversity compared to the forests they historically replaced, and because of their negative impact on soils, water, and climate. We experimentally test whether less intensive management schemes may enhance biodiversity and lessen detrimental effects on the environment while maintaining high yields. We compare reduced vs. conventional fertilization, as well as mechanical vs. chemical weed control (with herbicides) in a long-term, full-factorial, multidisciplinary experiment. We conducted the experiment in an oil palm company estate in Sumatra, Indonesia, and report the results of the first 2 years. We measured soil nutrients and functions, surveyed above- and below-ground organisms, tracked oil palm condition and productivity, and calculated plantation gross margins. Plants, aboveground arthropods, and belowground animals were positively affected by mechanical vs. chemical weed control, but we could not detect effects on birds and bats. There were no detectable negative effects of reduced fertilization or mechanical weeding on oil palm yields, fine roots, or leaf area index. Also, we could not detect detrimental effects of the reduced fertilization and mechanical weeding on soil nutrients and functions (mineral nitrogen, bulk density, and litter decomposition), but water infiltration and base saturation tended to be higher under mechanical weeding, while soil moisture, and microbial biomass varied with treatment. Economic performance, measured as gross margins, was higher under reduced fertilization. There might be a delayed response of oil palm to the different management schemes applied, so results of future years may confirm whether this is a sustainable management strategy. Nevertheless, the initial effects of the experiment are encouraging to consider less intensive management practices as economically and ecologically viable options for oil palm plantations. © Copyright © 2019 Darras, Corre, Formaglio, Tjoa, Potapov, Brambach, Sibhatu, Grass, Rubiano, Buchori, Drescher, Fardiansah, Hölscher, Irawan, Kneib, Krashevska, Krause, Kreft, Li, Maraun, Polle, Ryadin, Rembold, Stiegler, Scheu, Tarigan, Valdés-Uribe, Yadi, Tscharntke and Veldkamp.
25.5 Conclusions: In conclusion, the surviving tropical forest at the onset of the 21st century is a powerhouse of biological diversity, and we have the responsibility to make it sustainable. At the landscape level, we should maintain defined minimum areas of natural forest wherever feasible, and vigorously pursue reforestation in other areas. We should aim at soil, water, and biodiversity conservation, and multiple and sustainable use of forests. It is important that the local people accept the principles of planting native rather than exotic species, and mixed species rather than monoculture, as well as providing structural diversity to the plantation profile. In Southeast Asia and Papua New Guinea, experimental work on reforestation using indigenous tree species has already begun (Sakurai 1997; Tropical Forest Reforestation Technology Research Association 1997). In Australia, the Rainforest Cooperative Research Centre is conducting research into biodiversity values in reforestation in order to assess the patterns, causes, and consequences of biotic changes during reforestation, and to devise restoration methods within multiple-use landscapes (Catterall 2000). The data accumulating at the Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites of intact forests will permit testing of the parameters to be used in sustainability models. Comprehensive baseline data are also expected from the International Biodiversity Observation Year (IBOY), which started in 2001 (DIWPA: DIVERSITAS in Western Pacific and Asia, IUBS). Conservation priorities of biodiversity hot spots have already been identified on a global basis (Myers et al. 2000). It is hoped that future reforestation will be able to incorporate regional biodiversity conservation into its program. © Springer-Verlag Tokyo 2006. All rights reserved.
Smallholder livelihoods and the restoration of tropical forests are intimately intertwined. To address the question of how reforestation affects livelihoods and how they in turn affect reforestation, a meta-synthesis was undertaken of 339 scientific publications identified from a systematic literature search. This study is focused on smallholders in the humid tropics, and uses the Sustainable Livelihoods Framework, which was developed by the UK Department for International Development as the framework for analysis. The links between reforestation and livelihoods are found to be diverse and highly interconnected. Reforestation is only one of a smallholder's activities and typically forms part of a mosaic of land uses across a landscape. Therefore, reforestation should be designed, managed and evaluated under the perspective of a diverse livelihood portfolio, and not as a single activity isolated from other portfolio components, especially under current landscape approaches. It is important for reforestation to be a complementary rather than a competitive livelihood activity. Reforestation has great potential to address poverty, and to increase smallholder socio-ecological resilience and local social equity. However, reforestation outcomes are often suboptimal. Assessing smallholder capacity and the surrounding environment prior to reforestation, and addressing limiting local capacities and conditions in a timely manner, may enhance the likelihood of optimal benefits. © 2020 Elsevier Ltd
Direct seeding is a promising technique for reforestation, but it has been poorly studied in tropical forests. The research aims to assess the briquette composition, size and site preparation, and sowing date on the seedling survival and early growth of Gmelina arborea direct seeding at 12 months in Parung Panjang, Bogor. The briquette was printed using some materials, i.e., soil, compost, charcoal, lime and tapioca as a glue, and tested in a greenhouse to obtain the optimal seed germination. The complete randomized design was used to assess the optimum seed briquette composition on germination parameters in the greenhouse, while a randomized block design was used to assess the eight combinations of briquette sizes and site preparation techniques on the seedling survival and growth. The briquette composition of soil 10%, compost 45%, rice husk charcoal 35%, lime 5%, and tapioca 5% resulted in the best germination capacity (78.5%) and other germination parameters. Gmelina arborea seed briquette, which had the size of diameter 5 cm and thickness 3 cm sowed by land clearing and briquette burial, showed the highest seedling survival (56.8%) and growth (seedling height 120.32 cm and diameter 15.92 mm) compared to other sizes. The sowing date also significantly influenced the survival of direct seeding. The application on the early-middle rainy season (the middle of December) was optimal for direct seeding because of the stable rainy frequency in Parung Panjang, Bogor. This study supports the use of direct seeding of the species being studied, but the methods could be improved to include a more significant number of species. © Published under licence by IOP Publishing Ltd.
The Cerrado (Brazilian savanna) is the second largest biome in Brazil, covering 22% of the country, and campo rupestre is one of the most biodiverse ecosystem. Campo rupestre are extremely old mountaintop tropical ecosystems, composed of a mosaic of herbaceous, shrubland and savanna vegetation, generally located above 900 m above sea level characterized by shallow, acidic and nutrient-poor soils. In the context of increased land-use changes, effective conservation and management projects appear necessary to guarantee the conservation of these ecosystems. Although fire is a natural disturbance in campo rupestre, the effects of fire on vegetation dynamics remain poorly understood. Our objective was to assess the effects of fire on vegetation recovery and plant composition on both the short- and long-term in the main herbaceous vegetation types: the sandy and stony grasslands. We monitored plant community composition before and after a wildfire in order to assess the short-term vegetation recovery. Diachronic analyses of grasslands burnt at various dates were used to understand the effects of fire on the long-term vegetation dynamics. Our results highlighted a rapid recovery of campo rupestre vegetation after wildfires, suggesting a high adaptation to fire of plant communities. We did not find a significant variation in species richness of sandy grasslands according to time after fire, whereas higher species richness was observed in the recently burnt stony grasslands. No change in plant composition of campo rupestre in response to fire was highlighted, probably due to the high heterogeneity of this ecosystem. After fire, biomass gradually increased over time in both vegetation types. High biomass accumulation could lead to stronger fires. Further studies are necessary to understand the relationship between biomass accumulation and fire intensity in campo rupestre in order to set up adapted fire management strategies to conserve campo rupestre biodiversity. © 2017 Elsevier GmbH
Land-use and climate change are impacting species and ecosystems around the world. The reproductive phase of plants is especially vulnerable to environmental change. Global environmental changes normally act collectively with nonlinearities and synergistic interactions being reported. Here we combined two techniques (i.e. a space-for-time substitution approach and a full factorial experiment) to assess the combined effects of climate and land-use change on the regeneration (seed production, seed germination and seedling survival and growth) of four subtropical forest tree species of the southern Central Andes (Yungas forest) in Argentina. We focus on temperature and precipitation changes and on decreased shading at the forest floor, a likely impact of changing land-use and management. We detected species-specific and phase-specific responses. Seed mass and quality was influenced by elevation (here used as a proxy for temperature change) while germination, seedling survival and growth were mainly affected by changes in the seedbed conditions (i.e. changes in shading and in moisture related to precipitation change). Despite the influence of environmental conditions on all the phases of plant regeneration studied here, we show that the major bottleneck of the regeneration phase of these species is germination. Interactive effects between the elevation of the seeds’ provenance, precipitation and shading underpin the importance of studying the effects of different environmental changes collectively on plant regeneration to better forecast the effects of climate and land-use change on the Yungas forest. © 2018 Elsevier B.V.
Abandoned coconut plantations occur on tropical islands worldwide. Despite their adverse effect on local biodiversity, there is a paucity of information concerning rehabilitation methods and their respective outcomes. Previous accounts of coconut forest rehabilitation programs exclusively advocate clearcutting followed by planting of native saplings. Having experienced considerable practical and ecological complications from clearcutting on D'Arros Island, Republic of Seychelles, an alternative protocol was developed in which the upper coconut canopy was temporarily preserved so that the resultant shady environment on the forest floor might accelerate natural forest succession. Activities and progress were monitored in three experimental plots and compared to previously clearcut sites. Results suggest that the proposed method allows rehabilitation of abandoned coconut forests to be achieved sooner and at a lesser cost than clearcutting. © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
Millions of people are dependent on tropical forests for livelihood. However, their dependence on meagre incomes from nontimber forest products (NTFPs) and payment for ecosystem services (PES) are leading to continuing poverty. It is doubtful if the program, Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) has yet achieved much in its primary goal of forest conservation, and the chance of it helping to alleviate rural poverty is slim. Forest conservation per se hardly creates economic opportunities, beyond survival, for rural people. Our efforts for conserving forests and their biodiversity will remain less effective as long as there are so many enclaves of trenchant poverty within and around them in the landscapes and we continue to by-pass practical routes to poverty alleviation. Poverty can be alleviated only if local actions spur economic development in which local communities have a rightful and fair share and can earn rewards for their entrepreneurships. Wood is a renewable, recyclable, versatile and sustainable natural resource. The demands for wood products are rising in developing countries, as their economies grow. They also face endemic wood deficits. This provides opportunities to pro-actively develop commercial forestry as a path to rural development and poverty alleviation. That would also assist national climate change mitigation measures, because forests sequester carbon, wood products are largely carbon positive and timber- based options are on hand to substitute for high emission materials such as concrete, steel and aluminium used to build our living environments. To move along this path, the businesses of tree growing by small-growers and local value adding should be strengthened, catalysing the entrepreneurial spirits of local people. Central to this is the need to put in place strategies to improve the productivity of and value from small scale enterprises; yet there is a serious lack of research and application to serve this key need. Among other constraints faced by small-growers include, lack of transparent and legal rights to land ownership in several countries, layers of bureaucratic regulations and the current international forest certification systems which are cumbersome and unaffordable for small-growers. Actions are possible and needed for simplifying or removing road blocks on all these fronts, along with, importantly, the development of markets for diverse products. Growth of the forestry sector as an engine for rural development warrants far greater recognition and investment than has been the case so far. We need to re-imagine and strengthen the role of forestry including commercial wood business - green growth - as an effective path to rural development and poverty alleviation. © 2019
Forests are essential for the ecological functioning providing critical habitats for biodiversity and hold large biomass, which are affected by bioclimatic and topographical variables. This study investigated the topographic factor (elevation) that play an important role in forest diversity and biomass distribution. The present study examined the relationship between topographical (viz. elevation, slope, aspects) and Bioclimatic variables (temperature/ precipitation) with measured biomass of Tropical forests. The study area selected is Sariska Tiger Reserve (STR), a tropical forest with high conservation priorities with fewer disturbances. Earth observation datasets such as ALOS-PALSAR, SRTM, and GEDI aboveground biomass density (AGBD) are retrieved in the Cloud computing platform (GGE) to generate outcomes. The study also utilized Bioclimatic variables such as maximum, minimum and mean temperature during warmest/coldest month and warmest, coldest, wettest, driest Quarters. GEDI derived mean biomass was observed to be 1.3 to 95 Mg/ha ± (0.68–5.88 SD). The data was statistically analyzed using correlation coefficient (R) for topographic and bioclimatic variables. Results specified six Biodiversity indices (BDI), and six bioclimatic variables during analysis. Correlation coefficient (R) indicated strong positive relationship of three biodiversity indices with elevation for Shannon - Weiner index (R = 0.71) followed by Margalef richness index (R = 0.65) and reciprocal Simpson index (R = 0.61). While Buzas and Gibson Index (R=−0.45), Berger dominance index (R=−0.27), and Menhinick index (R=−0.51) showed negative correlation with elevation. Overall, topographic and bioclimatic variables are governed by elevation for biomass and carbon stocks (with r=−0.41). Similarly, correlation coefficient (R) of elevation against max temperature during Warmest month (MTMW), Warmest Quarter (MTWarQ) and Wettest Quarter (MTWetQ) indicated strong negative correlation with R value of −0.88, −0.88, and − 0.87 respectivelry. It is followed by MTColdest Quarter (R=−0.85) and MinTCM (R=−0.84). while lowest correlation was shown by Min Temp during Driest Quarter with R=−0.23. Outcomes showed declining trends of biomass stocks ranged from 129.44 mg/t to 7.07 mg/t with significantly increasing trends till mid elevation and thereafter decreasing trends of tree biomass with increasing elevation. Highest biomass of 95 mg/t (GEDI derived) and Field measured Biomass of 129.44 mg/t was observed at intermediate elevation of 530 m after that showed decline in biomass distribution. Elevation can act as a dominant determinant for AGB in tropical forest for several reasons, such as topographic variations, temperature variations, precipitation patterns, soil nutrient availability, species adaptation, disturbance regimes, and most influencing one is human activities. Therefore, elevation can be a crucial predictor in conjunction with other factors to influence biomass at undisturbed places with high slopes and controlled species richness, distribution and biomass accumulation in tree species. © International Society for Tropical Ecology 2024.
Many attempts to restore tropical forests at deforested lands have failed, mostly because the traits of planted species were inappropriate without information on their regeneration. Thus, a new approach for determining the ability of tree species to reestablish in degraded forest land is necessary for restoration practices. We investigated plant functional traits and the factors affecting restoration success in forest communities that had been restored both by natural regeneration and enrichment plantations, in abandoned shifting-cultivation areas within the tropical montane forests of Suthep-Pui National Park Chiang Mai, northern Thailand. Five 1-ha permanent plots (100. m. ×. 100. m) were established in three different forest management areas: primary forest, secondary forest, and enrichment plantations. The species composition of canopy trees, regenerated seedlings, and saplings were analyzed to determine tree functional traits and the factors governing forest composition, such as the physical environment and recruitment limitation. We found that trees within primary forest tended to have relatively heavier wood and larger seeds than secondary forest species. The dominance of certain species in primary forests was significantly correlated with wood density and seed size, although the correlations in secondary forests and enriched plantations varied among stands. The seedlings of the species with high leaf toughness, large leaf mass area, and wood density tended to be more sensitive to environmental conditions. Species with larger seeds tended to have a more limited recruitment, suggesting that enrichment plantations were more suitable for the establishment of these species. Our results suggest that the restoration of primary forest by natural regeneration is difficult because it is prevented by both environmental conditions and recruitment limitation. The contribution of these factors was species-dependent, which could be partly predicted by their functional traits. © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
The present projected rates of global species loss emphasize the need to precisely understand how biodiversity promotes ecosystem function in different types of ecosystems. Some known mechanisms such as niche complementarity and selection effects have been tested to explain the biodiversity-ecosystem function (BEF) relationships in several ecosystems, but less work has been done in high-altitude forests with environmental stresses. Therefore, we measured key diversity attributes including species richness (SR), functional trait diversity (Rao's quadratic entropy, RaoQ), and mean pairwise distance (MPD) in functional trait space and compare them to an important functional attribute (aboveground biomass, AGB, as a proxy for productivity) and resource stress (soil phosphorus). The results showed that both SR and RaoQ showed positive relationships with AGB, while MPD exhibited a negative relationship with AGB, suggesting that increases in plant species ameliorated by neighboring plants with similar functional and evolutionary roles in a stressful environment will help enhance ecosystem productivity. Together with plant diversity, the proportion of variance in AGB increased from 23.90 to 65.80% when soil phosphorus was added into analyses, suggesting that SR, RaoQ, and MPD all exhibit potentiality in the variation of AGB and that soil nutrients play important roles in the BEF relationships. The BEF relationships in tropical cloud forests are mediated by facilitative interactions due to low soil phosphorus. Our findings suggested that conservation of neighboring plant species with functional similarity and close relatedness be important in these forest managements. Additionally, our results showed a comprehensive consideration of environmental factors in BEF relationship analysis. © Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022.
Fires are increasingly affecting tropical biomes, where landscape-fire interactions remain understudied. We investigate the fire-proneness—the likelihood of a land use or land cover (LULC) type burning more or less than expected based on availability—in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest (AF). This biodiversity hotspot is increasingly affected by fires due to human activities and climate change. Using a selection ratio-based approach, we analyzed fire-LULC interactions in 40,869 fires over a 35-year period (1987–2022) across various ecoregions in the AF. Our findings revealed that secondary forests, forest areas that have regrown after major disturbances, burned 61% more than expected by chance, whereas old-growth forests, native forests that have developed over very long periods, burned 57% less than expected, highlighting a nearly inverse relationship in their fire-proneness. Interestingly, our data indicate that pastures in the AF are less prone to fire than expected, despite being considered among the land uses that burn the most in Brazil. Other LULCs showed variable fire-proneness, with some differences between ecoregions. Over time, the fire-proneness of secondary forests decreased, likely due to forest aging and changes in land management practices. We emphasize the necessity for tailored fire management strategies that address the unique vulnerabilities of secondary forests, particularly in the context of ongoing restoration efforts aimed at increasing native forests. Effective measures, including the implementation of 'fire-smart management' practices and enhancing the perceived value of secondary forests among local communities, are crucial for mitigating fire risks. Integrating these strategies with incentive-based approaches can bolster fire prevention, ensuring the long-term success of restoration programs. Our study provides a framework for understanding fire-landscape dynamics in tropical forests and offers actionable insights for practitioners working to safeguard these biomes from the escalating threat of wildfires. © 2025 The Authors
Restoration has now emerged as a global priority, with international initiatives such as the “UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration (2021–2030)”. To fulfill the large-scale global restoration ambitions, an essential step is the monitoring of vegetation recovery after restoration interventions. This study aimed to evaluate the utility of remotely sensed vegetation indices, using the normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) and enhanced vegetation index (EVI), to monitor the progress of forest regeneration across a tropical forest restoration project area in Kibale National Park, Uganda. Using the chronosequence approach, results indicated non-linear patterns in NDVI and EVI across the first 25 years of recovery. Both NDVI and EVI increased for the first 10 years of forest regeneration. This 'greening' phase could be used as the indicator of the successful onset of forest recovery. In particular, the decline of elephant grass, and the consequent arrival of shrubs and trees, can be detected as an increase in NDVI. Primary forests differed from the 25-year-old regenerating forests based on the unique combination of low mean and low seasonal variation in EVI. Our results, therefore, suggest that the long-term success of forest restoration could be monitored by evaluating how closely the combination of mean, and degree of seasonal variation in EVI, resembles that observed in the primary forest. © 2021 The Authors. Land Degradation & Development published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Across the globe, non-native plant species have become abundant in many tropical forests, resulting in altered patterns of biological diversity and species composition, and impacting important ecosystem functions. However, long-term experimental research on the efficacy of non-native tree removal for tropical forest restoration remains limited. We investigated the removal of non-native tree species in a mesic tropical forest in Hawaiʻi, where rates of endemism and endangerment of plant species is high and multiple non-native tree species are abundant. As a collaboration between resource managers and researchers, we tested the effects of non-native tree removal on overstory and understory metrics of restoration using three restoration approaches: “total cut” (cutting all non-native trees); “girdle” (girdle of all non-native trees); and “selective cut” (cutting approximately 50% of non-native trees). Prior to removal, we established permanent plots (four 10 × 10 m plots per restoration treatment, with 10 1 × 1 m subplots in each), then monitored them over 10 years. Across all treatments, canopy openness increased significantly post restoration, peaked after three years, then decreased to pre-treatment levels or lower. The increase was largest for the total cut treatment, but there was large variation within treatments. By the end of the experiment, the total cut and girdle treatments performed similarly for all our metrics of restoration, including survival, growth, density, and basal area of native trees; density and richness of native species in the understory; and total weed biomass. The selective treatment performed worse, showing lower relative gains in basal area of native trees and density of native understory individuals. Overall, tree removal was effective in restoring a native canopy. However, understory native species richness and density remained at pre-treatment levels, likely due to limited seed dispersal, seed predation by non-native rodents, and continued competition from non-native herbaceous species. Nonetheless, subplots with the best starting conditions performed the best. More intensive and longer-term weeding of non-native species in the understory, focused on areas with the best starting conditions and combined with out-planting of native seeds, seedlings and/or saplings, is likely necessary to foster effective native species regeneration. Overall, our research shows that removal of non-native trees using the total cut and girdle techniques can foster native forest restoration in the mesic forests of Hawaiʻi, but that on-going long-term management in the understory is critical. © 2022 Elsevier B.V.
For local communities of Sarawak, Malaysia, pulaus (forest reserves) are important components of agriculture and forestry systems, e.g., as seed orchards. However, pulaus are often fragmented, which may affect tree reproductive and regeneration processes and cause low seed production or seedling survival. Here, we investigated whether the pulau system affects the reproductive success of a tropical tree, Shorea laxa (Dipterocarpaceae). First, we compared survivorship during the flower-to-seedling stages, seed fate and seedling mortality between a pulau and a primary forest. Next, we evaluated the neighborhood aggregation effect, i.e., local density effect, on the reproductive process. Finally, through microsatellite analysis using seed arrays, we examined the pollination process including the selfing rate, genetic diversity and pollen dispersal distances.We found no clear differences in tree survivorship during the flower-to-seedling stages between the two sites. However, predation by vertebrates was lower in the pulau, possibly because of a lower density of seed-predating vertebrates. Neighborhood aggregation was negatively correlated with seed maturation and seed survival in the pulau, similar to the primary forest. However, the scale of neighborhood aggregation differed between the two sites, suggesting a change in the scale of plant-animal interactions. Although pollen dispersal was limited within the pulau, a low selfing rate and high genetic diversity of the seed array indicated effective pollination.In this study, we did not find a strong negative effect of the pulau or of forest fragmentation on the reproduction and regeneration of S. laxa. The pulau investigated in this study was shown to provide genetically rich seeds. We also discuss the importance of the pulau system from a conservation perspective. © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
Long-term research on the response of wet forests in the Luquillo Experimental Forest (LEF) to natural and anthropogenic disturbances yielded information useful for the management of these forests and to a better understanding of the functioning of tropical forests and how species composition changes under different disturbance regimes. We summarize studies on basal area removal, response to ionizing radiation, and the effects of hurricanes and landslides on forested watersheds. We also review studies on forested stream biota following hurricane, drought, and flooding events. This chapter also evaluates reforestation of degraded lands and recovery of forests after abandonment of paved roads. All the studies combined cover the major land cover changes that take place throughout the tropics and which require attention to conserve tropical biodiversity. These changes range from limited extractions of resources from forests to deforestation and conversion to pastures. When tropical forests are converted to pastures, more intensive management actions are needed to restore lands, including planting of introduced species capable of growing on degraded lands. Results from the LEF have demonstrated the high resistance and resilience of tropical forests and the success of plantings in the restoration of forest cover on degraded lands. In both streams and forests, species composition shifts from native to introduced species when anthropogenic disturbance regimes become prevalent over the natural disturbance regimes. © 2014 Springer New York. All rights reserved.
Since the origin of the protected area network, authorities have resettled people in the interest of wildlife conservation. However, the impacts of resettlement on wildlife corridors connecting increasingly insular protected areas and the interaction of resettlement with existing human-wildlife conflict (HWC) outside of protected areas remain unclear. Using Kanha National Park (KNP) in central India as a case study, we quantified impacts of 450 households (that were resettled from 2009 to 2013, surveyed in 2016) on non-protected forests at their new settlement locations, We measured forest use for cattle grazing, tendu leaf extraction (a commercial non-timber forest product) and consumption of forest foods. We also quantified HWC risks that resettled households face at their new settlement locations. We use published spatial analyses on designation of the corridor and risks of human wildlife conflict in conjunction with our data to assess post-resettlement impacts at the new settlement locations. Overall, most resettled households (330) have moved to existing villages that lie outside of wildlife corridors around KNP. They comprise < 10% of existing populations at most of their new settlement villages. Many resettled households and their non-resettled neighbors face high HWC risks due to the spatial patterns of HWC around KNP. Controlling for assets and proximity to forest, resettled households own more cattle, are less involved in tendu trade, and consume fewer forests foods than non-resettled neighbors. Model results suggest that increasing off-farm economic opportunities would reduce pressures on forest resources for both resettled and non-resettled households. Our findings, while limited to the KNP landscape, provide approaches applicable in other human-dominated places to design resettlement strategies towards landscape-level conservation goals.
Tropical forests are of vital importance for maintaining biodiversity, regulating climate and material cycles while facing deforestation, agricultural reclamation, and managing various pressures. Remote sensing (RS) can support effective monitoring and mapping approaches for tropical forests, and to facilitate this we propose a deep neural network with an encoder–decoder architecture here to classify tropical forests and their environment. To deal with the complexity of tropical landscapes, this method utilizes a multi-scale convolution neural network (CNN) to expand the receptive field and extract multi-scale features. The model refines the features with several attention modules and fuses them through an upsampling module. A two-stage training strategy is proposed to alleviate misclassifications caused by sample imbalances. A joint loss function based on cross-entropy loss and the generalized Dice loss is applied in the first stage, and the second stage used the focal loss to fine-tune the weights. As a case study, we use Hainan tropical reserves to test the performance of this model. Compared with four state-of-the-art (SOTA) semantic segmentation networks, our network achieves the best performance with two Hainan datasets (mean intersection over union (MIoU) percentages of 85.78% and 82.85%). We also apply the new model to classify a public true color dataset which has 17 semantic classes and obtain results with an 83.75% MIoU. This further demonstrates the applicability and potential of this model in complex classification tasks. © 2021 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
The Atlantic forest is one of the most threatened tropical forest ecosystem in the world, and despite current knowledge, its ability to recover structure and diversity after a disturbance is still a matter of debate. Quantifying carbon stocks and species diversity in forests at different successional stages and assessing their recovery capacity is important for designing local conservation and restoration strategies. We investigated the resilience potential of lowland Atlantic forests at landscape-scale using a chronosequence approach in 160 0.1-ha permanent plots, three old-growth and 13 second-growth forests at various stages of recovery. We assessed whether tree species richness, including species with high conservation values (endemic and threatened), composition and aboveground carbon stock recover along succession; and estimated how much of the old-growth forest values the 20-yr-old secondary forests had attained and the time needed to reach old-growth forests levels. Species richness, composition and carbon stock tended to recover along the chronosequence, while endemic and threatened species showed no relationship with forest age. After 20 yr of succession, the secondary forests recovered on average 52% of total species richness, 21% of species composition and only 16% of carbon stock of old-growth forests. We predicted that the absolute recovery of lowland Atlantic forests would take eight decades to thousands of years, much longer than the 10–40 years targeted by national efforts to restore degraded ecosystems. Despite slow recovery, these regenerating forests are important for climate mitigation and biodiversity conservation as they potentially sequester 1.78 Mg C ha−1 yr−1 and harbor a number of species comparable to old-growth forests. Our findings indicate that achieving landscape restoration and conservation goals through passive restoration can be a challenge, highlighting the need to invest in management plans in areas with relatively low resilience and high biodiversity and carbon conservation values. © 2020 Elsevier B.V.
Abstract: Interest in forest regeneration has increased as secondary forests in regeneration process are cited as the forests of the future. However, remaining forests are subjected to chronic anthropogenic disturbances, which may reorganize tropical biodiversity. This paper investigates the recovery of fruit-feeding butterfly assemblages following slash-and-burn agriculture in the Caatinga dry forest, assessing the roles that chronic disturbances, tree species richness and biomass play in their taxonomic and functional recovery during secondary succession. Butterflies were recorded monthly across old-growth forest stands and areas previously subjected to slash-and-burn agriculture, and with differing times since abandonment. While there was a high degree of similarity in community-level attributes among regenerating forests of different ages, secondary and old-growth forests supported relatively distinct assemblages, both taxonomically and functionally. As expected, chronic disturbance, forest biomass and trees species richness were excellent predictors of taxonomic and functional changes. Specifically, large-bodied and canopy-inhabiting butterflies reached higher abundances in more disturbed habitats, while those ocellus-bearing species that fly in the understory and feed on monocot as larvae responded negatively to disturbance, but benefited from increased forest biomass and tree species richness. Our findings suggest that although regenerating secondary forests can recover values of community-level attributes of fruit-feeding butterflies similar to those of old-growth forests, chronic anthropogenic disturbances across the landscape may be selecting only specific ecological groups that are tolerant to adverse conditions. Implications for insect conservation: Chronic disturbance can taxonomically and functionally alter butterfly assemblages across forest regeneration and consequently impact their ecological functions. © 2023, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
Forest disturbance poses major threats to biodiversity and forest ecosystem processes. Understanding bird species' responses to disturbed forests is important for species conservation and forest management. Here, we assessed the impact of selective logging history (similar to 150 years), livestock grazing, alien plant invasion and adjacent matrix-type surrounding forest patches on bird species richness and functional diversity in 14 Southern Mistbelt Forest patches in the Midlands of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. The bird communities were surveyed using fixedradius point-counts. We quantified functional diversity using three functional indices functional richness, functional divergence, and functional evenness. None of the disturbance types assessed affected the richness of bird species. The size of the forest patch affected bird species. For functional diversity, FRic was significantly higher in disturbed forest patches for forest specialists, insectivores and cup or ball-nesting birds. Functional evenness for the forest-sensitive groups, like forest specialists and insectivores, was significantly lower in disturbed sites. The results of this study showed that responses of functional communities and forest specialist bird species varied depending on disturbance type and intensity. We recommend that future studies assessing forest disturbance impacts on bird species use taxonomic proxies with different functional diversity indices for forest bird species conservation and management.
Competitive interactions between native tree seedlings and exotic grasses frequently hinder forest restoration. We investigated the consequences of competition with exotic grasses on the growth and net nitrogen (N) uptake capacity of native rainforest seedlings used for reforestation depending on soil N availability and N source. Tree seedlings and grasses were grown in the greenhouse in different competition regimes (one tree species vs one grass species) and controls (grass monocultures or single tree seedlings) at low and high soil N. After 8 weeks, we quantified net N uptake capacity using N-15-labelled organic (i.e., glutamine and arginine) and inorganic (i.e., ammonium and nitrate) N sources and biomass indices. Depending on soil N availability, we observed different species-specific responses to growth and N acquisition. Tree seedlings generally increased their net N uptake capacity in response to competition with grasses, although overall seedling growth was unaffected. In contrast, the responses to competition by the grasses were species-specific and varied with soil N availability. The different N acquisition strategies suggest the avoidance of competition for N between trees and grasses. Overall, the results highlight that quantifying underlying mechanisms of N acquisition complements the information on biomass allocation as a measure of responses to competition, particularly with varying environmental conditions.
The restored Platform Sipan 1X, located at Block 90 as part of its Plan of Cessation. The platform is characterized by being located In a tropical forest with high biodiversity which includes the units of vegetation dense and semi dense forest. The platform was invaded by kudzu (Pueraria phaseoloides), species of exotic leguminous with high proliferation, which is excellent for recovery of soils because of the swiftness with which the cover advances covering the edaphic cover protecting the soils from the erosive phenomena, but if this leguminous is not handled properly it turns into a problem because it crawls and climbs which permits to cover superficially the neighboring species, and thus takes basically the light drowning it completely until it is dead, so the Restoration Plan had the objective of eradicating the P. phaseoloides, assuring success of the reforestation using native species and permitting the recovery of the degraded space. Restoration work included the location through the channeling in swamped zones and improving in the compacted areas. For reforestation were used eight (08) native forest species: "bolaina" (Guazuma crinita), "capirona" (Calycophylum spruceanum), "copaiba" (Copaifera officinalis), "guaba" (Inga sp.), "marupa" (Simaruba amara), "moena" (Nectandra sp.), "pashaco" (Shizolubium amazonicum) and "ubos" (Spondias mombin), initially placing more than 4,000 plants. A monitoring and maintenance was done each two months during two years, assessing the condition of the plantation. Due to the remoteness of the location no type of machinery was used, the team comprises 15 persons including technical and local personnel who executed the work of replanting, cleaning of channels, clearing of dry plants and foliar applications. In 80% of the area the plants prospered within what was foreseen, nevertheless in the remaining 20% there were problems because the soil was compacted and there was water runoff, so in those zones were planted seedlings that were produced in the platform itself. It could be seen the favorable effect of the natural regeneration of the forest with the species: topa (Ochroma pyramidalis), ocuera (Veronia sp.) and cetico (cecropia sp.), which contributed to make the plantation more dense. Results of the project showed 98% of the area with forest coverage totally established 9,000 seedlings in good conditions and the kudzu controlled totally. This evaluation in a tropical forest,acontributes to the development of methodologies for the restoration of exploration platforms in remote zones and tropical forests. Copyright 2014, Society of Petroleum Engineers.
Growth performance, biomass accumulation, and net primary productivity (NPP) of five exotic plant species planted to stabilize and improve the coal mine spoils in India were assessed. The selected exotic species were very successful under afforestation programs on wastelands. Plant species showed a considerable variations in growth characteristics with response to their ages on coal mine spoils. The shoot height was found to be maximum in Eucalyptus hybrid and minimum for Cassia siamea during whole course of study. The circumference of plants varied significantly due to plant species as well as age. Shoot biomass increased by 2.5-3 times in 7 years old plantations of different plant species as compared to those of 4 years. Marked increments were also observed in the major root and fine root biomass with increasing age of plantations. Total biomass accumulation was recorded maximum in E. hybrid and minimum in C. siamea. The NPP also followed a similar trend as total biomass. The maximum contribution was made by stem with branch in comparison to other components in NPP among different plant species. Shoot production including branches was found to be maximum in E. hybrid and minimum in C. siamea, whereas the NPP of major roots did not show a similar trend as that of shoot. On the basis of biomass and primary productivity, E. hybrid and Acacia auriculiformis were found suitable for plantation on coal mine spoil land. © 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Background: The conservation and restoration of forest landscapes is an important aspect of sustainable development. In semi-arid regions these practices are difficulted by the harsh climate of these environments, with low precipitation values and prolonged dry seasons. The objective of this study is to identify tree species from the south of the Brazilian state of Piauí that have potential to be used in forest restoration programs. Results: Data from forest inventory and tree characteristics were used to select eight tree species using target species definition, focusing on species with desirable wood properties, abundance in the study region, favorable dendrometric variables, seed availability, ease of seed germination and seedling growth in nursery and field conditions, among others. These species were then evaluated as candidates for restoration using a framework species approach focusing on the following attributes: (i) 70% or higher seedling survival in the field; (ii) seedling height of 45 cm or taller after the first growing season in the field and (iii) 70% or greater nursery seedling survival. Conclusion: The species Combretum glaucocarpum, Cenostigma macrophyllum, and Pityrocarpa moniliformis are suitable to be employed in forest restoration programs in the southern region of Piauí, Brazil. Further studies must be carried out to assess the behavior of these and other potential tree species in long term field conditions and under varying silvicultural regimes, a key aspect for forest restoration. © 2021, Federal University of Lavras. All rights reserved.
Deforestation is the dominant threat to tropical dry forests (TDFs) in Mexico. Its causes include agriculture, tourism, and mining. In some cases, unassisted forest regeneration is sufficient to return diverse forest cover to a site, but in other cases, changes in land use are so severe that active restoration is required to reintroduce tree cover. The ecological and social constraints on TDF restoration in Mexico are poorly understood. To address this knowledge gap, we synthesized relevant restoration literature for Mexico published between January 1990 and February 2020. We examined 43 unique articles about TDF restoration practices in Mexico to identify (1) the national distribution of TDF restoration projects, (2) restoration objectives, and (3) factors contributing to TDF restoration success or failure. The largest number of restoration sites were in the Yucatan Peninsula, and the most common objective was to restore dry forest vegetation on lands that had been used for agriculture or impacted by fires. Planting seedlings was the most widely reported restoration strategy, and plant survival was the most frequently monitored response variable. Maximum annual temperature and the Lang Aridity Index were the best predictors of plant survival, which ranged from 15% to 78%. This synthesis highlights how national restoration inventories can facilitate the development of a restoration evaluation framework to increase the efficacy of restoration investments. © 2022 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Restoring self-sustaining tropical forest ecosystems on surface mined sites is a formidable challenge that requires the integration of proven reclamation techniques and reforestation strategies appropriate to specific site conditions, including landscape biodiversity patterns. Restorationists working in most tropical settings are usually hampered by lack of basic information on the wide variety of native tree species that characterize the pre-disturbance forests, as well as insufficient understanding of the ecology of disturbance and natural recovery to design effective restoration programs. A notable exception to this is the forest restoration program developed since the early 1980s by a Brazilian bauxite mining company operating at Trombetas in Para State in central Amazonia. A systematic nursery and field research strategy was used to develop a reforestation program based on mixed plantings of mon than 70 native old-growth forest tree species. This technique has been used to replant about 100 ha of deforested minelands each year over the past 15 years. Research in recent years has evaluated this approach and other, generally simpler, reforestation methods used at a smaller scale at this site. Post-plantation biodiversity development and other indicators of restoration success or sustainability were recorded. The results of these studies have shown the overwhelming importance of careful site preparation and topsoil handling/replacement practices in determining both future productivity and biodiversity of the redeveloping forests, irrespective of the complexity of the planting design used. The inclusion of a wide variety of forest species, particularly later successional species, was very important for long-range restoration owing to limitations on natural recovery processes that inhibit seed dispersal and subsequent colonization of many old-growth forest species. Many of the: lessons learned at this site an applicable to improve the design of mineland rehabilitation and forest restoration programs worldwide. (C) 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
India is one of the world's mega-regions for biodiversity, with 64M ha of protected land comprising 23% of its land. Among these 51M ha of forests are tropical forests rich in vegetation and home to numerous rare, endangered and threatened species. Tropical forests are decreasing at an alarming pace due to various natural factors (floods, cyclones, etc.) and man-made factors (forest fire, clear-cutting, mining, etc.) and this has also led to a decrease in soil quality, which later renders them abandoned. The physiochemical properties of the forest soil differ depending on time and weather, such as temperature, precipitation cycles, topography variability, vegetation cover, various microorganism activities, and other biotic and abiotic factors. The soil- water system is one of the most important soil factors for plant production, carbon allocation, efficiency in photosynthesis, nutrient cycling and biological growth. Water Holding Capacity (WHC) is one of the key parameters that is essential for forest productivity and is significantly associated with increased tree height. The analysis of research papers of past 4 decades was taken into account and found that WHC is one of the key factor that can be used assess forest situations and productivity. Therefore, proper monitoring of this parameter should be carried out in order to conserve and protect the forest ecosystem and for sustainable forest management. © 2021 Ecological Society of India. All rights reserved.
Setyawan AD. 2010. Biodiversity conservation strategy in a native perspective; case study of shifting cultivation at the Dayaks of Kalimantan. Nusantara Bioscience 2:97-108. Native tribes generally are original conservationists; they build genuine conservation strategy of natural resources and environment for sustainable living. Dayak is a native tribe of Kalimantan that has been living for thousands of years; they use shifting cultivation to manage the communal forest lands due to Kalimantan's poor soil of minerals and nutrients, where the presence of phosphorus becomes a limiting factor for crops cultivation. In tropical forests, phosphorus mostly stored in the trees, so to remove it, the forest burning is carried out. Nutrients released into the soil can be used for upland rice (gogo) cultivation, until depleted; after that, cultivators need to open a forest, while the old land was abandoned (fallow) until it becomes forest again (for 20-25 years). The consecutive land clearing causes the formation of mosaics land with different succession ages and diverse biodiversity. This process is often combined with agroforestry systems (multicultural forest gardens), where the will-be-abandoned fields are planted with a variety of useful trees that can be integrated in forest ecosystems, especially rubber and fruits. These systems of shifting cultivation are often blamed as the main factor of forest degradation and fires, but in the last 300 years, this system has little impact on forest degradation. But, this is relatively low in productivity and subsistent, so it is not suitable for the modern agriculture which demands high productivity and measurable, mass and continuous yield, as well as related to the market. The increased population and industrial development of forestry, plantation, mining, etc. make the communal forest become narrower, so the fallow periods are shortened (5-15 years) and the lands are degraded into grasslands. In the future, shifting cultivation remains one of the Dayaks option to meet the needs of rice, but agroforestry should be developed because of its higher economic value.
To meet their large-scale forest and landscape restoration targets, countries must find ways to accommodate areas for conservation alongside agricultural production. In some pasture-dominated regions of Latin America, intensive silvopastoral systems (SPS) are being promoted to increase cattle productivity on certain lands while facilitating the removal of cattle from marginal areas for forest restoration. However, the recovery of these forests and their contribution to the overall conservation value of the landscape has not been assessed rigorously. We evaluated forest structure and composition in 20 sites in a region of the Colombian Andes where a decade ago farmers transitioned to SPS and fenced off riparian areas to enable forest recovery. We compared these restored forests to a reference model based on the remaining riparian forest across the region, all of which has been subjected to human management. We found that woody species richness was higher in restored than in reference forests, and the proportion of large-seeded, later successional, animal-dispersed species were similar in both forest types. Whereas we found a similar suite of dominant tree species in restored and reference forest, Guadua angustifolia, a native giant bamboo was more abundant in the reference forests due to human management. Total tree basal area was higher in restored forests due to a small number of very large trees likely present in the pastures at the time of site protection. These findings highlight (1) the potential for recovery of diverse forests in riparian sites despite previous grazing use and (2) the role of remnant trees in facilitating natural succession. Overall, rapid forest recovery with minimal intervention in previously farmed lands is good news for conservation in a region that still harbors significant biodiversity despite high levels of fragmentation and the influence of human management. © 2019 Elsevier B.V.
Forested riparian zones perform numerous ecosystem functions, including the following: storing and fixing carbon; serving as wildlife habitats and ecological corridors; stabilizing streambanks; providing shade, organic matter, and food for streams and their biota; retaining sediments and filtering chemicals applied on cultivated/agricultural sites on upslope regions of the catchments. In this paper, we report a synthesis of a different feature of this type of vegetation, which is its effect on water yield. By synthesizing results from studies that used (i) the nested catchment and (ii) the paired catchment approaches, we show that riparian forests decrease water yield on a daily to annual basis. In terms of the treated area increases on average were 1.32±0.85mmday -1 and 483±309mmyr -1, respectively; n=9. Similarly, riparian forest plantation or regeneration promoted reduced water yield (on average 1.25±0.34mmday -1 and 456±125mmyr -1 on daily and annual basis, respectively, when prorated to the catchment area subjected to treatment; n=5). Although there are substantially fewer paired catchment studies assessing the effect of this vegetation type compared to classical paired catchment studies that manipulate the entire vegetation of small catchments, our results indicate the same trend. Despite the occurrence of many current restoration programs, measurements of the effect on water yield under natural forest restoration conditions are still lacking. We hope that presenting these gaps will encourage the scientific community to enhance the number of observations in these situations as well as produce more data from tropical regions. © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
Tropical forests are complex systems with heterogeneous community assemblages often threatened under anthropogenic disturbances and grazing. We studied the change in plant community composition and structure under a disturbance gradient in the tropical dry deciduous forest of the corridor area between Nagzira Wildlife Sanctuary and Navegaon National Park of central India. We tested the hypothesis that the plant community will change along the gradient of proximity to human settlements depending on the anthropogenic stress. We sampled 183 nested quadrat plots to collect data on species abundance and various disturbance parameters. Density, diversity, and importance value index were calculated, and multivariate analysis was performed to assess the changes in species assemblage along the disturbance gradients. We found 76% overall dissimilarity between the plant communities in the three distance classes perpetrated by the difference in mean abundance of species like Tectona grandis, Terminalia sp., and Largerstroemia parviflora. The anthropogenic factors influence the density and diversity of tree species and regeneration classes. We found the abundance of regeneration class increased along the distance from the villages. The study intensifies the need for proper management and conservative approach to preserve the diversity of the forest patches for their structural and functional contiguity as a corridor in central India's highly susceptible and intricate corridor framework.
In the forest ecosystems, litterfall is an important component of the nutrient cycle that regulates the accumulation of soil organic matter (SOM), the input and output of the nutrients, nutrient replenishment, biodiversity conservation, and other ecosystem functions. Therefore, a profound understanding of the major processes (litterfall production and its decomposition rate) in the cycle is vital for sustainable forest management (SFM). Despite these facts, there is still a limited knowledge in tropical forest ecosystems, and further researches are highly needed. This shortfall of research-based knowledge, especially in tropical forest ecosystems, may be a contributing factor to the lack of understanding of the role of plant litter in the forest ecosystem function for sustainable forest management, particularly in the tropical forest landscapes. Therefore, in this paper, I review the role of plant litter in tropical forest ecosystems with the aims of assessing the importance of plant litter in forest ecosystems for the biogeochemical cycle. Then, the major factors that affect the plant litter production and decomposition were identified, which could direct and contribute to future research. The small set of studies reviewed in this paper demonstrated the potential of plant litter to improve the biogeochemical cycle and nutrients in the forest ecosystems. However, further researches are needed particularly on the effect of species, forest structures, seasons, and climate factors on the plant litter production and decomposition in various types of forest ecosystems. © 2020 The Author(s).
Frequent earthquakes, monsoon torrential rains and typhoons cause severe landslides and soil erosion in Taiwan. Hibiscus taiwanensis, Macaranga tanarius, and Mallotus paniculatus are major pioneer tree species appearing on landslide-scarred areas. Thus, these species can be used to restore the self-sustaining native vegetation on forest landslides, to control erosion, and to stabilize slope. However, their growth performance, root traits and biomechanical properties have not been well characterized. In this study, root system and root traits were investigated using the excavation method, and biomechanical tests were performed to determine the uprooting resistance, root tensile strength and Young's modulus of 1-year-old Hibiscus taiwanensis, Macaranga tanarius, and Mallotus paniculatus seedlings. The results reveal that relative to H. taiwanensis, M. tanarius and M. paniculatus seedlings had significantly larger root collar diameter, longer taproot length, higher root biomass, higher root density, higher root length density, heavier root mass, larger external root surface area, higher root tissue density, larger root volume, longer total root length, and a higher root tip number. Additionally, the height of M. paniculatus seedlings was significantly higher than those of H. taiwanensis and M. tanarius. Furthermore, the uprooting resistance and root tensile strength of M. paniculatus seedlings was significantly higher than those of H. taiwanensis and M. tanarius. Young's modulus of M. paniculatus and M. tanarius seedlings was also significantly higher than that of H. taiwanensis. These growth characteristics and biomechanical properties demonstrate M. paniculatus and M. tanarius are superior than H. taiwanensis, considering growth performance, root anchorage capability, tensile strength and Young's modulus. Taken as a whole, the rank order for species selection of these pioneer species for reforestation comes as: M. paniculatus > M. tanarius > H. taiwanensis. These results, along with knowledge on vegetation dynamics following landslides, allow us to better evaluate the eect of selective removal management of pioneer species on the resilience and sustainability of landslides. © 2020 by the author.
Mining is a major threat to vegetation and soil in the tropical forests. Reforestation of degraded surface mines is critically dependent on the recovery of soil health, where the nematodes play an important role. However, the key determinants of community assembly of soil nematodes during mine-restoration remain unknown in the tropical rainforests. Here, the recovery of taxonomic diversity of nematode communities and their trophic groups during reforestation of an extremely degraded tropical open-mining area is studied. The factors that may impact their recovery, such as root traits (length, area and tissue density), soil properties (pH and soil organic matter content (SOM)), and taxonomic diversities of soil bacterial and fungal communities are investigated. Differences in these parameters were evaluated in the three soil types: (i) mined soil - the erstwhile soil that was removed during mining and stock-piled for 10 years at the foot of an extremely degraded open-mining area; (ii) reforested soil, sampled from a 10-year successful restoration, which used the mined soil for reforestation; and (iii) undisturbed soil, collected from an adjacent undisturbed/not-mined tropical rainforest. A total of 11, 34 and 29 nematode-genera were identified in mined-, undisturbed-, and reforested soils, respectively. The taxonomic diversities of the 5 nematode groups in the mined soil were 1.5–5.2 times lower than in the undisturbed soil, but were similar in the restored and undisturbed soils. Taxonomic diversities of phytophagous and predator nematodes were correlated to restored root traits; whereas of bacterivores, fungivores, and omnivores were correlated to pH, SOM, soil bacterial and fungal communities. Consequently, complete loss of roots during mining likely severely reduced the nematodes, but their recovery after reforestation led to the restoration of taxonomic diversity of nematode communities. The mix-planting fast-growing tree species may be appropriate for recovering soil health, including nematode diversity, during reforestation of open tropical mines. © 2024 Elsevier B.V.
Questions: Natural regeneration is increasingly recognized as a potentially cost-effective strategy to reach ambitious forest landscape restoration targets, but rates of recovery are notoriously variable. We asked how well initial habitat conditions after cessation of agriculture predict forest recovery after nearly a decade. We aimed to provide land managers with general rules of thumb to assess when it is necessary to invest resources in active restoration, such as tree planting, to accelerate forest recovery. Location: Coto Brus County, Puntarenas, Costa Rica. Methods: We compiled data on initial vegetation structure, soil nutrients, prior land-use history and surrounding forest cover at 13 sites. After 8.5 years, we measured vegetation indicators commonly used to assess forest recovery, namely amount of canopy closure and number and diversity of woody recruits. Results: Two variables, grass cover and canopy closure, measured 1.5 years after site abandonment, explained 47–87% of five of the six response variables after 8.5 years; recovery was faster in sites with lower grass cover and higher canopy closure initially. Waiting an additional year to measure initial vegetation variables did not improve model fit. Time since the original forest was cleared explained 62% of change in canopy cover, whereas percentage of surrounding forest cover, length of pasture use and soil variables explained minimal additional variation. Conclusions: Our results suggest that two easily measurable vegetation variables can provide guidance to land managers and policy makers about where to invest scarce restoration resources to facilitate forest recovery. © 2018 International Association for Vegetation Science
Illegal logging is a threat to tropical forests in protected areas, yet the factors motivating it need to be better understood. Here, rural household participation in timber felling in the Barisan I Nature Reserve (West Sumatra) was described, the household contextual factors relating to this participation analysed and the importance of these activities to the household income assessed. Nearly 19% of the sampled households cut or hauled timber in the Reserve, and the demand for cash encouraged participation. Alternative livelihoods such as livestock raising and agroforestry intensification outside the Reserve could reduce the need for timber felling. Knowledge about legal status of the Reserve did not affect the odds of a household engaging in timber harvesting, but greater awareness of the Reserve resulted in lower levels of income from timber. Development policy that seeks to provide livelihood alternatives to timber felling households could reduce dependence on timber and contribute to forest conservation in the Reserve. Moreover, conservation outcomes should improve if control over the protection and enforcement of the Reserve is co-managed between the government and the local communities.
While sacred groves (forest fragments protected for religious reasons) are widely acknowledged to have a beneficial effect on biodiversity conservation, the ecological benefits of individual sacred trees remain unknown. Fig trees are present as sacred trees in humandominated landscapes across South Asia and are considered keystone species for wildlife in tropical forests. If frugivores continue to visit fig trees in disturbed landscapes, they may deposit seeds of other tree species beneath fig canopies, ultimately facilitating forest regeneration. We studied whether sacred fig trees in Tamil Nadu, India can facilitate seed dispersal in human-dominated landscapes. We quantified abundance of sacred fig trees at the study site, assessed whether seed-dispersing frugivore visitation to fig trees is affected by human disturbance, and compared tree seedling density beneath fig trees and open areas. We found that some species of frugivorous birds and bats will visit large fig trees in conditions of high human disturbance and that tree seedling density is significantly higher under sacred trees compared to open areas. By promoting frugivore activity, sacred fig trees may have a beneficial effect on biodiversity conservation in human-dominated landscapes.
In this study, we primarily assess the relationship between social safeguards and the living standards of local communities in different ecological zones of Ghana, relying on data from the seventh round of the Ghana Living Standard Survey (GLSS 7) and publicly available policy documents from the Ghana Statistical Service and the Forestry Commission of Ghana, respectively. This research aims to assist policymakers and stakeholders to make informed and appropriate decisions when developing social safeguards for emission reduction projects. The GLSS 7 covers 14,009 households, comprising 59,864 individuals in 892 enumeration areas or communities across the 10 regions of Ghana, now divided into 16. The data were collected using a stratified random sampling technique. Principal component analysis was employed to develop a living condition index, after which we generated a second construct based on the number of factors affecting living conditions. The results showed that access to sharecropping, literacy, extension services, financial institutions, a mobile phone network, and markets have significant positive relationships with the living conditions of local communities in Ghana. In addition, 78% of the social safeguards described in Ghana's REDD+ strategy, Forest and Wildlife Policy, Benefits Sharing Mechanism, and Forest Plantation Development Strategy are aligned with the determinants of local communities' living conditions. The findings suggest a need to enforce the Benefit Sharing Mechanism, better forest governance, and tenancy reforms in order to prevent the overexploitation of landowners and avoid elite capture. Furthermore, farmers must be linked to financial institutions in order to obtain credits. Additionally, we must seek to provide local communities with better access to markets and mobile phone networks in a way that allows them to carry out their livelihood activities effectively and efficiently. These measures help to reduce the risk of REDD+ actions and ensure sustainability.
Integration of conservation into sustainable forest management plans requires the accurate assessment of pre-harvesting biodiversity. An open question is how to efficiently and accurately sample biodiversity in production forests. Here we investigate one possible answer: the use of existing pre-felling inventories designed for the estimation of timber stocking. Using data drawn from two large permanent forest sample plots in Malaysia, we tested the ability of the Malaysian SMS pre-felling inventory (Pre-F) to accurately assess alpha (α)- and beta (β)-tree diversity. We found that the Pre-F did not accurately estimate variation in α-diversity at small spatial-scales, but could be used to accurately extrapolate α-diversity on larger spatial scales. The Pre-F also adequately assessed β-diversity in heterogeneous environments, but did not perform as well in homogeneous environments. The use of tree species codes as opposed to Latin nomenclature affected estimates of β- but not α-diversity. © 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Forests are complex three-dimensional ecosystems, but little is known about the influence of vertical stratification of forest structure on biodiversity and species turnover. Saproxylic beetles make a substantial contribution to forest biodiversity and ecosystem functions such as nutrient cycling. Management measures aimed at supporting saproxylic biodiversity are becoming an integral part of sustainable forest management practices. Yet, monitoring is carried out under the assumption that saproxylic activity at ground level will be a realistic reflection of saproxylic biodiversity in the forest as a whole. To investigate the validity of this assumption we compare vertical stratification and composition of saproxylic beetle assemblages between three forest types of varying altitude and latitude, including a tropical lowland forest in Panama, a temperate lowland forest and a temperate montane forest, both in the eastern Czech Republic. Beetles were sampled following a standardized sampling protocol using flight intercept traps arranged in vertical transects. Overall, the tropical forest was estimated to harbour two to three times more saproxylic beetle species than the temperate lowland and the montane forest, respectively. However, point richness estimates within vertical strata were remarkably similar between biomes. Species richness was similar in the understorey of all three forests. It peaked in the canopy of the tropical forest but in the understorey of temperate forests. So, while the beetle assemblages were clearly vertically stratified in all three forest types, stratification patterns varied markedly between tropical and temperate forests. This trend is driven primarily by the high richness of saproxylic beetles in the tropical forest canopy. However these richness differences belie the strong similarities in stratification of feeding guild composition observed all three forest types. This would tend to suggest that similar trophic structuring forces might operate across very different forest biomes of the world. Similarities in feeding guild composition suggest that management measures aiming at conserving biodiversity of saproxylic beetles are likely to be effective across different forest types. The differences in vertical stratification, however, suggest that understorey monitoring alone will be insufficient to understand management effects on saproxylic biodiversity. In the tropics, in particular, more emphasis will need to be placed on managing the diverse, three-dimensional structure of forest canopies as habitat for saproxylic beetles. © 2019 Elsevier B.V.
Neotropical fruit bats (family Phyllostomidae) facilitate forest regeneration on degraded lands by dispersing shrub and tree seeds. Accordingly, if fruit bats can be attracted to restoration sites, seed dispersal could be enhanced. We surveyed bat communities at 10 sites in southern Costa Rica to evaluate whether restoration treatments attracted more fruit bats if trees were planted on degraded farmlands in plantations or island configurations versus natural regeneration. We also compared the relative influence of tree cover at local and landscape spatial scales on bat abundances. We captured 68% more fruit bat individuals in tree plantations as in controls, whereas tree island plots were intermediate. Bat activity also responded to landscape tree cover within a 200-m radius of restoration plots, with greater abundance but lower species richness in deforested landscapes. Fruit bat captures in controls and tree island plots declined with increasing landscape tree cover, but captures in plantations were relatively constant. Individual species responded differentially to tree cover measured at different spatial scales. We attribute restoration effects primarily to habitat structure rather than food resources because no planted trees produced fruits regularly eaten by bats. The magnitude of tree planting effects on fruit bats was less than previous studies have found for frugivorous birds, suggesting that bats may play a particularly important role in dispersing seeds in heavily deforested and naturally regenerating areas. Nonetheless, our results show that larger tree plantations in more intact landscapes are more likely to attract diverse fruit bats, potentially enhancing seed dispersal. © 2015 Society for Ecological Restoration.
Passive forest restoration can buffer the effects of habitat loss on biodiversity. We acoustically surveyed aerial insectivorous bats in a whole-ecosystem fragmentation experiment in the Brazilian Amazon over a 2-year period, across 33 sites, comprising continuous old-growth forest, remnant fragments, and regenerating secondary forest matrix. We analyzed the activity of 10 species/sonotypes to investigate occupancy across habitat types and responses to fragment size and interior-edge-matrix (IEM) disturbance gradients. Employing a multiscale approach, we investigated guild (edge foragers, forest specialists, flexible forest foragers, and open space specialists) and species-level responses to vegetation structure and forest cover, edge, and patch density across six spatial scales (0.5-3 km). We found species-specific habitat occupancy patterns and nuanced responses to fragment size and the IEM disturbance gradient. For example, Furipterus horrens had lower activity in secondary forest sites and the interior and edge of the smallest fragments (1 and 10 ha) compared to continuous forest, and only two species (Pteronotus spp.) showed no habitat preference and no significant responses across the IEM and fragment size gradients. Only the Molossus sonotype responded negatively to vegetation structure. We uncovered no negative influence of forest cover or edge density at guild or species-level. Our results indicate that reforestation can buffer the negative effects of fragmentation and although these effects can still be detected in some species, generally aerial insectivorous bats appear to be in recovery after 30 years of passive forest restoration. Our findings reinforce the need to protect regenerating forests while conserving vast expanses of old-growth forest.
Tropical forestry is often not competitive with agricultural land uses such as pasture for cattle ranching. Additional revenues from carbon sequestration generated by the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) of the Kyoto Protocol can change this situation. In three different zones of north-western Ecuador, minimum compensation payments for carbon sequestration were determined, which would make reforestation a feasible land-use alternative. Based on our findings that these minimum prices depend on the net benefit of the respective land-use alternatives, and on the accounting regimes for CDM sink projects, we applied the accounting rules for temporary and long-term Certified Emission Reductions (CER) to two reforestation projects: forest plantation and natural regrowth of secondary forest. A comparison of these alternatives showed that secondary forest is an attractive alternative under both accounting regimes because of its low establishment costs and relative early timber revenues. After identifying the zone most suitable for carbon sink projects, we calculated net benefits of land-use changes in the event that certain prices for emission reductions were actually paid. We found that secondary forest becomes economically attractive, if the price of permanent credits is above $4.5/tCO2, whereas forest plantations require permanent CER prices of $7.0/tCO2. In both cases, the results are within the price margins forecasted by various institutions for the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol. The presented methodology is meant to support the decision making process on the supply side of a future CER market. Opportunity costs of land-use changes have to be analyzed carefully before deciding in favor of long binding forestry projects. Assigning temporary credits to naturally regrown secondary forests could-although excluded from CDM during the first commitment period-combine the advantages of a flexible accounting regime with the positive economic and ecological effects of this competitive land use. © 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Understanding the resilience of ecosystems to different land uses is critical to elucidate the mechanisms underlying regeneration processes and plan more sustainable land-use systems. While these relationships are well understood in continuous tropical forests, they are still poorly comprehended in forest formations embedded in a savanna matrix, even though these forest systems are critical for conserving savanna biodiversity and water resources. We assessed the time and capacity of swamp gallery forests to recover after shifting cultivation, in the Cerrado (Brazilian savanna), investigating the role of environmental factors in community recovery. This shifting cultivation system uses slash and burn techniques and establishes drained fields of 0.3–1.2 ha which are cultivated for 10 years, then left fallow for 10–65 years. To assess the resilience of these communities, we analyzed a chronological sequence of 28 secondary forests (1–65 years) and compared them with four old forests (reference ecosystems). We evaluated the trajectory and recovery time of community diversity, composition, and structure (height, canopy coverage, density, basal area, and biomass) as a function of fallow time, water table depth, and soil characteristics using multiple linear models. Forest fragments were considered recovered when their attributes reached the mean values of the reference forests. Most attributes are projected to reach the mean reference values of old-growth forests within nine decades, except for the proportion of non-pioneer species, canopy cover, and biomass. Water table depth influenced the trajectory and time required for recovery species richness and floristic composition. Soils with higher pH and higher nutrient availability positively influenced the recovery of non-pioneer species composition, while soils with lower pH and high organic carbon availability favored an increase in canopy height throughout succession. The disturbances generated by this shifting cultivation system do not prevent the recovery of at least 80 percent of the assessed community attributes in 65 years, suggesting that the resilience of secondary forests was not lost. Considering disturbance at similar scales, we recommend that these ecosystems be left fallow for at least 90 years to complete the recovery of ecological attributes. © 2022 Elsevier B.V.
Second-growth forests represent the largest area of forest in southern Mexico and can provide relevant information on how their structural attributes in are linked to anthropogenic factors and for their forest management. However, a knowledge gap remains at national level with little scientific literature available. Therefore, this research aimed to investigate the structure and tree richness of second-growth forests in the south of Quintana Roo State, México. With stratified sampling through participatory mapping of local collaborators, secondary tropical forests of 7, 15, 27, 37, and ≥ 48 to 80 years (y) old-growth were identified. We categorized forests into three successional stage classes: 5-20 y (Class I; forests of 7 and 15 y); 25-40 y (Class II; forests of 27 and 37 y), and old-growth forest (Class III; forests 48-80 y). In each forest (7, 15, 27, 37, 48, and 80 y of time since abandonment [tSA]) three plots were randomly chosen and established within the forest. Each age class was composed of two forests and six sample plots. In total there were 18 plots of 500 m2 each. Subsequently, we: i) calculated the land use intensity (LUI) to which the sites were subjected, ii) described the following structural attributes: floristic similarity, true diversity (effective number of species), stem density, and basal area (AB), and iii) evaluated if tSA and LUI influence the aforementioned structural attributes. Tree diversity was characterized with Hill numbers associated with observed species richness (0D), richness of equally abundant species (1D), and dominant species (2D). Forest structure was analyzed by density (number of trees ha−1) and distribution of stems by diameter class ha−1 and basal area (BA, m2 ha−1). The second-growth forest was derived from the milpa agricultural system under moderate land use intensity (LUI index = 0.02 - 0.1). Floristic structure was at least similar between Class I and Class III. Forest age and LUI do not affect tree composition of the forests (p ≥ 0.1667). However, these two factors affected stem density and BA. Only the species richness (0D) of second-growth forest and old-growth forest was influenced by tSA (p = 0.0002). In second-growth forests, Classes I and II, 78 species (0D) were recorded, 8 and 8 exclusive species, 28 and 36 equally abundant species (1D), and 15 to 24 dominant species (2D). In the old-growth forest, Class III, 70 species were recorded, and 38 and 26 equally abundant (1D) and dominant species (2D), as well as 5 exclusive species. The density of stems decreased with increasing forest age and increasing BA. Second-growth forest and old-growth forest all showed a high density of small diameter stems. These results indicate that second-growth forests are important tree species reservoirs (including those for timber purposes), comparable to old-growth or mature forests, and therefore they are relevant not only as biodiversity conservation areas or carbon sinks, but also for planned sustainable forest management. © 2024 The Author(s)
Past studies have shown that tropical forest regeneration on degraded farmlands is initially limited by lack of seed dispersal, but few studies have tracked changes in abundance and composition of seed rain past the first few years after land abandonment. We measured seed rain for 12 months in 10 6-9-year-old restoration sites and five mature, reference forests in southern Costa Rica in order to learn (1) if seed rain limitation persists past the first few years of regeneration; (2) how restoration treatments influence seed community structure and composition; and (3) whether seed rain limitation is contingent on landscape context. Each restoration site contained three 0.25-ha treatment plots: (1) a naturally regenerating control, (2) tree islands, and (3) a mixed-species tree plantation. Sites spanned a deforestation gradient with 9-89% forest area within 500 m around the treatment plots. Contrary to previous studies, we found that tree seeds were abundant and ubiquitous across all treatment plots (585.1 ± 142.0 seeds•m-2•yr-1 [mean ± SE]), indicating that lack of seed rain ceased to limit forest regeneration within the first decade of recovery. Pioneer trees and shrubs comprised the vast majority of seeds, but compositional differences between restoration sites and reference forests were driven by rarer, large-seeded species. Large, animal-dispersed tree seeds were more abundant in tree islands (4.6 ± 2.9 seeds•m-2•yr-1) and plantations (5.8 ± 3.0 seeds•m-2yr-1) than control plots (0.2 ± 0.1 seeds•m-2yr-1), contributing to greater tree species richness in actively restored plots. Planted tree species accounted for <1% of seeds. We found little evidence for landscape forest cover effects on seed rain, consistent with previous studies. We conclude that seed rain limitation shifted from an initial, complete lack of tree seeds to a specific limitation on large-seeded, mature forest species over the first decade. Although total seed abundance was equal among restoration treatments, tree plantations and tree islands continued to diversify seed rain communities compared to naturally regenerating controls. Compositional differences between regenerating plots and mature forests suggest that large-seeded tree species are appropriate candidates for enrichment planting. © 2015 by the Ecological Society of America.
Seed dispersal by Red fox (Vulpes vulpes), Stone marten (Martes foina), and Wild boar (Sus scrofa) was analyzed in an extensively degraded mosaic landscape in Sierra Nevada (SE Spain). The main objective was to determine whether seed dispersal by mammals was related to habitat degradation within a mosaic of adjacent degraded patches mixed with native forest and thereby to determine the potential role of mammals as seed dispersers in degraded landscape units. For three consecutive years, mammal feces were collected in the fruit production period, extracting all seeds of woody species found therein and analyzing their viability. Feces were collected in three different plots for each of five different landscape units: shrubland, native forest, and dense, cleared, and fenced reforestation stands. Seeds from 16 woody species (which represent more than a half of the total fleshy-fruited woody species available) were recorded, although some agrarian species are also introduced in a low percentage of the scats. Seeds showed a high viability rate for all dispersed species, irrespective of the mammal disperser. No differences in species composition appeared in the overall landscape units or in the seed density between degraded habitats. Due to the small patch size, the high viability of dispersed seeds, and the large home range of the large mammals, these three animal species act as efficient seed dispersers for a diverse assemblage of woody plant species regardless of the habitat type within this degradation framework. This fact has important consequences for the biodiversity recuperation in these degraded habitats, principally in pine plantations.
In most of the legally protected areas in Mexico local inhabitants use natural resources, such as fire wood or cattle grazing. These frequent but low-intensity disturbances have consequences at various levels of the tropical ecosystems and strongly impact forest structure and its regeneration capacity. Despite their importance, the effects of these perturbations in many aspects of tropical forest ecology and in the forest's capacity to recover after disturbance exclusion remain poorly understood. Understanding the impact of these processes on tropical forests is necessary for rehabilitating these forests and enhancing their productivity. In this study, we evaluate the impact of twelve years of exclusion (E) of cattle grazing and fire wood extraction in the composition and dynamics of seed rain, and compare this assessment to a similar analysis in an area where these perturbations continued (without exclusion, WE). We found a strong seasonality in seed rain (96% of seeds fell in the dry season) in both areas. There were no significant differences between E and WE sites in relation to overall seed density, species richness and diversity. However, the distribution along the year of seed species density was significantly different among the E and WE sites. The Jaccard's similarity index between E and WE sites was relatively low (0.57). Barochory was the most common dispersal mode observed among the 23 species in terms of seed species density (48%), followed by anemochory (39%) and zoochory (13%). In relation to seed density, anemochory was the most frequent dispersal mode (88%). Most species in the zone were categorized as small seeds (92%), and there were no significant differences in the distribution of seed size between E and WE. The spatial pattern of dispersal of the four species with the highest relative importance value index, in both areas, was aggregated. Twelve years of disturbance exclusion were not enough to fully restore the seed rain of the area; some differences were already perceptible after this lapse. On the other hand, zoochorous species were almost absent from both sites. The re-introduction of climax and animal-dispersed species may be, in addition to perturbation exclusion, a viable strategy to accelerate ecological restoration in this area.
Tropical home gardens are widely recognized as reservoirs of biodiversity. Typically, Maya home gardens have an area of intensive management and one of extensive management. In the latter, some wild plant species may find safe sites for establishment, since they exhibit a high degree of similarity (in terms in plant species composition) to the surrounding forest and are dominated by plants with fleshy fruit. Therefore, this may attract frugivorous animals, which in turn may generate some seed rain. The objective of our study was to compare seed rain in the extensively managed areas of home gardens and in the surrounding forest during the fruiting peak in a rural landscape in the Yucatan. We assessed seed rain using seed traps in two habitats: the extensively managed areas of home gardens and an adjacent tropical forest. Seed rain was more abundant, denser and more diverse in the home gardens than in the adjacent forest. Approximately one quarter of the seeds recorded are from species shared between the forest and home gardens, suggesting there is notable seed exchange between these habitats. Also 50% of the seed species exclusively found in home gardens are allochthonous, likely rare species from the forest. In general, our results suggest that home gardens—particularly their extensively managed areas—are effective seed traps for forest species. © The Author(s) 2020.
Tropical forests have been intensively degraded and deforested for different anthropogenic uses, mostly associated to agricultural expansion due to increasing human demands. Therefore, an emerging number of studies has advocated on the benefits of land-sharing strategies such as agroforestry systems which conciliate biodiversity conservation with production. Yet features at both landscape and local scales could affect ecological processes and productivity within agroforests. Here, we used structural equation models to investigate the direct and indirect effects of landscape forest cover, animal seed dispersers and local vegetation variables on the seed rain structure of cocoa (Theobroma cacao) agroforests of the Brazilian Atlantic forest. We sampled seed rain for 12 consecutive months, performed bird and bat surveys and measured local structure variables related to management intensification (i.e., lower abundance and richness of adult trees and lower canopy shading indicating farm intensification) in 15 farms embedded within landscapes showing varying forest cover amount (2.3–74.9 %). Our results indicate that total and animal-dispersed seed richness in cocoa agroforests increased in more forested landscapes induced by the frugivorous bird richness, whereas the abundance of total and animal-dispersed seeds was greater in more shaded farms. Contrary to expectations, the abundance of total and animal-dispersed trees negatively influenced the richness of frugivorous birds, thus indirectly affecting the richness of total and animal-dispersed seeds. Finally, we observed a weak similarity among the composition of arrived seeds and adult trees of animal-dispersed species recorded in the same sampling sites, suggesting that several seeds were actively dispersed from other localities. Our results therefore demonstrate that landscape forest amount and local management intensification play key roles in determining the seed diversity reaching cocoa agroforestry farms. We emphasize the importance of retaining native vegetation cover around the cocoa agroforestry, by either preserving the existing forest remnants or promoting restoration programs within deforested landscapes, in addition to locally ensure tree shading to boost seed arrival and enhance ecosystem functionality. © 2021 Elsevier B.V.
Planting native tree seedlings is the predominant restoration strategy for accelerating forest succession on degraded lands. Planting tree "islands" is less costly and labor intensive than establishing larger plantations and simulates the nucleation process of succession. Assessing the role of island size in attracting seed dispersers, the potential of islands to expand through enhanced seed deposition, and the effect of planting arrangements on seed dispersal by birds and bats informs restoration design. Determining the relative importance of local restoration approach vs. landscape-level factors (amount of surrounding forest cover) helps prioritize methods and locations for restoration. We tested how three restoration approaches affect the arrival of forest seeds at 11 experimental sites spread across a gradient of surrounding forest cover in a 100-km2area of southern Costa Rica. Each site had three 50 X 50 m treatments: (1) control (natural regeneration), (2) island (planting tree seedlings in patches of three sizes: 16 m2, 64 m 2, and 144 m2), and (3) plantation (planting entire area). Four tree species were used in planting (Terminalia amazonia, Vochysia guatemalensis, Erythrina poeppigiana, and Inga edulis). Seed rain was measured for 18 months beginning ~2 years after planting. Plantations received the most zoochorous tree seeds (266.1 ± 64.5 seeds-m-2'yr-1 [mean ± SE]), islands were intermediate (210.4 ± 52.7 seeds.m -2yr-1), and controls were lowest (87.1 ± 13.9 seeds.m-2yr-1). Greater tree seed deposition in the plantations was due to birds (0.51 ± 0.18 seeds'm-2'd -1), not bats (0.07 ± 0.03 seeds-m-2'd -1). Seed rain was primarily smallseeded, early-successional species. Large and medium islands received twice as many zoochorous tree seeds as small islands and areas away from island edges, suggesting there is a minimum island size necessary to increase seed deposition and that seed rain outside of planted areas is strongly reduced. Planting design was more important for seed deposition than amount of forest cover within the surrounding 100- and 500-m radius areas. Establishing plantations and large islands facilitates the arrival of early-successional tree seeds and represents a broadly applicable strategy for increasing seed rain on abandoned agricultural lands. However, more intensive restoration approaches may be necessary for establishment of dispersal-limited species. © 2010 by the Ecological Society of America.
Tropical forests are highly vulnerable to ongoing deforestation, which often involves converting land for agricultural use. While tropical agroforests have been promoted as wildlife-friendly systems, limited information is available on the ability of agroforests to provide diverse fruits that attract birds and thus contribute to essential ecological processes, such as seed dispersal. Here, we evaluated the organization of tropical seed-bird cooccurrence networks in cocoa agroforests of the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. Specifically, we investigated the influence of (i) landscape and local predictors in shaping the structure of seed-bird co-occurrence networks; and (ii) species traits in explaining their interactive role in the networks. We constructed matrices of presence-absence interactions based on morphological matching among the beak width of frugivorous bird species and the size of ornithochorous seed species (both native and exotic species), using field data of seed rain and understory bird surveys from 15 cocoa agroforests. We further evaluated both the effects of landscape forest cover and local shading on five network indices and how functional traits of birds and seeds explain their importance to the network. In total, we obtained 467 events of potential plant-bird interactions, which revealed a modular pattern. We also observed that only canopy shading significantly affected network connectance, and seed diameter was a significant predictor in explaining tree species contribution in the network. Therefore, our findings show that cocoa agroforests with greater shading will have greater opportunities for interactions between frugivorous birds and plants. We also observed that plants with small seeds play a more relevant role in the co-occurrence interaction network. Based on findings, we emphasized that cocoa agroforests likely maintain certain mutualistic relationships to ensure ecosystem functionality and demonstrate that co-occurrence networks have great potential for future seed dispersal networks in agricultural ecosystems.
While the reassembly of fruit-frugivore interactions remains at the forefront of tropical forest restoration, seed dispersal networks emerge as a potential approach to enhance restoration success. This review explores the integration of seed dispersal networks in tropical forest restoration, with the aims of (1) synthesizing important findings in the literature, (2) detailing potential biases in utilizing network theory, and (3) addressing current knowledge gaps and future directions for the field. We first highlight the importance of combining phytocentric and zoocentric approaches when sampling for seed dispersal interactions, as different methodologies have varying effects on network measures, and combining approaches can foster a more comprehensive understanding of dispersal interactions. Furthermore, when integrating seed dispersal networks into restoration goals, we suggest a highly connected and species-rich network is desirable for earlier stages of forest succession where community turnover and transient interactions are pivotal. Nested patterns may emerge throughout varying stages of forest succession, and identifying generalist species that make up nested patterns may be useful for restoration practitioners in both early and later stages of forest regeneration. Modularity should be highest at later stages of succession to maintain community structure and stability, and connector species may play important roles in facilitating seed dispersal across temporal scales. Finally, we emphasize the importance of site-specific long-term datasets, chronosequences, and studies at large spatial scales to continue to understand network reassembly as a function of tropical forest succession and to develop effective strategies that enhance the recovery of tropical forest ecosystems. © 2024 Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation.
Successful forest restoration in tropical environments is limited by the paucity of studies on the initial establishment and early survival requirements of seedlings of most native tropical tree species under disturbed conditions. Here, we evaluated the initial growth responses and the regeneration potential of seedlings of five tree species native to Costa Rica (Hasseltia floribunda, Inga densiflora, Persea americana, Tapirira mexicana and Trichilia pittieri). Seedlings were grown in secondary forests and adjacent open pastures under contrasting conditions of light availability. We quantified seedling growth, survival and herbivory from August 2010 to August 2011 on a monthly basis, and measured differences in leaf mass per area (LMA) at the end of the experiment. We found significant variation in growth responses between the understory of secondary forests and pastures. Growth in height was highest in pastures across all species, with I. densiflora, P. americana and T. mexicana showing the most striking differences. In contrast, H. floribunda and T. pittieri did not show differences in diameter growth between environments. Except for T. mexicana, herbivory increased throughout the experiment in all the species. Herbivory increased faster in pastures for H. floribunda and T. pittieri and showed higher rates in the forest understory for I. densiflora and P. americana. Seedling survival showed significant differences for all species across environments. Survival of H. floribunda and I. densiflora was higher in secondary forests, whereas the other species showed higher survival in pastures. LMA showed higher values in the pastures across all species, showing that individuals exposed to high light conditions had great photosynthetic rate and great leaf construction capacity. Due to their rapid growth and high survival, I. densiflora and T. mexicana showed great potential to restore abandoned pastures and secondary forests. Increasing our knowledge on the response of seedlings under disturbed conditions in tropical ecosystems is critical for improving the restoration of altered environments by matching the ecological amplitude of native species with specific environmental conditions. © 2016, Universidad de Costa Rica. All rights reserved.
Our study tested the effects of herbicide application and cattle removal on the survival and growth of three native tree species planted in pastures within a deforested, dry tropical region of Panama. We investigated whether enrichment planting may be a potential, complementing reforestation tool with natural regeneration. Three economically valuable tree species were chosen for the study; Cedrela odorata L., Enterolobium cyclocarpum (Jacq.) Griseb, and Copaifera aromatica Dwyer. Planted seedlings were monitored for survival, root collar diameter and height growth in the presence or absence of two factors; (1) initial herbicide application and (2) cattle. After 16 months, subsamples of seedlings within each treatment were harvested and measured for dry masses and leaf areas. In the initial stages of development, C. odorata seedlings had the greatest growth rates with herbicide application whereas E. cyclocarpum seedlings had the greatest growth rates with cattle exclusion. The combination of these two factors yielded the best growth for both species. Of the three species, C. odorata had the lowest mortality rates (58%), and the greatest average dry mass (μ = 403.7 g), leaf area (μ = 169.3 m2), diameter growth rate (μ = 3.7 cm year-1) and height growth rate (μ = 81.7 cm year-1) at 16 months. In addition, in the presence of cattle, C. odorata grew significantly better than E. cyclocarpum. To accelerate forest succession, herbicide should be applied initially and cattle removed before enrichment planting. © 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Forest regeneration has increased in many tropical abandoned lands and current restoration commitments in this region aim to restore over 1,400,000 km2 of degraded land by 2030. Although regenerating forests recover biomass, biodiversity, and processes with time, the recovery trajectories may be uncertain due to past disturbances. Currently, there is a lack of knowledge to sustain the effectiveness of passive regeneration for the recovery of riparian forests and the adjacent waterbodies in the tropics, which may compromise the outcomes of ongoing and future tropical riparian restoration programs. We evaluated the drivers of riparian forest structural recovery and how this relates to stream conditions in 12 abandoned pasturelands in eastern Brazilian Amazonia. These pasturelands range across regeneration age (pasture (PA) — 0 to 4 years; young regeneration (YR) — 8 to 12 years; old regeneration (OR) — 18 to 22 years) and years of past land-use (PA — 23.25 average years of past land-use, YR — 18.25, OR — 7). We compared the conditions of these sites to 4 reference sites with conserved forests (REF, >100 years), where there was no recorded pasture use in the past. Short-term responses of forests and streams to passive regeneration indicated high ecosystem resilience after low to intermediate past land-use intensity, reflected in the improvement of stream ecosystems. Such high resilience is possibly attributable to low- to intermediate-intensity pasture-related disturbances, remaining forest matrix, and residual structures (e.g. roots, sprouts, and in-stream wood) observed in the area. Our results suggest a recovery by 12 to 20 years for riparian forests of this region. However, areas degraded by intensive land-use apparently showed delayed recovery. We conclude that seizing resilience windows (defined here as the period when ecosystems retain high potential resilience) is essential to foster passive recovery of riparian forests and streams more cost-effectively in the tropics. © 2022 Elsevier B.V.
To upscale restoration of tropical forest ecosystems, direct seeding—sowing seeds directly into the ground—is potentially a more cost-effective technique than tree planting. However, its success is limited by seed predation, the harshness of environmental conditions on restoration sites and particularly by a lack of information about suitable tree species. Therefore, this study tested the suitability of 23 native forest tree species for direct seeding, to restore a biodiversity-rich, upland, evergreen forest in northern Thailand. Three replicate seed batches of each species were sown randomly in two degraded sites and in a tree nursery under controlled conditions. Seed removal and germination were monitored weekly until no further germination had occurred for more than a month. Subsequently, seedling yield, growth and species performance score were also monitored at appropriate intervals. Nine months after sowing, seed removal differed significantly among species but was generally low, with a cross-species average of 3.4% (±0.5 SE). Seed size was negatively correlated with seed removal. Eight species failed to germinate. Seed germination percentage varied widely among species. Cross-species average germination of the 15 species that germinated was 25% (±6.2 SE). Two species (Adenanthera microsperma and Alangium kurzii) were ranked as having high germination (>50%), five species (Choerospondias axillaris, Spondias pinnata, Diospyros glandulosa, Melia azedarach and Phyllanthus emblica) had medium germination (20–50%) and eight species had low germination (<20%). Following the first dry season, two of the fifteen germinated species failed to establish. Germination and establishment were influenced by seed size, seed storage behavior and successional status. A. microsperma, S. pinnata and C. axillaris are recommended for direct seeding based on their high species performance index values. This study further concluded that selecting desiccation-tolerant seeds, particularly those with medium-to-large sizes, could increase the chances of successful seedling establishment. © 2024 by the authors.
Through slash-and-burn techniques, vast areas formerly occupied by tropical montane cloud forest (TMCF) in Mexico have been converted into croplands and secondary forest of different ages. Despite the dramatic changes in soil properties and processes detected during cropping and forest regeneration, no attempts have been made to develop soil quality indicators (SQI) to assist in the assessment of soil conditions during such changes. SQI are considered to be essential in evaluating plans of forest restoration or management; as such, the objectives of this study were to (i) select soil properties that can be used as SQI during forest regeneration for abandoned crop fields in a TMCF area managed under the slash-and-burn method; and (ii) examine the ecological significance of stand age for function-based interpretations of the selected SQI. To this end, the soil properties of three adjacent chronosequences in El Rincón, Sierra Norte, Southern Mexico were analyzed. Each chronosequence consisted of ordered series of five stands of different age after abandonment: a cornfield and adjacent forests of ~15 (incipient forest), ~45 (young forest), ~75 (mature forest), and≥100 (old-growth forest) years after abandonment. The soil properties of undisturbed old-growth forest stands were used as a reference. After inspection of principal component analysis results and control charts, the following soil properties were chosen as SQI in TMCF areas: soil organic carbon, pH, plant-available P, O horizon thickness and exchangeable Al 3+. The selected SQI displayed different rates of change during forest regeneration. Soil organic carbon had a fast recovery rate and, therefore, a greater ability to return to its original level after disturbance. In contrast, O horizon thickness, soil pH, plant-available P, and exchangeable Al 3+ showed a slow rate of change during the fallow period. SQI did not always change linearly nor improve with the age of the forest. The highest exchangeable Al 3+ concentration was detected in 45-year-old forests, suggesting that at this forest age, soil become an important filter against Al 3+ sensitive species, potentially affecting vegetation composition. Considering the slow recovery rate of some SQI, we estimate that fallow periods of at least 100years are required in order to reach good soil quality in TMCF ecosystems. Management practices should therefore consider the maintenance of forest of different ages spanning at least 100years in the landscape. Doing so would achieve more sustainable management practices by allowing a relatively continuous recovery of the ecosystem without prolonged interruptions of land utilization. © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
The identification of species influencing the occurrence of other associated species is of fundamental importance for the success of forest restoration of degraded areas. The objective of this work is to present a phytosociological and socioeconomic index (IFSE), obtained by techniques of factor analysis, modeling six quantitative variables (abundance, frequency, dominance, biomass, the commercial value of timber and amount of non-timber forest products) and equal number of qualitative variables, whose dummy variable is equal to one, assumed value for those species whose higher earnings amounted to 50 % of the total for each quantitative variables analyzed. Sampling of the dense rain forest (407 ha) was composed by 80 plots of 0.25 ha (4.91 % of sampling intensity) and all individuals with diameter at 1.30 m above the ground (DBH) >= 10 cm were identified and measured. It was recorded 10,105 individuals, including 493 species covering 58 families. The species were ranked by the index proposed in three categories of priority phytosociological and socioeconomic status (high, medium and low). The appropriateness of factor analysis was determined by tests of Bartlett and KMO. The Bartlett's test evaluated the overall significance of the correlation matrix and indicated that correlations were significant at 1 % probability. The KMO test showed that the variables were correlated and the model of variance showed a very good level of fitness to the data. These results endorsed the use of factor analysis to extract factors and estimate the factor scores. The results were statistically validated for construction of the index IFSE and 25 species were selected as the priority ones (key species). And also, it was recomended the planting density for these forest species for restoration of degraded areas in Amazonia.
A major challenge of forest management is to maintain the biodiversity and integrity of the forests while at the same time satisfying human needs through productive activities. While selective extraction of natural resources has less severe consequences on biodiversity and ecosystem function than complete removal of vegetation, such consequences need to be evaluated in detail. "Varas" or stems cut from small trees of tropical dry forests (TDF) in the Pacific Coast of Mexico have been used as plant support stakes in horticultural fields (mainly tomato crops) since the middle of the last century. In this study, we evaluated the effects of selective cutting of plant support stakes on the diversity of woody vegetation of a TDF in northwestern Mexico. Stakes were cut by local harvesters before our assessment of cutting effects. In each of three cutting treatments (T0 = uncut, T1 = one cut event, and T2 = two cut events), we established three sampling plots each consisting of ten 50 m × 2 m parallel transects. All woody plants (stems ≥1.0 cm diameter at 1.3 m height, DBH) were identified and measured on each transect. Species richness (S) decreased as the number of cuts increased (T0 = 65 species, T1 = 50 species, and T2 = 38 species). The Simpson (C) and the Shannon (H′) diversity indices, as well as the rarefaction curves and non-parametric estimates of diversity (Chao1 and ACE) confirmed this tendency of change. Comparison of dominance-diversity curves showed that the woody plant community loses equitability with every additional stake cutting event. The total number of stake providing species did not vary notably across treatments (T0 = 8 species, T1 = 9 species, and T2 = 7 species), but four species reduced their dominance considerably in T2, while Croton septemnervius, the most used species, increased its abundance and relative basal area with each additional stake harvest, reaching a representation of more than 59% of total number of stems in T2. The reduction in species diversity, changes in patterns of dominance, and the proliferation of species associated to disturbed sites suggest that current practices of selective cutting require adjustments to make this forest management application more consistent with local conservation of woody plant species diversity and community structure. © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Understanding how selective logging affects biodiversity is crucial to planning cost-effective conservation strategies in tropical forests, yet there is limited understanding of its impacts on fauna functional diversity in the tropical Americas. We assessed how selective logging intensification and time since logging influence multiple metrics of fauna functional integrity in the Brazilian Amazon by collecting bird and dung beetle data within 48 logging management units that had experienced varying exploitation intensities between 1.5-2.0 and 5.0-6.0 years before the faunal surveys. We investigated assemblage responses and used functional attributes to assess changes in functional diversity, specialization, originality and species rarity. Using point counts and pitfall traps, we collected 5081 records of 182 bird species and 7892 dung beetles from 45 species. Logging intensification led to significant declines in most dung beetle responses and bird body mass, whereas time since logging was a key driver of dung beetle and bird functional and taxonomic diversity. Our study presents novel empirical evidence of how logging intensification effects vary across taxa, ecological metrics and time since logging, which is key to informing forest conservation and further investigating environmental degradation impacts on tropical biodiversity.  © The Author(s), 2024. Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of Foundation for Environmental Conservation.
Tropical montane bird communities are hypothesized to be highly sensitive to anthropogenic disturbance because species are adapted to a narrow range of environmental conditions and display high rates of endemism. We assessed avian sensitivity at regional and continental scales for a global epicenter of montane bird biodiversity, the tropical Andes. Using data from an intensive field study of cloud forest bird communities across 7 landscapes undergoing agricultural conversion in northern Peru (1800–3100 m, 2016–2017) and a pan-Andean synthesis of forest bird sensitivity, we developed management strategies for maintaining avian biodiversity in tropical countrysides and examined how environmental specialization predicts species-specific sensitivity to disturbance. In Peru, bird communities occupying countryside habitats contained 29–93% fewer species compared with those in forests and were compositionally distinct due to high levels of species turnover. Fragments of mature forest acted as reservoirs for forest bird diversity, especially when large or surrounded by mixed successional vegetation. In high-intensity agricultural plots, an addition of 10 silvopasture trees or 10% more fencerows per hectare increased species richness by 18–20%. Insectivores and frugivores were most sensitive to disturbance: abundance of 40–70% of species declined in early successional vegetation and silvopasture. These results were supported by our synthesis of 816 montane bird species studied across the Andes. At least 25% of the species declined due to all forms of disturbance, and the percentage rose to 60% in agricultural landscapes. The most sensitive species were those with narrow elevational ranges and small global range sizes, insectivores and carnivores, and species with specialized trophic niches. We recommend protecting forest fragments, especially large ones, and increasing connectivity through the maintenance of early successional vegetation and silvopastoral trees that increase avian diversity in pastures. We provide lists of species-specific sensitivities to anthropogenic disturbance to inform conservation status assessments of Andean birds. © 2023 The Authors. Conservation Biology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Society for Conservation Biology.
Ecologically sustainable forest management necessitates monitoring forest conditions and the environmental impacts of management activities. Through adaptive management, assessments that reveal excessive environmental impacts require revision of the management plan to ensure that ecological functions and attributes of forest ecosystems are maintained within acceptable limits. But how are these acceptable limits determined? And how are 'normal' or 'natural' conditions defined when these are temporarily or spatially variable. In order to determine the desired biological state of the forest, indicator baseline values, together with some measure of variability under natural conditions are needed. A useful Ecological Criteria and Indicator set should therefore provide objective standards for evaluation, and these standards should account for spatial and temporal variation in indicator states as well as resilience to anthropogenic disturbance. We present a framework within which the standards for assessing ecologically sustainable forest management might be defined. We draw upon published literature to determine the responses of selected indicators to natural and anthropogenic disturbances. Using these values we can begin to predict expected ecological conditions of a sustainably managed forest given information on forest type, disturbance intensity and time since disturbance.
Management of non-point source pollution is of great importance in the context of coffee agriculture, as this land use often coincides with headwater streams that influence water quality at the basin scale. Sustainability certification programs, such as the Rainforest Alliance (RA), provide management guidelines that promote non-point source pollution control in coffee. One of these practices is the maintenance of shade trees within farms, required by RA at a minimum of 40% shade tree cover. Here we assess the effectiveness of this practice in Tarrazii, a high elevation coffee growing region in Costa Rica. We monitored indicators of non-point source pollution in streams with both high and low shade tree cover. Streams with High Shade Tree Cover (HSTC, N= 5 subwatersheds) had 35-55% cover, approximating or exceeding the RA recommendation of at least 40%; and streams with Low Shade Tree Cover (LSTC, N= 5 subwatersheds), had 18-31% cover. We monitored the ten study streams during the dry (April & December), transition (July), and peak (October) rainfall seasons of 2013, and compared responses using t-tests. We found support for the effectiveness of shade tree cover in controlling non-point source pollution: HSTC streams had significantly (p = 0.042) lower mean annual turbidity and significantly (p =0.004) lower turbidity during the transition season. HSTC streams also had significantly (p= 0.05) lower conductivity values during the transition period, although this trend was weaker through the year. Subwatersheds with HSTC streams were characterized by a higher percentage of RA-certified coffee than LSTC streams. Our study provides evidence of the benefits of RA shade tree cover criteria for managing water quality within high elevation tropical agro-ecosystems, especially if implemented at the watershed scale. These results contribute to our understanding of the role of agroforestry certification on tropical ecosystem conservation, and are the first account of the effectiveness of a specific coffee certification guideline on non-point source pollution control. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
The Caatinga is a Brazilian biome, which belongs to the group of dry tropical forests and constitutes one of the largest semiarid areas in the world, with high housing levels of biodiversity. Despite this, the biome has been intensely impacted by anthropic interference, which makes sustainable forest management (SFM) practices an opportunity to associate the conservation of the biome with the generation of income. However, the effects of different SFM practices on the Caatinga balance have not yet been addressed, especially concerning soil and litter. This study aims to answer the following questions: (1) Do forest management practices influence leaf litter’s decomposition and chemical composition? (2) Does the effect of forest management on litter decomposition vary according to its level of intervention in the vegetation? For this, the leaf litter decomposition was evaluated in three forest management conditions and a control condition: clear cutting (CC), selective cutting by minimum diameter (SCD), selective cutting by species (SCS), and unmanaged Caatinga (UC). Decomposition was evaluated using the litterbags method over 260 days. The levels of total nitrogen, polyphenols, lignin, and cellulose in the leaf litter were determined at the beginning and end of the experiment. Our results showed the participation of leaves in the total litter (CC = 15%; SCD = 24%; SCS = 46%; UC = 55%). In all treatments, the leaf material decomposition process occurred with greater intensity after 120 days, reaching losses greater than 33% at 180 days. The management SCS is the practice that most favors the litter decomposition process with the most expressive value of k constant (0.0038 g g−1 dia−1) and half-life of 182 days compared to the others and may have future implications for nutrient cycling. On the other hand, CC and SCD were the practices that most increased the amount and composition of the accumulated litter and the mineralization of chemical compounds of the leaf litter. Graphical abstract: [Figure not available: see fulltext.] © 2021, The Joint Center on Global Change and Earth System Science of the University of Maryland and Beijing Normal University.
Background. Lowland areas in tropical East and Southeast Asia have a long history of conversion from forestland to agricultural land, with many remaining forests being chronically degraded by wood cutting, livestock grazing, and burning. Wetland-breeding amphibians that have evolved in lowland forests in the region have adjusted to changes in habitat composition caused by humans' activities, and populations continue to persist. However, we have little understanding of the impacts of forest disturbance on these species beyond assessments of abundance and distribution, and species considered to be common and widespread have been largely neglected.     Methods. We examined body condition and sex ratios of toads (Duttaphrynus melanostictus), predation risk in treefrogs (2 Polypedates spp.), and growth and survival of leaf litter frogs (2 Microhyla spp.) in agricultural land, degraded forest, and intact forest in two study areas, Thailand and Hong Kong.     Results. Toad populations exhibited higher body condition and female-biased sex ratios in intact forest. Predation of treefrog embryos by flies was lower in intact and degraded forests than in agricultural land. Embryonic survival and larval growth and survival in leaf litter frogs were lower in intact forests than in agricultural land.     Results for each study were similar between study areas. Discussion. For three of five of these common amphibian species, we documented signals of forest loss and disturbance in their populations. Although these species occur in disturbed habitats, loss of forest cover continues to degrade aspects of their population demography. We urge conservation biologists to consider that populations of species appearing to be common, widespread, and tolerant of human disturbance may be eroding over time.
Investigating the impact of silvicultural practices on tropical forest restoration plantations is highly relevant, as there is a growing global demand for large-scale ecological restoration. The objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that native trees respond positively to the intensification of fertilization and weed control in a forest restoration plantation on a site previously used as cropland in the Atlantic Forest region of Brazil. We carried out a study with 22 native tree species, 11 of which were classified as shade species and the other 11 classified as diversity species. We implemented a randomized experimental design in a split-plot design, with six replicates of four treatments: intensive weed control (glyphosate spraying every 3 months) with and without fertilization, and non-intensive control (mechanical control every 6 months), with and without fertilization. We performed fertilization by supplying the site with 53 kg ha−1 of nitrogen, 35 kg ha−1 of phosphorus, and 51 kg ha−1 of potassium. We evaluated individual tree crown areas and increments in basal diameter and height 16 months after planting. In general, growth varied more among species than in weed control and fertilization treatments. Overall, the method of controlling weeds did not influence tree growth, but interacted with species for all growth variables. Fertilization increased tree diameter increment, and interacted with species, leading to diameter and height increments; however, most of the species did not respond to fertilization. Contrary to our expectations and previous findings, silvicultural intensification did not promote higher overall tree growth, probably because the restoration planting was conducted on a cropland with decades of intensive management, which increased soil fertility and reduced weed abundance through periodical maintenance prior to restoration planting. Our results highlight the importance of considering local and historical conditions to decide whether and when management intensification is required to accelerate tree growth in tropical forest restoration plantations. © 2021 Elsevier B.V.
The objective of this study was to analyse the initial medium-term growth of a P. reticulata settlement under different phosphorus doses. The experiment was carried out in an area of Atlantic Forest, Sooretama, Northern Espírito Santo State, Brazil. Five doses of P per each tree (0 g, 27 g, 47 g, 67 g and 87 g) were tested in a randomized block design with three replicates and 18 plants per plot. At 3 months, 9 months and 15 months, height and diameter were measured at the soil level. At 36 months height, diameter at breast height, survival, basal area, and nutritional evaluation of the trees were measured. A logistic model was also used to model the growth in height of individual trees and a logistic model considering fixed effects and mixed form (fixed and random effects), in order to verify if the inclusion of the random effect (tree) would result in gains in terms of accuracy in the estimation of the future height of P. reticulata trees. The species presents potential for use in reforestation programs under edaphoclimatic conditions tested and under similar conditions. The species was not very demanding in P, and the addition of this nutrient promotes negative effects on its growth in the short and medium term. Regarding the model of growth in height, the logistic model adjusted in the mixed form showed to be superior to the traditional adjustment. © 2021, Instituto de Ecologia, A.C.. All rights reserved.
Post-logging silvicultural treatments involving thinning are commonly recommended to increase the commercial timber production under polycyclic harvesting regimes in tropical forests. However, thinning practices intentionally designed to improve commercial timber production may alter species composition and functional composition. Low, medium, and high intensity thinning following logging plus a logged only control was applied in an Australian tropical forest in 1969 to assess the long-term liberation thinning impacts on the commercial timber volume and the functional composition of the regenerating forest. Over 46 years following thinning, only medium- and high-intensity thinning promoted recruitment of commercial trees into the >10 cm diameter class. All three thinning treatments enhanced the standing volume of most desirable commercial species, mainly driven by the growth of remaining non-harvested trees in the 10–20 cm diameter class. The merchantable timber volume of other less desirable species was also promoted in the four treatments. Over the first 28 years after treatment (1969–1997), the average annual timber volume accumulation rate was highest in the medium-intensity thinning (1.97 m3 ha−1 year−1). The positive impacts of medium- and high-intensity thinning on commercial timber volume growth lasted longer than the low-intensity thinning. From 1997 to 2015, average annual volume increments increased in the medium- and high-intensity thinning, changed little in the low-intensity thinning, and decreased in the untreated control. Moreover, the medium- and high-intensity thinning led the community functional composition to shift towards early-successional species, which reduced community-weighted mean wood densities. The changes induced by intensive thinning treatments may affect the recovery of forest biomass and biodiversity. Hence, the trade-off between enhancing timber stocks and maintaining functional composition should be considered during planning and implementation of tropical forest management. © 2019 Elsevier B.V.
Tropical dry woodlands and savannas harbour high levels of biodiversity and carbon, but are also important regions for agricultural production. This generates trade-offs between agriculture and the environment, as agricultural expansion and intensification typically involve the removal of natural woody vegetation. Cattle ranching is an expanding land use in many of these regions, but how different forms of ranching mediate the production/environment trade-off remains weakly understood. Here, we focus on the Argentine Chaco, to evaluate trade-offs between beef production and carbon storage in grazing systems with different levels of woody cover (n = 27). We measured beef productivity and carbon storage during 2018/19 and used a regression framework to quantify the trade-off between both, and to analyze which agroclimatic and management variables explain the observed trade-off. Our main finding was that silvopastures had the lowest trade-off between beef production and carbon storage, as management in these systems seeks to increase herbaceous forage by removing shrubs, while maintaining most of the bigger trees that contain most above-ground carbon. The most important variable explaining the beef production/carbon storage trade-off was pasture management, specifically the number of shrub encroachment control interventions, with a lower trade-off for higher numbers of interventions. Unfortunately, more interventions can also result in woody cover degradation over time, and shrub encroachment management must therefore be improved to become sustainable. Overall, our study highlights the strong environmental trade-offs associated with beef production in dry woodlands and savanna, but also the key role of good management practices in lowering this trade-off. Specifically, silvopastoral systems can increase beef production as much as converting woodlands to tree-less pastures, but silvopastures retain much more carbon in aboveground vegetation. Silvopastoral systems thus represent a promising land-use option to lower production/environment trade-offs in the Dry Chaco and likely many other tropical dry woodlands and savannas. © 2023 Elsevier B.V.
The biodiversity of tropical forests depends on certain level of environmental disturbances, such as the natural fall of trees providing clearings, seed germination, growth and development of plants that environment. On the other hand, forest management intervenes in this natural cycle, by removing larger trees of the species which are of great commercial value. However, little is known about natural growth and regeneration of the hundreds of tropical species; and this constitutes a gap and obstacle to the implementation of sustainable forest management, by permitting the maintenance of biodiversity. In this regard, this study aims to determine the age and growth periodicity of stem of native Cedrela sp. trees in Acre under different growth conditions (sites and microsites) to provide subsidies to sustainable forest management in this region. Trees of Cedrela sp were selected at three sites: Experimental Reserve Catuaba (REC) (three microsites), Farm São Jorge (FSJ) Zoobotanic Park (PZ). Wood samples were collected at DBH of the trunk for the dendrochronological analysis. This was followed by the demarcation, counting and measuring the width of growth rings. Next, the Cofecha program was used for the quality control of the series of growth rings. Using the parameters: number, average width of the growth ring, standard deviation and the DBH of the tree stems, a similarity of trees Cedrela sp. in site and microsites was observed by multivariate statistical analysis.Different growth conditions (sites and environments) significantly affected the radial growth of trees Cedrela sp., demonstrating the potential of dendrochronology as a tool for forest management.
Seed removal has been considered an important ecological filter in plant community assembly during the first years of restoration. However, little is known about the influence of the restored ecosystems attributes on seed consumption patterns by predators and, consequently, on the composition and structure of the regenerating community. We tested whether seed removal differs between natural and restored ecosystems and whether it depends on the seed consuming agent (insects, rodents and birds). We evaluated seed removal in three forest restoration treatments (two active and one passive) established over 20 years ago. We used a fragment of old-growth native seasonal semideciduous tropical forest close to the experimental area, as a reference ecosystem. We installed exclusion stations for different consumer groups (insects, rodents and birds) of seeds belonging to four tree species from different successional groups and dispersal syndromes (Tabernaemontana hystrix Steud, Schinus terebinthifolius Raddi, Pterogyne nitens Tul and Anadenanthera colubrina var. cebil (Griseb.) Altschul. Insects were the main agent removing seeds from the species tested as a whole, regardless of the restoration treatment. Seed removal proportions were generally low and differed between active and passive restoration treatments, depending on the tree species. However, they were similar to the native forest, regardless of the restoration treatment. We found an effect of the interaction of restoration treatments and consuming agents only for one of the zoochoric species tested (Tabernaemontana hystrix). Seed removal no longer seems to represent a biotic filter limiting plant recruitment for T. hystrix, S. terebinthifolius, P. nitens and A. colubrina recruitment in the restoration treatments, regardless of the restoration technique. © 2021 Elsevier B.V.
Coffee agroforests may be structurally and floristically complex and may contain a significant fraction of species from biodiverse and threatened tropical montane forest biotas; hence, understanding the dynamics of tropical forest biodiversity in coffee agroecosystems has emerged as a centrally important area of tropical conservation biology research. We conducted a morphospecies analysis on foliage-dwelling beetles collected from coffee plants on four coffee farms in southern Chiapas, Mexico, to characterize variation in the abundance, species richness, and species composition of this mega-diverse taxon in relation to coffee cultivation system, spatio-temporal variation, and predator removal. We constructed thirty-two cages to exclude birds and bats on four farms, each enclosing 7-10 coffee plants and paired with an adjacent uncaged control plot, and then collected beetles from coffee foliage with D-Vac aspirators in each plot once every 3 months for one year. We classified the 2662 beetles collected into 293 morphospecies, representing 42 families of beetles. Extrapolation and interpolation analyses revealed a very high level of species richness, with no plateau and only a slight leveling trend observed in our species accumulation curves. We found that low-shade systems contain equal or higher beetle abundance, lower species richness, more highly homogenized species composition, and higher abundance of coffee berry borer pests on coffee foliage than do high-shade systems. We observed no effect of flying vertebrate exclusion on the coffee foliage beetle assemblage, but did find significant variation in abundance, species richness, and species composition of coffee foliage beetles across seasons and study sites. The increased beetle biodiversity of high-shade coffee cultivation systems has important implications both for the preservation of native biodiversity in coffee growing regions and for the control of agricultural pests such as the coffee berry borer. © 2008 Gesellschaft für Ökologie.
1. As the role of forestry-based options for reducing or mitigating greenhouse gas emissions is debated by policymakers, there is a need to inform the debate by synthesizing existing information on carbon dynamics in tropical forest systems and by applying this information to a range of possible interventions in forestry. 2. To investigate the consequences of reductions in logging damage for ecosystem carbon storage, we constructed a model to simulate changes in biomass and carbon pools following logging of primary dipterocarp forests in south-east Asia. We adapted a physiologically driven tree-based model of natural forest gap dynamics (FORMIX) to simulate forest recovery following logging. 3. Following selective logging, simulated ecosystem carbon storage declined from prelogging levels (213 Mg C ha-1) to a low of 97 Mg C ha-1, 7 years after logging. Carbon storage in biomass approached prelogging levels about 120 years after logging. 4. The relationship between fatal stand damage and ecosystem carbon storage was not linear, with biomass recovery following logging severely limited by 50-60% stand damage. 5. Results from simulations suggest that when 20-50% of the stand is killed during logging, replacing persistent forest species with pioneer tree species can reduce the site's potential for carbon storage by 15-26% over 40-60 years. 6. Reducing fatal damage from 40% to 20% of the residual stand, as was the case with a pilot project in Malaysia, was associated with an increase of 36 Mg C ha-1 in mean carbon storage over 60 years. 7. Efforts to monitor and verify the benefits, either through carbon sequestration in new growth or carbon retention in existing biomass, of offset projects involving tropical forests and natural forest management should focus on above-ground biomass, particularly the large trees. Selection of the most appropriate allometric equations for a site and species is important because of their influence on biomass estimates.
Reconstructing the dynamics and drivers of late Quaternary megafaunal extinctions requires direct radiometric date series that are assessed within probabilistic statistical frameworks. Extinction chronologies are poorly understood for many tropical regions, including Madagascar, which had a diverse, now-extinct Holocene large vertebrate fauna including a “megaherbivore” guild of endemic hippopotami and elephant birds. Madagascar's megaherbivores likely played vital roles in regulating ecosystem structure and nutrient cycling, but few direct dates are available for megaherbivore specimens identified to species level, with uncertainty over when and why different representatives of this guild disappeared. Here, we conduct a new investigation into Malagasy megaherbivore extinction dynamics, including 30 new AMS dates and 63 audited published dates. We use Gaussian-resampled inverse-weighted McInerny (GRIWM) analysis to estimate species-specific extinction dates for three elephant bird species (Aepyornis hildebrandti, Mullerornis modestus, Vorombe titan), eggshell representing Aepyornis or Vorombe, and two hippo species (Hippopotamus lemerlei, H. madagascariensis), and to estimate extinction dates for megaherbivore communities in different biomes. Megaherbivores persisted for millennia after first human arrival. Extinction date estimates vary significantly between biomes, with disappearance from dry deciduous forest over a millennium earlier than other biomes, possibly reflecting local variation in megaherbivore population densities or human pressures. However, megaherbivore communities including all elephant bird and hippo species persisted elsewhere across Madagascar until ∼1200-900 BP, when they collapsed suddenly. Extinctions are closely correlated in time with intensive conversion of forests to grassland at ∼1100-1000 BP, probably associated with a shift to agro-pastoralism and representing a radical change in sustainability of prehistoric human interactions with biodiversity. © 2021
Background and aims: Restoring healthy ecosystem depends on recovering not only biodiversity, but also ecosystem processes and functionality. We investigated the effects of tree community parameters and site abiotic conditions on nutrient cycling in restored forests. Methods: We assessed litter production and nutrient inputs in five 16-year old restored forests established using different restoration methods and species combinations, i.e. unplanted control (natural regeneration), direct seeding, agroforestry, mixed commercial species plantation (commercial mix), and high-diversity plantation, replicated at two sites that differed in soil fertility. We used adjacent seasonal semideciduous forest remnants as references. Results: Restoration treatments with intermediate and high species richness had higher litter and nutrient inputs and did not differ from the reference forest. In the more fertile site, litter and nutrient inputs increased across different treatments with increasing stand density, whereas in the low fertility site, litter and nutrient inputs in the different treatments increased with increasing tree species richness and the proportion of putative nitrogen-fixing tree species. Conclusions: Restoration treatments, even those with low species richness, but with a relatively high proportion of trees with nitrogen-fixing capability might be effective in restoring nutrient cycles in lower fertility soils, whereas in the more fertile soils it is possible to increase nutrient inputs by establishing restoration treatments at high stem densities. Our results suggest that the magnitude of relationships among plant community parameters and nutrient cycling depends strongly on site conditions. © 2021, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
Deforestation diminishes the ecological services that a forest provides (e.g., flood prevention). To restore such services, reforestation is often utilized. The full restoration of the original forest ecosystem, however, can take several decades. The present study was conducted to identify the missing key components for rehabilitation of a degraded plot of land in Thailand on which Acacia trees were planted 18 or 19 years ago. Canopy spectral and soil physicochemical profiles of the Acacia plantation plot showed more advanced rehabilitation than in the soil microbial functions, as represented by soil dehydrogenase activity and community-level physiological profiles, when compared with those of a natural evergreen forest. The slower restoration of the soil microbial functions was thought to: (1) be attributed to the loss of certain microbes that played important roles in the evergreen forest soil, and (2) restrict the restoration of the entire forest ecosystem which was found to be still progressing towards a full restoration of the land's original conditions. Finally, possible measures for further rehabilitation of the ecosystem were discussed.
The Atlantic Forest in Brazil is a biodiversity hotspot, yet its diverse ecosystems and species are becoming increasingly threatened by habitat loss and extreme habitat fragmentation. Most habitat patches of Atlantic Forest are dispersed across agricultural landscapes (e.g., grazing and cropping) in relatively small and isolated fragments (80% < 50 ha). Forest fragments < 1 ha, scattered trees in pastures, tree lines on trenches and fences, and remnant riparian forest, collectively called here Small Landscape Elements (SLEs), are very common in this context. While these SLEs make up much of the Atlantic Forests footprint, very little is known about their role or impact on the persistence and conservation of species. In this study, we investigate the role of SLEs on landscape configuration, particularly their contribution toward landscape connectivity of individual species and the genetic flow of species between larger forest fragments. We randomly selected 20 buffers of 707 hectares within a 411,670 hectare area of the Atlantic Forest that was completely covered by forest in the past located in the south of Minas Gerais State, Brazil. The forest cover randomly varied between these buffers. We used graph theory to measure landscape connectivity as the probability of connectivity for different disperser movement types between landscape knots (habitat patches). We used three estimated dispersal distances in the models: pollen disperser insect (50 m), low-mobility seed disperser bird (100 m) and high-mobility seed disperser bird (760 m). The SLEs together increased the probability of connection by roughly 50%, for all model dispersers, if compared to a theoretical baseline landscape containing no SLEs. Of all SLEs, riparian forests contribute the most toward enhancing landscape connectivity. In these highly fragmented landscapes, such as the Atlantic Forest (>70%), the position of SLEs within the landscapes was more important than their respective areas for connectivity. Although the landscapes were deeply fragmented, we showed that the presence of SLEs can increase connectivity and reduce further biodiversity loss in the Atlantic Forest. © Copyright © 2021 Siqueira, de Carvalho, Rhodes, Archibald, Rezende and van den Berg.
Our work aimed to test the hypothesis that soil microscale heterogeneity act as a community ecological driver, increasing diversity and promoting structural shifts on the Seasonally Dry Tropical Forest (SDTF) tree community. We evaluated the relationship between microscale edaphic variations and floristic-structural patterns of tree communities in a SDTF fragment located in the southern end of the Brazilian Caatinga domain. Vegetation and soil data were obtained through 27 sample units of 400 m(2)(20 m x 20 m), within each one we measured and identified at species level all arboreal individuals with Circumference at the Breast Height greater or equal to 10 cm, and also collected the soil samples. Through the data we evaluated soil variation influence on the tree community structural and floristic patterns trough generalized linear models. Soil explained the small-scale structural and floristic variations, contributing significantly to biomass, sprouting and to floristic relationships between sample units. It was also observed a possible relation of the result with the Caatinga domain biogeographic history, due the presence of Sedimentary Caatinga species, which are not expected for the study region. Soil plays an important role in driving small-scale complexity and diversity of SDTF, but we also suggest that Caatinga biogeographic events have influence on the high heterogeneity patterns.
In response to unsustainable timber production in tropical forest concessions, voluntary forest management certification programs such as the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) have been introduced to improve environmental, social, and economic performance over existing management practices. However, despite the proliferation of forest certification over the past two decades, few studies have evaluated its effectiveness. Using temporally and spatially explicit village-level data on environmental and socio-economic indicators in Kalimantan (Indonesia), we evaluate the performance of the FSC-certified timber concessions compared to non-certified logging concessions. Employing triple difference matching estimators, we find that between 2000 and 2008 FSC reduced aggregate deforestation by 5 percentage points and the incidence of air pollution by 31%. It had no statistically significant impacts on fire incidence or core areas, but increased forest perforation by 4 km2 on average. In addition, we find that FSC reduced firewood dependence (by 33%), respiratory infections (by 32%) and malnutrition (by 1 person) on average. By conducting a rigorous statistical evaluation of FSC certification in a biodiversity hotspot such as Indonesia, we provide a reference point and offer methodological and data lessons that could aid the design of ongoing and future evaluations of a potentially critical conservation policy. © 2015 Miteva et al. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
While it is well documented that informal social ties play a role in information exchange on land management practices, the structural features of such networks that govern individual choice on land use change remain elusive. This study aims to correlate information network structures with localized or "micro-level" land use diversification and land use change. We ask the following: (i) what is the network structure of producers who manage diverse land use types? and (ii) are network topologies and the emergence of new network ties related to land use change? This work draws on a longitudinal study with producers in the transition zone of Ghana. We use social network analysis to assess the social relationships of 40 focal producers embedded in networks of 116 producers, combined with field observation to chart land use types and size. Land use ordered across eight types, from forest and agroforests to crops and grasslands. Converting land to crop production was correlated to the addition of ties in a focal producer's network, while the diversity of land use types was correlated to the number of institutional ties as well as gender of the focal producer. We illustrate that local networks relate to land use change whereas external ties drive the introduction of new land use types. Given that the diversity of land use types may be a signature of livelihood resilience, the promotion of external, bridging ties can contribute to an increase in land use diversification. However, a strong local network is needed to implement this change.
Many threats to tropical forests and their biodiversity result from social and economic factors. Policies to conserve the forests depend on being able to demonstrate their economic value and on social measures involving local community participation. Research to calculate the total economic value of the forests has involved estimating the direct use value of forest products, the indirect values from environmental benefits and services, and option and existence values. Threats to the forest have endangered the social and economic welfare of many indigenous groups; their survival and the conservation of the forests can often be achieved by reinforcing traditional systems of land tenure and environmental management.
Successional dynamics of plants and animals during tropical forest regeneration have been thoroughly studied, while fungal compositional dynamics during tropical forest succession remain unknown, despite the crucial roles of fungi in ecological processes. We combined tree data and soil fungal DNA metabarcoding data to compare richness and community composition along secondary forest succession in Costa Rica and assessed the potential roles of abiotic factors influencing them. We found a strong coupling of tree and soil fungal community structure in wet tropical primary and regenerating secondary forests. Forest age, edaphic variables, and regional differences in climatic conditions all had significant effects on tree and fungal richness and community composition in all functional groups. Furthermore, we observed larger site-to-site compositional differences and greater influence of edaphic and climatic factors in secondary than in primary forests. The results suggest greater environmental heterogeneity and greater stochasticity in community assembly in the early stages of secondary forest succession and a certain convergence on a set of taxa with a competitive advantage in the more persisting environmental conditions in old-growth forests. Our work provides unprecedented insights into the successional dynamics of fungal communities during secondary tropical forest succession. © 2021 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Coastal wetlands are essential for regulating the global carbon budget through soil carbon sequestration and greenhouse gas (GHG-CO2, CH4, and N2O) fluxes. The conversion of coastal wetlands to agricultural land alters these fluxes' magnitude and direction (uptake/release). However, the extent and drivers of change of GHG fluxes are still unknown for many tropical regions. We measured soil GHG fluxes from three natural coastal wetlands-mangroves, salt marsh, and freshwater tidal forests- A nd two alternative agricultural land uses-sugarcane farming and pastures for cattle grazing (ponded and dry conditions). We assessed variations throughout different climatic conditions (dry-cool, dry-hot, and wet-hot) within 2 years of measurements (2018-2020) in tropical Australia. The wet pasture had by far the highest CH4 emissions with 1231±386mgm-2d-1, which were 200-fold higher than any other site. Dry pastures and sugarcane were the highest emitters of N2O with 55±9mgm-2d-1 (wet-hot period) and 11±3mgm-2d-1 (hot-dry period, coinciding with fertilisation), respectively. Dry pastures were also the highest emitters of CO2 with 20±1gm-2d-1 (wet-hot period). The three coastal wetlands measured had lower emissions, with salt marsh uptake of-0.55±0.23 and-1.19±0.08gm-2d-1 of N2O and CO2, respectively, during the dry-hot period. During the sampled period, sugarcane and pastures had higher total cumulative soil GHG emissions (CH4+N2O) of 7142 and 56124CO2-eqkgha-1yr-1 compared to coastal wetlands with 144 to 884CO2-eqkgha-1yr-1 (where CO2-eq is CO2 equivalent). Restoring unproductive sugarcane land or pastures (especially ponded ones) to coastal wetlands could provide significant GHG mitigation. © 2021 Naima Iram et al.
The role of tropical forests for maintaining environmental functions is decreasing due to the rapid changes to agricultural purposes. Agroforestry system is assumed to be an alternative system which reduces the negative impact of the conversion in term of maintaining the level of soil macrofauna diversity. This study was conducted at UB Forest within the period November 2017 to February 2018 by collecting soil macrofauna from 9 different land use types using hand sorting along with pitfall sampling for comparison. ANOVA and various diversity indexes were used (Shannon index, Pielu index, etc) to determine macrofauna structure and communities. Total soil C was examined using Walkley and Black method along with Particulate Organic Matter (POM) C fractionation approaches. Litter inputs were collected using a litter trap method, while in-situ litter were determined using destructive methods. Biplot and CVA multivariate analyses were adopted to determine the impact of different management on soil macrofauna diversity and structure. The result showed that conversion to agriculture practices reduced the structure, population and abundance of soil macrofauna as litter production, organic matter and soil C content decreased. The lowest abundance of individual soil macrofauna at monoculture system (PM) was reduced to 45 morphospecies compared to pine coffee agroforestry at the age of 4 (PK4:20 years after planting) system as much as 104 morphospecies. There was a strong relationship between litter thickness and the abundance of soil macrofauna. Both methods (Hand sorting vs Pitfalls traps), had a different ability for collecting soil macrofauna communities. Species occurs at rich or low organic matter input can be adopted as soil macrofauna bioindicator of changes on an ecosystem. Biplot and CVA methods can be used to distinguish and to cluster the impact of different management at various agroforestry systems. © 2019 IRC-MEDMIND. All rights reserved.
The mesofauna has an important function in the soil and it is represented mainly by Acari Oribatida and Collembola. We report the first data on the density and diversity of the soil mesofauna in Benjamin Constant, Amazonas State, Brazil. The following systems were evaluated: primary forest, secondary forest, agroforestry system, cultivated areas and pastures. A total of 101 samples were collected 100 m apart from each other and specimens were collected by using Berlese-Tullgren method. The highest density was registered in secondary forest (29,776 specimens.m-2). Acari Oribatida was the dominant group (7.072 specimens.m-2) in the pasture, suggesting that mites show higher capacity of adaptation to disturbed environments and/or due to the presence of gregarious species. The density of Collembola (5,632 specimens.m-2) was higher in secondary forest. Formicidae was the dominant group (27,824 specimens.m-2) and its highest density occurred in the secondary forest (12,336 specimens.m-2). Seven species and ten morphospecies of Isoptera and three species of Symphyla were identified. The highest density and diversity were found in secondary forest. One supposes that the low density of mesofauna found in all of the studied systems is being influenced by soil structure and composition as well as litter volume. For SUT, the composition of taxonomic groups in the cultivated areas is similar to the one found in primary forest, while the groups found in the agroforestry system are similar to those in the pasture, which may help to decide on land use strategies.
Decomposition is a key process driving carbon and nutrient cycling in ecosystems worldwide. The home field advantage effect (HFA) has been found to accelerate decomposition rates when litter originates from “home” when compared to other (“away”) sites. It is still poorly known how HFA plays out in tropical, riparian forests, particularly in forests under restoration. We carried out three independent reciprocal litter transplant experiments to test how litter quality, soil nutrient concentrations, and successional stage (age) influenced HFA in tropical riparian forests. These experimental areas formed a wide gradient of soil and litter nutrients, which we used to evaluate the more general hypothesis that HFA varies with dissimilarity in soil nutrients and litter quality. We found that HFA increased with soil nutrient dissimilarity, suggesting that litter translocation uncouples relationships between decomposers and litter characteristics; and with litter N:P, indicating P limitation in this system. We also found negative HFA effects at a site under restoration that presented low decomposer ability, suggesting that forest restoration does not necessarily recover decomposer communities and nutrient cycling. Within each of the independent experiments, the occurrence of HFA effects was limited and their magnitude was not related to forest age, nor soil and litter quality. Our results imply that HFA effects in tropical ecosystems are influenced by litter nutrient limitation and soil nutrient dissimilarity between home and away sites, but to further disentangle major HFA drivers in tropical areas, a gradient of dissimilarity between litter and soil properties must be implemented in future experimental designs. Abstract in Portuguese is available with online material. © 2023 Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation.
Aim Ecological strategies are the growth and survival tactics employed by species in response to various environmental conditions. We aimed to identify the abiotic drivers for variation in ecological strategies of species in forest vegetation across different climatic zones. Methods We established 50 0.04-ha forest dynamics plots in each of four forest vegetation types across different climatic zones respectively. Three leaf functional traits (leaf area, specific leaf area and leaf dry matter content) of woody plant species and 7 soil factors were sampled and measured. Based on competitor, stress-tolerator, ruderal (CSR) theory and the CSR ordination method (StrateFy), we classified plants into four groups according to their ecological strategies. Redundancy analysis was used to access the key drivers of variation in plant ecological strategies across different forest types. Results The proportion of C-strategists decreased with increasing latitude, from tropical to cold-temperate forests. Except for the tropical forest, the proportion of S-strategists increased while that of Int-strategists (the intermediate type of strategy between the competitor, stress-tolerator, and ruderal strategies) decreased with increasing latitude. Ten abiotic variables (soil pH, available phosphorus, available nitrogen, precipitation of the warmest quarter, temperature seasonality, annual temperature range, precipitation of the wettest month, mean temperature of the warmest quarter, elevation, and precipitation of the driest month) were significantly correlated with plant ecological strategies of species in different forest types. Conclusions Contrary to our expectation, soil nutrients were more important than seasonal climatic factors in determining the ecological strategies of species in forests across different climatic zones.
Identifying soil characteristics associated with the plant’s resource use and acquisition strategy at different scales could be a crucial step to understanding community assembly and plant strategy. There is an increasing trend that plant functional properties can be an important driver of ecosystem functioning. However, major knowledge gaps exist about how soil abiotic properties, shape species diversity, above-ground biomass (AGB) and plant functional diversity in the Bawangling tropical forest (TCF) of Hainan island. Hence we hypothesized that plant functional traits and above-ground biomass would be strongly associated with soil abiotic factors given their direct relationship to soil resource acquisition and use. Here, we used 12 plant functional traits (FTs), above-ground biomass (AGB), and five soil nutrients in the Bawangling tropical cloud forest of Hainan Island by using a polynomial regression model and multivariate correlations to show relationship and identify how plants allocate their limited resources to adapt to their surroundings. Various phytosociological attributes were assessed and an Importance Value Index (IVI) value was calculated for each species to determine the dominant species. More than half of the total variations could be attributed to interspecific variations in H, DBH, LA, LMA, and LDW. From a taxonomic perspective; we found that species-level variance was more significant for plant functional traits and soil nutrients like TN, AP, TP, and OM. On the other hand, variation in specific stem density (SSD), leaf thickness (LT), leaf phosphorus (LP) and leaf soluble sugar (LS) was an exception for these tendencies. Among soil nutrients, soil nitrogen and phosphorus significantly impact the species and functional traits. Furthermore, the soil AN and TP we also found to have a comparatively strong positive relationship with above-ground biomass (AGB) as compared with other soil nutrients. The morpho-physiological functional traits showed a trade-off between conservative and acquisitive resource usage. These variations suggested that the relationships of functional traits, AGB, and species with soil nutrients mainly AN and TP in tropical cloud forests can directly affect the growth, reproduction, and survival of the species and are beneficial for the species co-existence and maintenance of biodiversity. Copyright © 2024 Batool, Bahadur and Long.
Revealing the assembly mechanisms of the soil microbial community, which is crucial to comprehend microbial biodiversity, is a central focus in ecology. The distribution patterns of microbial elevational diversity have been extensively studied, but their assembly processes and drivers remain unclear. Therefore, it is essential to unravel the relationship between the deterministic and stochastic processes of the microbial community assembly and elevational gradients. Here, our study built upon previous physicochemical analyses of soil samples collected along an elevational gradient (900–1500 m) in Daiyun mountain, a subtropical forest located in southeastern China. Using the phylogenetic-bin-based null model analysis (icamp) and multiple regression on matrices approach, we explored the major drivers that influence the assembly processes of soil bacterial and fungal community across elevations. The results showed that: (1) bacterial rare taxa exhibited a broad habitat niche breadth along the elevational gradient; (2) homogeneous selection and homogenizing dispersal proved to be the most important assembly processes for the bacterial and fungal community; (3) soil phosphorus availability mediated the relative importance of deterministic and stochastic processes in the soil microbial community. Notably, the relative abundance of dominant microbial taxa controlled by homogeneous selection and homogenizing dispersal increased with increasing soil phosphorus availability. Collectively, the assembly processes of microbial elevational communities of the subtropical mountains in China can be explained to some extent by variations in the soil phosphorus availability. This conclusion provides valuable insights into the prediction of soil microbial diversity and phosphorus nutrient cycling in subtropical montane forests. © 2023 by the authors.
Questions: We studied the importance of soil properties and neighbouring forest cover in affecting plant community biomass and assembly during the tropical forest restoration process. We also investigated how compositional responses depended on traits expected to influence individual success. Location: Forest restoration sites across anthropogenic grasslands in mixed use agricultural watersheds, eastern São Paulo state, Brazil. Methods: We identified and measured all woody individuals (DBH ≥ 5 cm) in four 200-m² plots per site. Then we translated these measurements into above-ground biomass (AGB), and related AGB variability to neighbouring forest cover, soil texture and chemical fertility using mixed effect models. We assessed the effect of these predictors on different species groups, arranged according to variation in wood density, tree height or habitat selectivity, through multivariate abundance models. Results: AGB ranged between 0 and 104.7 t/ha (median of 10.4 t/ha), with high variation within, as well as between, watersheds. Sand percentage, forest cover and the interaction between soil nutrient concentrations and sand percentage were good predictors of measured AGB. The most parsimonious model projected a seven growing seasons AGB recovery of 70.90 t/ha, when a site is on fertile soils with 10% sand and surrounded by forest cover of 50%. In contrast, only 5.24 t/ha is predicted on acidic-poor soils with 67% sand and 0% forest cover. Increasing forest cover favoured smaller trees and habitat generalists while increasing sand percentage inhibited taller species and forest specialists. Sand percentage constrained softwoods in fertile soils. Conclusion: Our results confirm that the likelihood of restoration to pre-disturbance conditions is constrained in contexts of higher degradation, such as when agricultural use adversely affects soil properties and/or motivates extreme deforestation. Lower AGB found on sandy soils suggests that forest recovery is sensitive to local drought intensification. Given regional projections for extended dry seasons, restoration approaches could consider targeting alternative reference states, rather than historical/undisturbed ones, under highly altered environments, while aiming to improve soil and microclimate conditions to allow moist tropical forest recovery where feasible. © 2018 International Association for Vegetation Science
Corridor engineering is a common approach for wildlife conservation. The influence of the practice on soil properties including nutrients and organic matter, however, remains poorly investigated. In order to predicate the long-term effects of Asian elephant (Elephas maximus L.) conservation corridors (AECC) of the Greater Mekong Sub-region (GMS) on soil properties and functional recovery, we studied the soil comprehensive accumulation ability and estimated total recovery time under two major forest types on which the corridor is built (natural secondary forest and rubber plantation) and one forest type generated by ecological replanting on existing rubber plantation in comparison with soils under primary rain forest and fallow land in Xishuangbanna, Southwest China. Soil samples were taken from five research sites and fifteen soil properties were measured.     On a 30-year basis, soil recovery differed significantly in the three regimes. The natural secondary forest regime had the highest comprehensive accumulation of about 92% and the shortest estimated recovery time (37-40 years). In contrast, the monoculture rubber plantation, despite constant fertilizer and management input, yielded the poorest recovery result of about 75% and the longest recovery time (95-100 years). From the perspective of soil recovery, this regime appears unsustainable. However, the ecological replanting using local rain forest trees and shrubs thereby to build forest structure complexity and diversity on the monoculture rubber plantation improved comprehensive accumulation ability of about 8% (from 75% to 83%) and shortened the recovery time (40 years). The results suggest that the corridor engineering by natural secondary forest regime or by ecological replanting of monoculture rubber plantation can serve as effective regimes for soil properties recovery. Crown Copyright (C) 2012 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Southeast Asia is highly biodiverse and currently experiences among the highest rates of tropical deforestation globally, but impacts on biodiversity are not well synthesized. We use Bayesian multi-level modeling to meta-analyse 831 pairwise comparisons of biodiversity in sites subject to land-use driven deforestation (for example, plantations or logged forest) versus undisturbed sites (control sites). After controlling for hierarchical dependencies, we show that biodiversity is a fifth lower in sites with these land-use driven deforestation (95% credible interval = 16%-28%, mean = 22%). This reduction was greater when forest losses were of high-intensity (34% reduction in biodiversity) compared to low-intensity (18% reduction), and effects were consistent across biogeographic regions and taxa. Oil-palm plantations led to the greatest reduction in biodiversity (39%, CI 27%-48%), and agroforests the least (24%, CI 10%-37%). We also find that biodiversity was reduced by 26% (CI 4%-42%) in secondary forest sites compared to undisturbed control sites, but biodiversity was the same in intermediate or mature-aged secondary forest compared to control sites (although species composition was potentially altered). Overall, our study provides a new line of evidence of the substantial detrimental impacts of land-use driven deforestation and particular types of land-use on the biodiversity of Southeast Asia.
The capability of tropical forest to recover from extensive land-use remains a matter of debate, despite its importance for guiding conservation and restoration policies. This is especially the case for Southeast Asia. Fortunately, the Sunda Shelf was extensively exposed during the Last Glacial Maximum sea-level lowstand, providing a unique window to study the long-term and landscape-scale development of tropical forest in new accommodation spaces that may be analogous to those emerge after the cessation of human activities. Here we conduct pollen analyses on three sediment cores from the southern South China Sea – two located in front of the Sunda Shelf paleo-river mouths and one close to the northern Borneo – in order to evaluate the similarity/difference between the “primary” and “secondary” tropical forest of Southeast Asia. The assemblages of major pollen taxa and the life-form composition of identified plant types are found to be quite similar among the sites, indicating that well-structured rainforest should have expanded to the Sunda Shelf despite the sandy and potentially saline, nutrient-poor soils. The plant biodiversity, however, was obviously lower on the Sunda Shelf than on Borneo as inferred from the pollen richness. This indicates a loss of biodiversity during large-scale range expansions. Our findings suggest the potential of reforestation in the lowlands of Southeast Asia, but unfortunately the incapability of restoring biodiversity to pre-disturbance levels through natural regeneration alone. Moreover, the old forests in the mountainous northern Borneo appears to be irreplaceable and thus a priority of conservation efforts. © 2024
Context Agricultural land use is expanding and is a major driver of the biodiversity crisis. Land use planning initiatives seeking to optimize wildlife conservation are hindered by a lack of baseline data quantifying species' tolerance to human-modified landscapes. Objectives We explored the influence of landscape characteristics on the fine-scale space-use patterns of a model generalist carnivore, the Malay civet (Viverra tangalunga), within degraded tropical forests and oil palm plantations. Methods We collected over 20,000 GPS locations from 21 male civets in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo to evaluate the species' space-use patterns and habitat utilization processes. We used movement-based modeling to determine home ranges, and combined the results with high-resolution remotely sensed habitat characteristics. We developed resource utilization functions to determine individual and population-level functional responses to proximity to plantation edge, distance to water, terrain ruggedness, forest structure, and functional diversity. Results Civets foraged within oil palm plantations, yet all animals utilized forests. Home ranges scaled with proportion of plantation within both total and core ranges. Resource utilization functions reported individualism in the species' responses to habitat characteristics. At the population-scale, civets consistently and more intensely used habitats closer to plantation edges and taller tree canopies. Conclusions Although plantations did not pose an inhospitable matrix, oil palm agriculture is a less suitable habitat than remnant forests for civets. Proximity measures and forest structure influenced the spatial behaviors of this adaptable generalist, highlighting the importance of protected areas. We recommend land-sparing and -sharing approaches to facilitate carnivore persistence across oil palm degraded landscapes.
Forest fires (FF) in tropical seasonal forests impact ecosystem. Addressing FF in tropical ecosystems has become a priority to mitigate impacts on biodiversity loss and climate change. The escalating frequency and intensity of FF globally have become a mounting concern. Understanding their tendencies, patterns, and vulnerabilities is imperative for conserving ecosystems and facilitating the development of effective prevention and management strategies. This study investigates the trends, patterns, and spatiotemporal distribution of FF for the period of 2001–2022, and delineates the forest fire susceptibility zones in Odisha State, India. The study utilized: (a) MODIS imagery to examine active fire point data; (b) Kernel density tools; (c) FF risk prediction using two machine learning algorithms, namely Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Random Forest (RF); (d) Receiver Operating Characteristic and Area Under the Curve, along with various evaluation metrics; and (e) a total of 19 factors, including three topographical, seven climatic, four biophysical, and five anthropogenic, to create a map indicating areas vulnerable to FF. The validation results revealed that the RF model achieved a precision exceeding 94 % on the validation datasets, while the SVM model reached 89 %. The estimated forest fire susceptibility zones using RF and SVM techniques indicated that 20.14 % and 16.72 % of the area, respectively, fall under the “Very High Forest Fire” susceptibility class. Trend analysis reveals a general upward trend in forest fire occurrences (R2 = 0.59), with a notable increase after 2015, peaking in 2021. Notably, Angul district was identified as the most affected area, documenting the highest number of forest fire incidents over the past 22 years. Additionally, forest fire mitigation plans have been developed by drawing insights from forest fire management strategies implemented in various countries worldwide. Overall, this analysis provides valuable insights for policymakers and forest management authorities to develop effective strategies for forest fire prevention and mitigation. © 2024 Elsevier B.V.
In southeastern Mexico, forest fires threaten the biodiversity in tropical rainforests. The aim of this work was to analyze the spatial and temporal distribution of burned areas in Montes Azules Biosphere Reserve and its area of influence over three years: 1998, 2003 and 2015. The Normalized Burn Ratio (NBR) and the Burnt Area Index for MODIS (BAIM) were extracted from near-infrared and shortwave-infrared Landsat imagery; their accuracy was validated with ASTER images. As a result, 1,628 polygons of burned areas larger than 10 ha were delimited, covering 86,500 ha and representing 11.2 % of the study area: 7.7 % in 1998, 3.2 % in 2003 and 0.4 % in 2015. Burned areas of under 50 ha are of common occurrence each year, whereas the largest polygons (1,000 – 3,000 ha) are considered exceptional and are present only under the severe influence of El Niño weather phenomenon. The highest proportion of burned areas (54.7 %) affected agricultural lands, followed by secondary vegetation (34 %), tropical forests (7.6 %), temperate forests (2.1 %), savannah (1 %) and tular marshlands (0.6 %). Regarding burned areas, 20 % occurred within the protected area. The decreasing tendency of burned areas confirms their relationship with the intensity of ENSO. Cartographic representation of burned areas is an effective means of evaluating the effects of fire management programs and biodiversity conservation of tropical rainforests in protected areas. © 2020, Universidad Austral de Chile. All rights reserved.
Terminos Lagoon ecosystem is the largest fluvial-lagoon estuarine system in the country and one of the most important reserves of coastal flora and fauna in Mexico. Since the seventies, part of the main infra-structure for country's oil extraction is located in this area. Its high biodiversity has motivated different type of studies including deforestation processes and land use planning. In this work we used satellite image analysis to determine land cover changes in the area from 1974 to 2001. Our results indicate that tropical forest and mangroves presented the most extensive losses in its coverage. In contrast, urban areas and induced grassland increased considerably. In 2001 more than half of the ecosystem area showed changes from its original land cover, and a third part of it was deteriorated. The main causes of deforestation were both the increase in grassland and the growth of urban areas. However, deforestation was attenuated by natural reforestation and plant canopy recovery. We conclude that the introduction of cattle and urban development were the main causes for the land cover changes; however, the oil industry activity located in the ecosystem, has promoted indirectly to urban growth and rancher boom.
Woody lianas are critical to tropical forest dynamics because of their strong influence on forest regeneration, disturbance ecology, and biodiversity. Recent studies synthesizing plot data from the tropics indicate that lianas are increasing in both abundance and importance in tropical forests. Moreover, lianas exhibit competitive advantages over trees in elevated CO2 environments and under strong seasonal droughts, suggesting that lianas may be poised to increase not only in abundance but also in spatial distribution in response to changing climate. We used a combination of high-resolution color-infrared videography and hyperspectral imagery from EO-1 Hyperion to map low-lying lianas in Noel Kempff Mercado National Park (NKMNP) in the Bolivian Amazon. Evergreen liana forests comprise as much as 14% of the NKMNP landscape, and low-stature liana patches occupy 1.5% of these forests. We used change vector analysis (CVA) of dry season Landsat TM and ETM+ imagery from 1986 and 2000 to determine changes in liana-dominated patches over time and to assess whether those patches were regenerating to canopy forest. The spatial distribution of liana patches showed that patches were spatially aggregated and were preferentially located in proximity to waterways. The CVA results showed that most of the dense liana patches increased in brightness and greenness and decreased in wetness over the 14 years of the change analysis, while non-liana forest patches changed less and in more random directions. Persistent liana patches increased in area by an average of 59% over the time period. In comparison, large burned areas appeared to recover completely to canopy forest in the same time period. This suggests that the dense liana patches of NKMNP represent an alternative successional pathway characterized not by tree regeneration but rather by a stalled state of low-canopy liana dominance. This research supports hypotheses that liana forests can be a persistent rather than transitional component of tropical forests, and may remain so due to competitive advantages that lianas enjoy under changing climatic conditions. © 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Cedrela odorata L. was introduced as a possible forest restauration species in classified forests at Côte d’Ivoire. Because of its demonstrated invasive behavior in other tropical forests, this study aimed to assess the impact of Cedrela odorata on the regeneration of spontaneous plant species in tree plantations. On the base of Cedrela odorata larger tree densities, two types of forest plantation were considered: Type I (240 stems/ha) and Type II (176 stems/ha). In these plantations, plots with 0.25 ha were chosen to locate each tree with dbh ≥ 2.5 cm, in an orthonormal reference. The tree density, the basal area, the species richness, the Shannon diversity index and the rank-abundance curves were determined considering smaller and larger trees. The horizontal spatial arrangement and Ripley’s K function were performed to understand the spatial relationship between Cedrela odorata smaller trees and those of spontaneous species. The results shown lower spontaneous plant species richness (15-20 species) and diversity (1.15 - 1.43); the dominance of Cedrela odorata smaller trees (43.02 – 62.95 % of all stems). The Cedrela odorata smaller trees and those of other species have dependent spatial distributions; expressed by a spatial repulsion between the two groups up to a distance of 18 m in the most densified forest plantation. This repulsion was related to an aggregated distribution of Cedrela odorata smaller trees in plantation with higher tree density. The study suggests a 170-stems/ha (or lower) of Cedrela odorata planting density for biodiversity establishment improvement outcomes in forest plantations. Copyright: © 2023, J. Tropical Biodiversity Biotechnology.
The hilly red soil region in southern China is still facing serious soil erosion, even after long-term afforestation projects. This might result from structural shortcomings of the tree species chosen for afforestation. Within the Biodiversity and Ecosystem Functioning China project (BEF China), we used point cloud data from terrestrial laser scanners (TLS) and splash cups to analyze spatial leaf area index (LAI) and to predict the potential of splash erosion in subtropical forests. High LAI of Lithocarpus glaber and Schima superba was measured mainly at the middle and lower parts of the trees while for Sapindus saponaria it was found at the upper parts. LAI was decreasing from the tree stems to the edges of the canopy. Lognormal and exponential linear models were suitable to describe the vertical and horizontal LAI distribution of selected tree species, respectively. Sapindus saponaria generally had the highest values of throughfall kinetic energy (TKE) among the analyzed tree species and measured rainfall events. In the radial direction, higher LAI tended to produce lower TKE, whereas in the vertical direction, higher skewness of LAI distribution had higher TKE. LAI and its spatial distribution both were important for TKE. These findings can help to understand mechanisms of splash erosion in forest plantations related to unsuitable spatial LAI of tree species planted. It might further improve our knowledge how tree diversity may influence splash erosion by enriching the canopy layers in an early successional stage of subtropical forest plantations. © 2018 Elsevier B.V.
Sustainable management in secondary tropical rainforests requires basic information about stand characteristics, mainly related to productivity and biodiversity. This study aimed to quantify vegetation diversity, timber production, and carbon storage from various sites of secondary forests in South Kalimantan. Forest inventory was conducted using a census method at seven different natural forest management unit compartments. Four parameters were measured from each tree, including the type of species, commercial categories, tree diameter, and tree height. Individual tree volume and biomass were estimated using allometric equations, while carbon storage was determined using a conversion factor from biomass. Three indicators were used to evaluate vegetation diversity: richness, heterogeneity, and evenness. The analysis of correlations was applied to examine the relationship between vegetation diversity and stand productivity with a significant level of 5%. Results found that there were 41 tree species in the study site comprising 20 commercial and 21 non-commercial species. The highest richness (R') was recorded in compartment 18X by approximately 4.0, while the most increased heterogeneity (H') and evenness (E') were observed in compartment 18Y by around 2.4 and 0.7, respectively. The accumulation of timber production varied in each site, with a range of 45.46-68.32 m3 ha-1. The highest carbon storage was noted in compartment 19Y (38.74±1.79 t C ha-1), while the lowest was found in compartment 18W (20.76±0.93 t C ha-1). The relative contribution of commercial species to timber production and carbon storage was substantially higher than non-commercial species at all sites. However, there was not a significant correlation between vegetation diversity and stand productivity (P>0.05). Overall, our study concluded that the secondary tropical forest ecosystems in the site had good vegetation diversity, timber production, and carbon storage. © 2022, Society for Indonesian Biodiversity. All rights reserved.
Landscape metrics have often been used to analyse the spatial dynamics of habitat fragmentation accompanying forest loss. However, there are few studies of the spatial dynamics of natural forest succession, especially over periods longer than the operational period of imaging satellites. This study applies spatial metrics to understand the spatial processes of a 70-year tropical secondary forest succession in Hong Kong, since World War 2. The highest rate of forest regeneration at 11% a year from 1989 to 2001 occurred when the landscape achieved greatest habitat diversity and juxtapositioning of habitat patches. This rapid regeneration occurred by infilling from remnant forest in adjacent valleys rather than by an advance along a broad forest front, and led to simplification of the landscape and declining habitat diversity. It was also accompanied by declines in species richness and abundance in regenerated forest patches. Thus both habitat and woody plant species diversity show a humped trend over the successional period as disconnected forest patches amalgamate, and shade-intolerant pioneers are shaded out by taller pioneers. From this point onwards, the birds of mixed habitats including bulbuls and hwamei known to disperse seed in the study area, may become less effective as forest patches consolidate, and only a few forest mammals remain. The observed improved connectivity within forest patches and reduced edge disturbances accompanying landscape simplification provide better conditions for dispersion within forest of light-intolerant climax species from the oldest, species-rich valley sites to the newly regenerated areas. However, in addition to the loss of forest dispersal agents, other natural dispersal agents such as gravity, flash floods and slope wash involving downward processes may be ineffective, as forest has regenerated upwards to higher elevations. Progression to a mature, biodiverse and stable forest ecosystem may depend on introduction of dispersal agents other than those which have operated over recent decades. Forest patches with high internal connectivity, indicated by high Mean radius of Gyration (MRG) and low Mean Perimeter-to-Area Ratio (MPAR) would appear to offer the best movement opportunities and least disturbance to such introductions. © 2017 The Authors
Floristic surveys and diversity indices are often applied to measure tree species diversity in mixed tropical forest remnants. However, these analyses are frequently limited to the overall results and do not allow to evaluate the spatial variability distributions of tree diversity, leading to develop additional tools. This study aimed to estimate the spatial variability of tree diversity and map their spatial patterns in a Brazilian mixed tropical forest conservation area. We used indices to measure the tree species diversity (dbh ≥ 10 cm) in 400 sampling units (25 m x 25 m) from a continuous forest inventory. Semivariograms were fitted to estimate spatial dependences and punctual kriging was applied to compose maps. Mean diversity values were constant in the continuous inventories, indicating a forest remnant in an advanced stage of ecological succession. On the other hand, tree diversity presented spatial patterns identified by geostatistics, in which the dynamics were composed of heterogeneous mosaics spatially influenced by tree species with different ecological features and densities, gap dynamics, advancement of forest succession, mortality, and Araucaria angustilofia’s cohorts. © 2018, Academia Brasileira de Ciencias. All rights reserved.
Context Human disturbances can have large impacts on forest structure and biodiversity, and thereby result in forest degradation, a property difficult to detect by remote sensing. Objectives To investigate spatial variation in anthropogenic disturbances and their effects on forest structure and biodiversity. Methods In 144 plots of 20 x 20 m distributed across a forest area of 750 km(2) in Southwest Ethiopia, we recorded: landscape variables (e.g., distance to forest edge), different human disturbances, forest structure variables, and species composition of trees and epiphyllous bryophytes. We then first assessed if landscape variables could explain the spatial distribution of disturbances. Second, we analysed how forest structure and biodiversity were influenced by disturbances. Results Human disturbances, such as coffee management and grazing declined with distance to forest edges, and penetrated at least a kilometer into the forest. Slope was not related to disturbance levels, but several types of disturbances were less common at higher elevations. Among human disturbance types, coffee management reduced liana cover and was associated with altered species composition of trees. The presence of large trees and basal area were not related to any of the disturbance gradients. Conclusions Although most anthropogenic disturbances displayed clear edge effects, surprisingly the variation in the chosen forest degradation indices were only weakly related to these disturbances. We suggest that the intersection between edge effects and forest degradation is very context specific and relies much on how particular societies use the forests. For example, in this landscape coffee management seems to be a key driver.
Many ecosystems face degradation unless factors that underpin their resilience can be effectively managed. In tropical reef ecosystems, grazing by herbivorous fishes can prevent coral-macroalgal phase shifts that commonly signal loss of resilience. However, knowledge of grazing characteristics that most promote resilience is typically experimental, localized, and sparse, which limits broad management applications. Applying sound ecological theory to broad-scale data may provide an alternative basis for ecosystem management. We explore the idea that resilience is positively related to the diversity within and among functional groups of organisms. Specifically, we infer the relative vulnerability of different subregions of the Great Barrier Reef (GBR) to phase shifts based on functional characteristics of the local herbivorous fish communities. Reef slopes on 92 reefs set in three zones of the continental shelf in eight latitudinal sectors of the GBR were surveyed on multiple occasions between 1995 and 2009. Spatial variation in fish community structure was high and driven primarily by shelf position. Measures of functional diversity, functional redundancy, and abundance were generally higher offshore and lower inshore. Two turbid inshore subregions were considered most vulnerable based on very low measures of herbivore function, and this was supported by the occurrence of phase shifts within one of three subregions. Eleven reefs that resisted phase shifts after major coral mortality included some with very low measures of herbivore function. The fact that phase shifts did not necessarily occur when large herbivores were scarce indicates that other environmental factors compensated to preserve resilience. Estimates of vulnerability based solely on herbivore function may thus prove conservative, but caution is appropriate, since compensatory factors are largely unknown and could be eroded unwittingly by anthropogenic stresses. Our data suggest that managing the threat of phase shifts in coral reef ecosystems successfully will require spatially explicit strategies that consider both the functional characteristics of local herbivore communities and environmental factors that may raise or lower resilience thresholds. A strong positive correlation between water clarity and the species richness and abundance of herbivorous fishes suggests that management of water quality is of generic importance to ensure the ecosystem services of this important group of herbivores. © 2013 by the Ecological Society of America.
The Brazilian Atlantic Forest is one of the world's biodiversity hotspots, and is currently highly fragmented and disturbed due to human activities. Variation in environmental conditions in the Atlantic Forest can influence the distribution of species, which may show associations with some environmental features. Dung beetles (Coleoptera: Scarabaeinae) are insects that act in nutrient cycling via organic matter decomposition and have been used for monitoring environmental changes. The aim of this study is to identify associations between the spatial distribution of dung beetle species and Atlantic Forest structure. The spatial distribution of some dung beetle species was associated with structural forest features. The number of species among the sampling sites ranged widely, and few species were found in all remnant areas. Principal coordinates analysis indicated that species composition, abundance and biomass showed a spatially structured distribution, and these results were corroborated by permutational multivariate analysis of variance. The indicator value index and redundancy analysis showed an association of several dung beetle species with some explanatory environmental variables related to Atlantic Forest structure. This work demonstrated the existence of a spatially structured distribution of dung beetles, with significant associations between several species and forest structure in Atlantic Forest remnants from Southern Brazil. © 2015 Sociedade Brasileira de Entomologia.
Uncovering magnitude, trend, and spatial pattern of land cover/land use changes (LCLUC) is crucial for understanding mechanisms of LCLUC and assisting land use planning and conservation. China has been undergoing unprecedented economic growth, massive rural-to-urban migration, and large-scale policy-driven ecological restoration, and therefore encountering enormous LCLUC in recent decades. However, comprehensive understandings of spatiotemporal LCLUC dynamics and underlying mechanisms are still lacking. Based on classification of annual LCLU maps from MODIS satellite imagery, we proposed a land change detection method to capture significant land change hotspots over Northern China during 2001-2013, and further analyzed temporal trends and spatial patterns of LCLUC. We found rapid decline of agricultural land near urban was predominantly caused by urban expansion. The process was especially strong in North China Plain with 14,057 km(2) of urban gain and -21,017 km(2) of agricultural land loss. To offset the loss of agricultural land, Northeast China Plain and Xinjiang were reclaimed. Substantial recovery of forests (49,908 km(2)) and closed shrubland (60,854 km(2)) occurred in mountainous regions due to abandoned infertile farmland, secondary succession, and governmental conservation policies. The spatial patterns and trends of LCLUC in Northern China provide information to support effective environmental policies towards sustainable development.
Mangrove forests are tropical trees and shrubs that grow in sheltered coastlines, mudflats, and river banks in many parts of the world. These forests are rated amidst the most productive natural ecosystems on the earth, and are ecologically and socioeconomically important because of their crucial roles in coastal ecosystem protection. However, these forests are declining at an alarming rate, which is possibly more rapid than that of inland tropical forests. This serious loss has prompted a worldwide movement to protect and promote the sustainable use of mangrove forests. Recently, many governments adopted the United Nations' Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The SDGs present an opportunity for nations to set realistic targets for achieving sustainable use of natural resources and environmental capital. Relevant to mangrove conservation, a range of targets were established for implementation by the year 2020, including Targets 6.6, 14.2, 14.5, and 15.2. To date, mangrove forests have been protected and restored for decades in China. However, little is known about achievements of China's SDGs implementation on mangrove forests. The issue highlighted the need for a long-term holistic view of China's mangrove forests dynamics. Although there have been multiple national datasets of China's mangrove forests, few studies focused specifically on mangrove forests and their surrounding land covers. Thus, the objectives of this study are: (1) to apply a systematic remote sensing method across the entire coast of China, and build a new dataset of long-term China's mangrove forests and surrounding land covers in 1973, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2010, 2015 (the first year of SDGs), and 2020 (the complete year of mangrove related SDGs); (2) to quantify the spatial-temporal changes of mangrove forests and conversion between mangrove forests and other coastal land covers; and (3) to discuss the achievements of China's SDGs implementation on mangrove forests. In this study, we applied a hybrid object-based and hierarchical classification method to Landsat series imagery and achieved a high accuracy dataset of China's mangrove forests and surrounding land covers. Results showed that: (1) on national scale, area of mangrove forests declined from 48801 to 18602 ha between 1973 and 2000, then partially recovered to 28010 ha in 2020; (2) the lost mangrove forests were mainly changed to croplands and aquaculture ponds, while the restored mangrove forests were mainly converted from tidal flats; and (3) during 2015-2020, China government restored 25% of national mangrove forests. To Sep. 2020, the area of mangrove nature reserves accounted for 16% of mangrove growth zone, and 77% of China's mangrove forests grew inside these nature reserves. A batch of relevant laws and regulations has been formulated to prohibit mangrove forests destruction. The protection and restoration of mangrove forests in China have already met Targets 6.6, 14.2, 14.5, and 15.2. However, since illegal logging is strictly prohibited and the awareness of protecting mangrove ecosystem has been increased continuously, losses of mangrove forests in some areas were mainly caused by natural disasters, such as extremely low temperature, hurricane, biological invasions, and insect outbreaks. For example, according to the Guangxi Mangrove Research Center, in March 2008 numbers of Avicennia plants along the coasts of Guangxi were killed by extremely low temperature, and in Guangxi Shankou Mangrove Nature Reserve, more than 167 ha of Spartina alterniflora (an invasive species) were discovered in 2005. The classification method and datasets of this study can support the evaluation of SDG 6.6 implementation, and provide important information for SDGs 13, 14, and 15 evaluation. In addition, the results of this study can serve as an important scientific basis and fundamental data for formulating China's mangrove protection and restoration strategies. © 2021, Science Press. All right reserved.
Soil degradation and diminished production in the desert of La Tatacoa are attributed to both environmental and anthropic factors. This article assesses the spatiotemporal dynamics of soil coverage in a discontinuous period of 23 years (1987-2001-2010), identifying areas of loss and recovery of vegetation. Geometric and radiometric corrections were applied, in addition, a quantitative analysis was performed by applying supervised classification to Landsat images. Spatiotemporal dynamics were identified through change matrices and the Kappa index. Multitemporal analysis showed a decrease in the areas of degraded soils (16.7%) and an increase in vegetal coverage (13.4%), which evinces a recovery process of 124 ha/year. The areas of stable natural vegetation and of greatest positive variation in the vegetal coverage are located to the north, northeast, and east, while the negative variation can be observed in the region adjacent to the Magdalena river. These results serve as the basis for new research on the biotic, abiotic, and socioeconomic factors that have generated the recovery of natural vegetation areas in some sectors and desertification in others. They seek to contribute to the formulation of sectorized measures such as ecological restoration as well as silvopastoral and agroforestry systems in according to social and environmental issues in a context of climate change. © 2019, Universidad Nacional de Colombia. All rights reserved.
Artisanal and small-scale gold mining (ASGM) in the Amazon has degraded tropical forests and escalated mercury (Hg) pollution, affecting biodiversity, ecological processes and rural livelihoods. In the Peruvian Amazon, ASGM annually releases some 181 tons of Hg into the environment. Despite some recent advances in understanding the spatial distribution of Hg within gold mine spoils and the surrounding landscape, temporal dynamics in Hg movement are not well understood. We aimed to reveal spatio-temporal trends of soil Hg in areas degraded by ASGM.,. We analyzed soil and sediment samples during the dry and rainy seasons across 14 ha of potentially contaminated sites and natural forests, in the vicinities of the Native community of San Jacinto in Madre de Dios, Peru. Soil Hg levels of areas impacted by ASGM (0.02 ± 0.02 mg kg−1) were generally below soil environmental quality standards (6.60 mg kg−1). However, they showed high variability, mainly explained by the type of natural cover vegetation, soil organic matter (SOM), clay and sand particles. Temporal trends in Hg levels in soils between seasons differed between landscape units distinguished in the mine spoils. During the rainy season, Hg levels decreased up to 45.5% in uncovered soils, while in artificial pond sediments Hg increased by up to 961%. During the dry season, uncovered degraded soils were more prone to lose Hg than sites covered by vegetation, mainly due to higher soil temperatures and concomitantly increasing volatilization. Soils from natural forests and degraded soil covered by regenerating vegetation showed a high capacity to retain Hg mainly due to the higher plant biomass, higher SOM, and increasing concentrations of clay particles. Disturbingly, our findings suggest high Hg mobility from gold mine spoil to close by sedimentary materials, mainly in artificial ponds through alluvial deposition and pluvial lixiviation. Thus, further research is needed on monitoring, and remediation of sediments in artificial to design sustainable land use strategies. © 2023 Elsevier Inc.
The benefits that tropical farmers derive from associating trees with crops may be reduced or outweighed by competition for light and soil resources, and the use of incompetitive trees in agroforestry associations is therefore a standard recommendation. However, under certain conditions tropical farmers use very fast-growing and presumably competitive trees in tree-crop associations. We studied the factors which allow the use of Eucalyptus deglupta as coffee shade in parts of Costa Rica, considering three possible explanations: (a) the availability of soil resources matches the requirements of the two species so that competition cannot arise; (b) complementary resource use reduces competition; and (c) coffee plants possess sufficiently competitive root systems to cope with the competition of fast-growing trees. We measured coffee and tree growth, soil nutrient availability, root distribution and dynamics of 4- to 5-year-old coffee and E. deglupta shade trees on a private coffee farm with recommended fertilization in a high-rainfall area in Costa Rica. There was no evidence of a negative effect of the trees on coffee growth, yields and mineral nutrition despite fast tree growth. However, a significant small-scale partitioning of the soil space between the root systems, with most of the coffee roots close to the coffee rows and most of the tree roots in the interrow spaces, was evidence for root interactions between the two species, resulting in complementary use of soil resources. Apparently, the root system of coffee was sufficiently competitive to restrict the rooting space of the trees. Trees and coffee also differed in the depth distribution of their roots, with the trees having the shallower root systems. The compatibility of coffee with fast-growing shade trees at this and similar sites can be explained with a combination of all three hypothesized mechanisms. © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Noweg T, Grinang J, Nelson J, Philip B, Felix SE, Kalu M. 2024. Species composition and diversity along the elevational gradient of a low tropical hill in Teramuo Hill, Bau, Sarawak, Malaysia. Biodiversitas 25: 3320-3330. Numerous efforts have been made to study the diversity pattern of trees in Nature Reserves in the Bau District of Sarawak, Malaysia. However, studies on tree diversity along the elevational gradient in the district's low tropical hills still need to be completed. This study sought to evaluate the composition and diversity of tree species on a low tropical rainforest hill in the Bau District of Sarawak. The study's specific objectives include: (i). Identifying the species composition at different elevations and (ii). Measuring the species diversity and richness across different elevational gradients. The study site was Teramuo Hill, a 9.2-hectare local recreational area in Bau District, Sarawak, belonging to a Bidayuh village community. The hill encompasses three forest types (primary, secondary, and agroforest) and has suffered degradation from both human activity and natural causes. A total of 28 sampling sites were arranged in six vertical lines along the elevational gradient, with the lowest elevation being below 45 meters above sea level (m asl.) and the highest about 100 m asl.. The study found that the species composition and species types dominating at different elevations varied. A distinct pattern emerged in species diversity and richness across the elevational gradient. Between 61 and 75 m asl., the mid-elevation zones exhibited the highest species diversity. These results suggest that the main influences are ecological factors and habitat physical variability at different elevations. The findings are essential for understanding how minor elevation changes affect tree communities in tropical forest environments. This knowledge can assist in planning targeted conservation programs and dictate community priorities in the Bau District of Sarawak, Malaysia. © 2024, Society for Indonesian Biodiversity. All rights reserved.
Tropical forest vegetation is shaped by climate and by soil, but understanding how the distributions of individual tree species respond to specific resources has been hindered by high diversity and consequent rarity. To study species over an entire community, we surveyed trees and measured soil chemistry across climatic and geological gradients in central Panama and then used a unique hierarchical model of species occurrence as a function of rainfall and soil chemistry to circumvent analytical difficulties posed by rare species. The results are a quantitative assessment of the responses of 550 tree species to eight environmental factors, providing a measure of the importance of each factor across the entire tree community. Dry-season intensity and soil phosphorus were the strongest predictors, each affecting the distribution of more than half of the species. Although we anticipated clear-cut responses to dry-season intensity, the finding that many species have pronounced associations with either high or low phosphorus reveals a previously unquantified role for this nutrient in limiting tropical tree distributions. The results provide the data necessary for understanding distributional limits of tree species and predicting future changes in forest composition. © PNAS 2013.
Much of the world's tropical forests have been affected by anthropogenic disturbance. These forests are important biodiversity reservoirs whose diversity, structure and function must be characterized across the successional sequence. We examined changes in structure and diversity along a successional gradient in the lowlands of New Guinea. To do this, we measured and identified all stems ≥5 cm diameter in 19 0.25 ha plots ranging in age from 3 to >50 yr since disturbance. We also measured plant functional traits related to establishment, performance, and competitive ability. In addition, we examined change in forest structure, composition, species diversity, and functional diversity through succession. By using rarefaction to estimate functional diversity, we compared changes in functional diversity while controlling for associated differences in stem and species density. Basal area and species density increased with stand age while stem density was highest in intermediate secondary forests. Species composition differed strongly between mature and secondary forests. As forests increased in basal area, community-weighted mean wood density and foliar carbon increased, whereas specific leaf area and proportion of stems with exudate decreased. Foliar nitrogen peaked in medium-aged forests. Functional diversity was highest in mature forests, even after accounting for differences in stem and species diversity. Our study represents one of the first attempts to document successional changes in New Guinea's lowland forest. We found robust evidence that as succession proceeds, communities occupy a greater range of functional trait space even after controlling for stem and species density. High functional diversity is important for ecological resiliency in the face of global change. © 2014 The Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation.
Large areas of the Panama Canal Watershed have been converted to monocultures of teak (Tectona grandis), a non-native timber species that is generally not providing hoped-for economic and ecological benefits of Forest Landscape Restoration. Enrichment planting offers a potential strategy for revitalizing these underperforming plantations through the addition of high-value, native species to the understory, but more information is needed to guide implementation and management in this region and other tropical areas. We assessed the performance of six promising native species (Byrsonima crassifolia, Dalbergia retusa, Dipteryx oleifera, Hyeronima alchorneoides, Platymiscium pinnatum, Terminalia amazonia) as an enrichment planting in teak plantations, and specifically considered how light availability, crowding pressure and annual fertilization affected seedling performance, we measured survival and growth for the first 30 months post-planting for similar to 3,000 seedlings; half received annual fertilization and half did not. We found that growth rate did not significantly affect survival among- or within-species, except for a positive relationship for D. oleifera. Overall seedling survival was high (83%), and, while species varied widely, there was not a strong effect of light, crowding or fertilization on survival. In contrast, overall growth of species was significantly affected by these factors. Across all species growth was negatively related to crowding and positively related to light availability and fertilization. There were among-species differences; while all but one species (D. oleifera) were negatively affected by crowding, only half responded positively to light availability (D. retusa, P. pinnatum, and B. crassifolia) and fertilization (D. retusa, P. pinnatum, and T. amazonia). Our findings suggest that all study species except for B. crassifolia, which suffered unacceptably high mortality, have high potential for use in enrichment planting in Panama teak plantations. Among-species differences in response to fertilization and growing environment highlight the need for continued studies to establish specific silvicultural guidelines for species in the enrichment planting context.
The implementation of the global programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in developing countries, and the role of Conservation, Sustainable Management of Forests and Enhancement of Forest Carbon Stocks (REDD+) is lacks a robust financial mechanism and is widely criticized for producing too little positive impact for climate, nature, and people. In many countries with tropical forests however, a variety of REDD+ projects continue to develop on the ground. This paper fills in some of the gaps in our understanding of the dynamic relation between global policymaking and implementation of REDD+ on the ground. Using the introduction of REDD+ in Southwest Ghana as an example, we apply a practice-based approach to analyze the different roles that local actors and global-local intermediaries played in the introduction of REDD+. Our results show a more balanced picture than polarized debates at the global levels suggest. The logic of practice explains how REDD+ was translated to the local situation. Global actors took a lead but depended on local actors to make REDD+ work. Together, they integrated elements of existing practices that helped REDD+ 'land' locally but also transformed REDD+ globally to resemble such local practices. REDD+ initiatives absorbed elements from established community-based conservation, forest restoration, and sustainable agro-forestry practices. The evolution of REDD+ in Ghana reflects global trends to integrate REDD+ with landscape approaches. © 2019 by the authors.
Recently, abandonment of montane cattle pastures in Hawaii has stimulated interest in forest restoration both for expansion of habitat for native species and for plantation forestry. Acacia koa is one of the most common forest trees in Hawaii, the most abundant native legume, and the most economically valuable native tree; it could be important to restoration efforts in many areas.     Using an age sequence of even-aged, 6- to 20-yr-old stands of A. koa, we evaluated stand characteristics, N accumulation, and rates of N fixation. Average diameter at breast height (dbh) and height increased linearly during the first 20 yr of tree growth, while stem density, dbh increment. and leaf area index declined. An experimental thinning in the 9-yr-old stand more than doubled dbh increment, suggesting that high tree densities could constrain tree growth. In contrast. N fertilization did not affect dbh increment. Nodule biomass was more than an order of magnitude less in the 20-yr-old stand than in the 6-yr-old stand, which corresponded to a similar decline in estimated input of N via fixation. Neither thinning nor N fertilization affected nodule biomass, but measurements of foliar and root phosphorus (P) suggest that a decline in P availability over time may have contributed to the decline in N fixation. In these stands, large amounts of decomposing litter remaining from stand establishment may have provided much of the N that accumulated in koa biomass. In more degraded sites. N fixation by A. koa may play a relatively more important role in restoration and in soil and ecosystem development.
Background. Agriculture and cattle raising are the main factors to forest loss and fragmentation, therefore, to reduce their negative impact, new production systems have been implemented. The Agroforestry and Silvopastoral Systems are corridors for fauna and source of natural regeneration, promoting the coexistence of several species and providing goods and services to the human being. Until now, the effects of the agriculture and cattle raising in the composition and configuration at the humid tropical forest in Sierra Norte de Puebla are still unknown. Objective. To compare the changes in the composition, stand structure, richness and tree diversity between an Agroforestry System (AFS), Silvopastoral System (SPS) and a Second-Growth Forest (SGF) in Palmagtitan, Sierra Norte de Puebla. Methodology. We established sampling units in three land management systems where we recorded specie, normal diameter total height, and cover of every tree in the area. For each attribute, we generated categories. The stand structural attributes such as density, basal area, cover and normal diameter were calculated and compared between land management systems with the multiple comparison DGC method. We obtained and compared the Margalef's richness, Shannon's diversity, Equitability and Fisher's alfa indices and Hill's numbers. The floristic similarity was analyzed with the Sorensen coefficient. Results. We identified 44 species from 24 families. The families Burseraceae, Moraceae, Rutaceae, Euphorbiaceae and Fabaceae were the best represented. Only the tree density presented statistical differences between the land management systems. The Margalef's richness index was different only in the SPS. The Shannon's diversity index and the Hill's numbers showed a major diversity in the AFS than in the SGF and the SPS. The similarity in the floristic composition between AFS and SPS was 16.6%, between AFS and SGF 38.30% and between SPS and SGF 26.23%. Implications. The characterization of the stand structure and tree diversity permits a better decision-making about the production systems management and the forest patches conservation. The tree management and the presence of native species in production systems allow to integrate handling practices to provide food safety and biodiversity conservation. Conclusions. The composition, stand structure, richness, and tree diversity in the three land management systems were determinated by the management and land use history. As the expected, the SGF got the biggest density, but (contrary to the stipulation) the most diverse was the AFS. It is necessary to know the ecosystems configuration and composition to devise management strategies that allow us to integrate the production and ecosystems conservation. © 2021 Universidad Autonoma de Yucatan. All rights reserved.
Many tropical forests worldwide are protected due to their sacredness to religious communities. In the south Gondar region of Ethiopia, most of the remaining native forests are tiny fragments (5.42 ha +/- 0.34) surrounded by pasture and agriculture that are protected because they encompass churches of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahido Church (EOTC). A small number of communities have erected stone walls around the perimeter of the forests to demarcate the boundary, and/or protect the interior of the forest. We evaluated the effectiveness of these walls at protecting ecological conditions by examining tree and seedling communities among sacred forests with and without walls in Montane and Upper Montane sites. We found the wall to be an effective conservation tool as regeneration potential was higher in forests with a wall. The density and species richness of seedlings were significantly higher in forests with a wall and these effects were more pronounced in Upper Montane forests. Forests with a wall also had seedlings of many native tree species that were not found in forests without walls. As expected, there were few differences in tree communities in forests with and without a wall. Although rare on the landscape, the presence of a stone wall around these forests was effective at protecting the seedling community because it likely reduced access to the forests by grazers and directed human visitors to trails. The use of a stone wall may protect seedling communities in other sacred forest fragments, particularly for those that are small, isolated, surrounded by agriculture, and have a depleted seed bank.
Question: What strategies are most appropriate for restoring tree seedling recruitment whilst avoiding the spread of invasive plant species in high conservation value tropical forests disturbed by planting a shade-demanding crop?     Location: Knuckles Forest Reserve, Sri Lanka (7 degrees 21-7 degrees 24N, 80 degrees 45-80 degrees 48E).     Methods: An experiment was conducted to test the effects of clipping or removal of established cardamom plants on recruitment of native tree seedlings and spread of non-native plants in a tropical montane forest with abandoned cardamom stands in the understorey. The number and composition of tree seedling emergents, the cover of herbaceous plants and the recovery of cardamom were assessed for 3yr.     Results: Tree seedling recruitment was higher in plots from which above-ground cardamom biomass had been removed through slashing (meanSE per 5m(2); 28.9 +/- 2.70) and those where cardamom plants had been removed completely through uprooting (32.2 +/- 3.17), or when dead cardamom leaves and stems were removed with small-scale extraction of pods (22.5 +/- 2.16), than in unmanipulated control plots (16.6 +/- 1.13) over 15mo. The species composition of tree seedling emergents did not differ in response to removal of cardamom. However, the cover of herbaceous plants, including the non-native invasive Ageratina riparia, increased in response to removal of cardamom. Recovery of cardamom was higher when the plants had been slashed than when entire plants were uprooted and removed.     Conclusion: Slashing or uprooting cardamom plants is a potential strategy for restoring tree seedling recruitment in forests with abandoned cardamom stands in the understorey, but these interventions would need to be repeated annually over many years to be successful, and they risk promoting expansion of the cover of herbaceous plants, including non-native species. Hence, this approach would be labour-intensive and costly. An alternative approach to promoting tree seedling emergence and establishment is to clear dead cardamom leaves and stems, and to encourage small-scale extraction of pods from the residual cardamom plants. Harvesting pods reduces the likelihood that the crop will be sustained in situ through natural regeneration, and supplies an income to local communities, which would enhance the social acceptability of the intervention.
Effects of land-cover change on insectivorous bat activity can be negative, neutral or positive, depending on foraging strategies of bats. In tropical agroforestry systems with high bat diversity, these effects can be complex to assess. We investigated foraging habitat use by three insectivorous bat guilds in forests and rubber plantations in the southern Western Ghats of India. Specifically, we monitored acoustic activity of bats in relation to (1) land-cover types and vegetation structure, and (2) plantation management practices. We hypothesized that activity of open-space aerial (OSA) and edge-space aerial (ESA) bat guilds would not differ; but narrow-space, flutter-detecting (NSFD) bat guild activity would be higher, in structurally heterogeneous forest habitats than monoculture rubber plantations. We found that bat activity of all guilds was highest in areas with high forest cover and lowest in rubber plantations. Higher bat activity was associated with understorey vegetation in forests and plantations, which was expected for NSFD bats, but was a surprise finding for OSA and ESA bats. Within land-cover types, open areas and edge-habitats had higher OSA and ESA activity respectively, while NSFD bats completely avoided open habitats. In terms of management practices, intensively managed rubber plantations with regular removal of understorey vegetation had the lowest bat activity for all guilds. Intensive management can undermine potential ecosystem services of insectivorous bats (e.g., insect pest-control in rubber plantations and surrounding agro-ecosystems), and magnify threats to bats from human disturbances. Low-intensity management and maintenance of forest buffers around plantations can enable persistence of insectivorous bats in tropical forest-plantation landscapes. Copyright © 2021 Deshpande, Kelkar, Krishnaswamy and Sankaran.
Pasture and afforestation are land-use types of major importance in the tropics, yet, most flux tower studies have been conducted in mature tropical forests. As deforestation in the tropics is expected to continue, it is critical to improve our understanding of alternative land-use types, and the impact of interactions between land use and climate on ecosystem carbon dynamics. Thus, we measured net ecosystem CO2 fluxes of a pasture and an adjacent tropical afforestation (native tree species plantation) in Sardinilla, Panama from 2007 to 2009. The objectives of our paired site study were: (1) to assess seasonal and inter-annual variations in net ecosystem CO2 exchange (NEE) of pasture and afforestation, (2) to identify the environmental controls of net ecosystem CO2 fluxes, and (3) to constrain eddy covariance derived total ecosystem respiration (TER) with chamber-based soil respiration (R-Soil) measurements. We observed distinct seasonal variations in NEE that were more pronounced in the pasture compared to the afforestation, reflecting changes in plant and microbial activities. The land conversion from pasture to afforestation increased the potential for carbon uptake by trees vs. grasses throughout most of the year. R-Soil contributed about 50% to TER, with only small differences between ecosystems or seasons. Radiation and soil moisture were the main environmental controls of CO2 fluxes while temperature had no effect on NEE. The pasture ecosystem was more strongly affected by soil water limitations during the dry season, probably due to the shallower root system of grasses compared to trees. Thus, it seems likely that predicted increases in precipitation variability will impact seasonal variations of CO2 fluxes in Central Panama, in particular of pasture ecosystems. (C) 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Grazing exclosures have been promoted as an effective and low-cost land management strategy to recover vegetation and associated functions in degraded landscapes in the tropics. While grazing exclosures can be important reservoirs of biodiversity and carbon, their potential in playing a dual role of conservation of biodiversity and mitigation of climate change effects is not yet established. To address this gap, we assessed the effect of diversity on aboveground carbon (AGC) and the relative importance of the driving biotic (functional diversity, functional composition and structural diversity) and abiotic (climate, topography and soil) mechanisms. We used a dataset from 133 inventory plots across three altitudinal zones, i.e., highland, midland and lowland, in northern Ethiopia, which allowed local- (within altitudinal zone) and broad- (across altitudinal zones) environmental scale analysis of diversity-AGC relationships. We found that species richness-AGC relationship shifted from neutral in highlands to positive in mid- and lowlands as well as across the altitudinal zones. Structural diversity was consistently the strongest mediator of the positive effects of species richness on AGC within and across altitudinal zones, whereas functional composition linked species richness to AGC at the broad environmental scale only. Abiotic factors had direct and indirect effects via biotic factors on AGC, but their relative importance varied with altitudinal zones. Our results indicate that the effect of species diversity on AGC was altitude-dependent and operated more strongly through structural diversity (representing niche complementarity effect) than functional composition (representing selection effect). Our study suggests that maintaining high structural diversity and managing functionally important species while promoting favourable climatic and soil conditions can enhance carbon storage in grazing exclosures. © 2021 Elsevier B.V.
Surface soil moisture is a critical but often neglected component of the hydrologic budget. Within mountain environments, surface soil moisture is highly heterogeneous and challenging to measure. Point measurements are often poorly representative of larger areas, while satellite pixels are generally too coarse in these topographically varied landscapes. In the Cordillera Blanca, Peru, rapid glacier recession is impacting downstream water supply in timing, quantity and quality. Recent research has shown that these proglacial valleys provide vital ecosystem services and store considerable amounts of water within the groundwater systems. However, the spatial and temporal variability of soil water storage is poorly understood. In this tropical Andean setting, we use an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) with multispectral (visible, near infrared, thermal infrared) sensors to map sections of two proglacial valleys in the Cordillera Blanca, Peru at sub-metre resolution. We use the Temperature Vegetation Dryness Index (TVDI) (Sandholt et al., 2002), and apply it for the first time to UAV borne imagery to estimate absolute surface soil moisture through calibration with in-scene field measurements. Resulting surface soil moisture maps have 50 cm spatial resolution with an R2 value of 0.55 and 0.76 for the two study sites, Pachacoto and Llanganuco respectively. We analyse the multispectral orthomosaics and soil moisture maps to improve our understanding of the controls on spatial variability in surface soil moisture within the proglacial valleys of the Cordillera Blanca. The maps permit us to identify both important groundwater spring sources and areas where domestic grazing impacts observed soil moisture estimates. The high resolution observations provided by the UAV facilitate a greater understanding of fine scale heterogeneity within these environments. © 2018 Elsevier Inc.
We monitored native forest regeneration over 11 y in a eucalyptus plantation and compared it with the neighbouring primary forest. For the plantation forest, we hypothesized that species richness, density, basal area and densities of old-growth species would increase over time, and compared to the primary forest, plantation forest would have higher species richness and density, but lower densities of old-growth species. In 2016, we repeated the protocol of a study that sampled the plantation forest in 2005, with thirty 10 x 10-m plots and enumerating trees (>= 10 cm diameter), saplings (>1 to <10 cm diameter) and seedlings (<1 cm diameter). In the plantation forest, for trees, the species richness, density of gap, bird-dispersed and mammal-dispersed species increased by 67%, 156%, 116% and 238% respectively; whereas for saplings, density of gap, bird-dispersed and small-seeded species declined by 45.2%, 51% and 18.2% respectively over time; and seedling densities did not change across functional groups. Stand basal area increased by 80.1% in the plantation forest. The primary forest had 446% greater density of closed-canopy trees compared with plantation forest. Contrary to our prediction, the plantation forest did not accumulate significant densities of old-growth species over time, probably due to demographic filters that prevent them from attaining maturity.
Regenerating tropical forests have an immense capacity to capture carbon and harbor biodiversity. The recuperation of the nitrogen cycle following disturbance can fuel biomass regeneration, but few studies have evaluated the successional dynamics of nitrogen and nitrogen inputs in tropical forests. We assessed symbiotic and asymbiotic nitrogen fixation, soil inorganic nitrogen concentrations, and tree growth in a well-studied series of five tropical forest plots ranging from 19 yr in age to old-growth forests. Wet-season soil inorganic nitrogen concentrations were high in all plots, peaking in the 29-yr-old plot. Inputs from symbiotic nitrogen fixation declined through succession, while asymbiotic nitrogen fixation peaked in the 37-yr-old plot. Consequently, the dominant nitrogen fixation input switched from symbiotic fixation in the younger plots to asymbiotic fixation in the older plots. Tree growth was highest in the youngest plots and declined through succession. Interestingly, symbiotic nitrogen fixation was negatively correlated with the basal area of nitrogen-fixing trees across our study plots, highlighting the danger in using nitrogen-fixing trees as a proxy for rates of symbiotic nitrogen fixation. Our results demonstrate that the nitrogen cycle has largely recuperated by 19 yr following disturbance, allowing for rapid biomass regeneration at our site. This work provides important insight into the sources and dynamics of nitrogen that support growth and carbon capture in regenerating Neotropical forests. © 2019 by the Ecological Society of America
1. Research into the successional responses of tropical forest communities following disturbance has potential applications for habitat restoration. Currently little is known of how these responses relate to the recovery of biodiversity and ecosystem processes. Succession of assemblages of decomposer arthropods is essential for the recovery of the soil community and nutrient cycling processes. 2. This study investigated the successional response of a termite assemblage to the experimental perturbation of forest habitat in southern Cameroon, examining the implications for tropical forest restoration. A randomized block design consisting of four experimental perturbations of differing severity was established in an old secondary forest in the Mbalmayo Forest Reserve. Isolated control sites were left in undisturbed forest. Recovery of the termite assemblage was assessed by measuring termite species richness and abundance at regular intervals over the subsequent 12 months. 3. The speed of recovery of the termite assemblage varied with the type and extent of perturbation. In treatments involving severe soil and canopy disturbance, termite species richness and abundance recovered more rapidly when dead wood was left on the ground following perturbation. The availability of dead wood also resulted in recolonization by a subset of the termite assemblage that was distinct compositionally from that sampled from all other treatments. This subset at sites with additional dead wood included not only certain wood-feeding species, but also soil feeders. 4. The positive effects upon the termite assemblage of leaving substantial dead wood on the ground has implications for the restoration of tropical forests following human-induced disturbances such as logging. The accelerated recovery of termite diversity and assemblage composition is a significant component of soil community recovery and the restoration of nutrient cycles. These benefits are expected to influence soil fertility and, ultimately, forest regeneration. The duration and persistence of these effects will depend crucially on the type, scale and intensity of the original disturbance. The impact of termites on soil properties, and vice versa, clearly deserves more attention in studies of tropical forest regeneration and recovery.
Secondary forests occupy extensive areas in tropical regions, providing an opportunity to investigate their relevance to biodiversity restoration. However, determining the conservation value of secondary forests and evaluating their successional trajectories depends on how biodiversity is measured. Here, we explore different biodiversity dimensions to understand how bird assemblages recover from forest disturbance caused by small scale farmers in the Amazon. We sampled bird species through standard visual and auditory censuses in 24 small plots of 1-hectare distributed in a paired design of old growth forests and secondary forests from different age categories (early, middle and late succession). We used 12 biodiversity metrics to explore the taxonomic, functional, and phylogenetic dimensions of bird diversity. Total species richness and evenness was similar between secondary and old growth forests. In contrast, the number of passerine species and disturbance-vulnerable species were higher in the controls of old growth forests compared to secondary forests. The relative abundance of birds with distinct functional traits consistently differed between the secondary forests of different age categories and their old growth forest counterparts. Functional evenness and divergence increased with canopy height and basal area through forest regeneration. In contrast, bird phylogenetic diversity in secondary forests was higher compared to those found in old growth forests while accounting for forest types and age categories of secondary forests. Bird species tolerant to disturbances partially compensate the loss of avian taxonomic and phylogenetic diversity during the conversion of undisturbed forests to agricultural fields. Changes in functional evenness and functional divergence suggest that resources used by birds are altered along the secondary succession and that the niche complementarity among species is reduced in more intensively managed sites. Ecological succession can be highly complex in terms of taxa identity, their functional roles and evolutionary history. Therefore, measurements that explore distinct biodiversity dimensions are fundamental to understanding how species are organized in assemblages across time and space. © 2020 Elsevier B.V.
Artisanal gold mining in Amazon forests and rivers has been reported in all Amazonian countries. Amazon mining has a wide range of negative effects and severe environmental and social consequences. Given that the activity in the region is mostly illegal, there are few studies published in the scientific literature on recovery of areas degraded by gold mining. This study conducts an experimental reforestation project aimed to evaluate soil degradation and explore the seedling survivorship and early growth of 51 tropical tree species in gold mined areas at 5 study sites distributed across the Madre de Dios region, in the Peruvian Amazon. The study evaluates the effect of biochar amendments on the survivorship and growth of 51 tropical species. The study also analyzes the influence of species wood density on seedling performance one year after planting. In order to inform further restoration plantation strategies, species were chosen with the end goals of timber production, biodiversity enhancement, and soil restoration. Site degradation, soil properties and mercury levels were analyzed in degraded areas and paired reference forest patches. Soils after gold mining are found to be highly degraded, with soil C being nearly absent, cation content greatly decreased, and loss of fine sediment. Soil mercury levels were found below national and international environmental quality standards. A positive correlation and a statistically significant relationship were found between survivorship and wood density. This reveals that the higher the wood density of the species, the higher the survival percentage. Growth and overall performance of mid, and especially low wood density species were significantly increased by biochar additions, while no effect was recorded on high wood density species growth. The study provides guidance on the post-ASGM restoration potential for 51 common and useful tree species and gives practitioners recommendations for combinations of species and fertilization treatments to optimize restoration designs. © 2020 Elsevier B.V.
According to the climate zoning proposed by Holdrige, Ocaña, in the department of Norte de Santander in Colombia, has a distribution of Dry Tropical Forest (Bs-T). This forest is threatened at the national level, so the Colombian state has been prioritized to restore and conserve it, since it provides a considerable number of ecosystem services and also, is key to the conservation of our biodiversity and the adaptation and mitigation of climate change. Forest fires have been a problem in the dry forest area of Ocaña, with a frequency of up to 13 fires per year in 2015 alone, according to the regional fire department. So far, fire management in the area has been lim-ited to emergency response, not prevention, because there is no institutional framework for fire risk management at the local level. The objective of this work is to identify the zones of vulnerability of the vegetation to forest fires in the Bs-T area of Ocaña. To do this, a protocol proposed by the Institute of Hydrology, Meteorology and Environmental Studies—IDEAM has been used, which specifies that it is necessary to first have a coverage map, adapted according to certain coverages (Corine Land Cover Methodology) prioritized by the protocol, to later generate the maps of type, duration and load of fuels, which are subjected to a multi-criteria evaluation in GIS soft-ware, thus generating the map of vegetation susceptibility to fires. As a result, for the predominant fuel type and load, a high threat was identified, mainly to the east of the Bs-T distribution area, while the low threat per fuel life, has a greater representativeness in hectares and is displayed mainly to the southeast of this area. It is concluded that the threat due to the vulnerability of vegetation to fire in Bs-T in Ocaña is mainly moderate, representing an area of approximately 13,924 ha. © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024.
In 2006, the Brazilian Forest Service (SFB) started an ambitious program to establish forest concessions so as to provide a legal framework for long-term sustainable timber production in Amazonian forests. Forest concessions in the Brazilian Amazon currently cover only 1.6 million ha (Mha) but we estimate the area of all potential concessions as 35 Mha. This paper assessed the conditions under which the present and potential concession system can ensure an annual production of 11 Mm(3). yr(-1) to meet the estimated present timber demand. For this we used the volume dynamics with differential equations model (VDDE) calibrated for the Amazon Basin with a Bayesian framework with data from 3500 ha of forest plots monitored for as long as 30 years after selective logging. Predictions of commercial volume recovery rates vary with location.     We tested 27 different scenarios by using combinations of initial proportion of commercial volume, logging intensity and cutting cycle length. These scenarios were then applied to the current area of concessions and to the area of all potential concessions (35 Mha). Under current logging regulations and the current concession area (mean logging intensity of 15-20 m(3).ha(-1), a harvest cycle of 35 years and an initial commercial timber volume proportion of 20%), timber production can be maintained only for a single cutting cycle (35 years). Only the scenario with a logging intensity of 10 m(3)ha(-1) every 60 years with a 90% initial proportion of commercial timber species can be considered as sustainable. Under this scenario, the maximum annual production with the present concession areas is 159,000 m(3) (157-159), or less than 2% of the present annual production of 11 Mm(3). When considering all potential concession areas (35 Mha), under current rules, the total annual production is 10 Mm(3)yr(-1) (2-17 Mm(3)yr(-1), 95% credibility interval) but is not maintained after the first logging cycle. Under the most sustainable scenario (see above) and a concession area of 35 Mha, the long-term sustainable annual production of timber reaches only 3.4 Mm(3)yr(-1). Based on these results we argue that the concession system will not be able to supply the timber demand without substantial reforms in natural forest management practices and in the wood industry sector. We argue that alternative sources of timber, including plantations linked with forest restoration initiatives, must be promoted.
The East Usambaras in Tanzania are a tropical biodiversity hotspot where current agricultural management practices pose threats to forest conservation and development objectives. Promoting sustainable agricultural intensification (SAI) would improve long-term productivity and reduce pressure on forest reserves. The study objective was to identify household-level characteristics that influence adoption of improved management practices, specifically soil replenishment practices, in order to identify opportunities and constraints to scaling up SAI to landscape level. First, three common farming systems and a fourth agroforestry (AF) model were developed to estimate the relative profitability of incorporating fallow, manure, and non-timber forest product activities. Next, household surveys were conducted and a logistic regression analysis was used to measure the influence of socioeconomic characteristics, physical and financial assets, tenure security, and plot-specific attributes on adoption of soil replenishment practices that were specified in the model. Findings showed that the AF model was financially competitive but raises opportunity costs to labour when compared to common systems. Marital status, household size, remittances, credit access, and tenure security significantly influenced adoption of fallow and applying organic inputs. Significant plot-specific attributes included perceived fertility and distance from the homestead. Policies to scale up SAI should consider these factors and emphasize improving markets for AF species and extension services.
Quantifying the influence of biodiversity on ecosystem function is an increasingly important goal as biodiversity declines. Tadpoles can be important contributors to ecosystem processes in streams, so amphibian declines over recent decades may have far-reaching ecosystem effects. We, therefore, used artificial channels located near an Australian rainforest stream to assess how the tadpoles of 2 frog species affect leaf litter decay, sediment bioturbation, and nutrient cycling in the presence and absence of invertebrates. Mixophyes coggeri (Myo-batrachidae) tadpoles did not increase leaf mass loss, but were important in sediment removal, which benefits smaller consumers. In contrast, high densities of Litoria serrata (Hylidae) tadpoles increased leaf mass loss, possibly because their excretion of nutrients facilitated decomposition, but were not important in sediment removal. However, we found no effect of nutrient excretion by L. serrata tadpoles on the nutrient quality of leaves and sediments, or on bio-film growth, even though L. serrata tadpoles and invertebrates together appeared to remove significant quantities of nutrients from sediment. Our results show that tadpoles of different species can have different functional roles in the ecosystem, which need to be taken into account when assessing the influence of amphibian declines on ecosystem processes. © 2019 by The Society for Freshwater Science.
The rain forests of Tanzania occupy small areas, mostly confined to isolated mountains. Except for some isolated volcanic mountains (Mt. Kilimanjaro, Mt. Meru, the Ngorongoro Crater), most of the rain forests are confined to the so-called Eastern Arc mountains with old crystalline bedrocks. The Eastern Arc rain forests are characterized by high biodiversity, and have large numbers of endemic and rare taxa of plants and animals. The submontane and montane rain forests are extremely important water catchments, providing water for major cities and densely populated rural areas. Most of the rain forest catchments are forest reserves, but still the human impact around and inside the reserves is considerable. Intensive cultivation due to heavy population pressure affects the reserves from all sides, leaving the forests isolated, fragmented 'islands' surrounded by the cultural landscape. Former timber production and logging programs initiated by the State and some foreign development organizations have depleted large areas of rain forests, e.g. in the Usambara Mountains. Extensive, destructive, legal and illegal activities such as, e.g. logging, pit-sawing and grazing have taken place inside most of the forest reserves. Some research programs on rain forest catchments are now being carried out in Tanzania, forming a basis for future management and monitoring of the forest reserves. The forest authorities are currently much concerned about the problems, giving catchment forest management highest priority in the Tropical Forestry Action Plan. © 1992.
The expansion of the agricultural frontier in the species-rich tropical regions of the world has generated conflicts between the need to secure food production and the conservation of biodiversity. As natural areas give way to farmlands, the future of sensitive taxa may depend on how intensively the crops are cultivated. In order to better understand the response of avian diversity to cultivation intensity in tropical farmlands, analyses of species richness are increasingly being complemented with information about the birds’ functional roles and evolutionary history. In this study, we analysed the association of several features of vegetation composition and structure, as indicators of cultivation intensity in coffee farms in Costa Rica, on the taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic dimensions of avian biodiversity at the local scale across an approximately 2000 m elevational gradient. Bird detections and vegetation measurements were conducted at 120 randomly selected circular plots of 25 m radius, across 51 coffee farms. Using regression modelling and multi-model inference, we related six vegetation features to five biodiversity metrics in this system and evaluated whether the results differed among elevational zones. The most influential vegetation feature was the number of trees with a diameter-at-breast-height larger than 30 cm, promoting higher richness, functional redundancy and phylogenetic structure of avian species. Shade from canopy cover and the number of non-coffee crops increased species and phylogenetic richness, respectively. The effect of individual vegetation features on particular biodiversity metrics varied across elevation, possibly due to the idiosyncratic response of each dimension to the elevation gradient or because of local ecological processes. We conclude that vegetation features related to cultivation intensity have effects on avian diversity, but that these effects differ among biodiversity metrics and are sensitive to the environmental context. Consequently, targeted conservation management should be based on more comprehensive studies that include more than one biodiversity dimensions as well as variation in relevant environmental context. In general, our results suggest that, when designing conservation strategies for birds in coffee-dominated landscapes, there is likely no “one-size-fits-all” strategy. © 2021 The Authors
Transformation of natural ecosystems into intensive agriculture is a main factor causing biodiversity loss worldwide. Agroforestry systems (AFS) may maintain biodiversity, ecosystem benefits and human wellbeing, they have therefore high potential for concealing production and conservation. However, promotion of intensive agriculture and disparagement of TEK endanger their permanence. A high diversity of AFS still exist in the world and their potentialities vary with the socio-ecological contexts. We analysed AFS in tropical, temperate, and arid environments, of the Tehuacan Valley, Mexico, to investigate how their capacity varies to conserve biodiversity and role of TEK influencing differences in those contexts. We hypothesized that biodiversity in AFS is related to that of forests types associated and the vigour of TEK and management. We conducted studies in a matrix of environments and human cultures in the Tehuacan Valley. In addition, we reviewed, systematized and compared information from other regions of Mexico and the world with comparable socio-ecological contexts in order to explore possible general patterns. Our study found from 26 % to nearly 90 % of wild plants species richness conserved in AFS, the decreasing proportion mainly associated to pressures for intensifying agricultural production and abandoning traditional techniques. Native species richness preserved in AFS is influenced by richness existing in the associated forests, but the main driver is how people preserve benefits of components and functions of ecosystems. Elements of modern agricultural production may coexist with traditional management patterns, but imposition of modern models may break possible balances. TEK influences decisions on what and how modern techniques may be advantageous for preserving biodiversity, ecosystem integrity in AFS and people's wellbeing. TEK, agroecology and other sciences may interact for maintaining and improving traditional AFS to increase biodiversity and ecosystem integrity while improving quality of life of people managing the AFS.
To achieve the ambitious goals of the UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration, restoration frameworks should embrace the diversity of ecosystems found on Earth, including open-canopy ecosystems, which have been largely overlooked. Considering the paucity of scientific foundations promoting restoration science, policy, and practice for open tropical ecosystems, we provide overarching guidelines to restore the campo rupestre, a Neotropical, open megadiverse grassland that has been increasingly threatened by multiple human activities, especially mining. Restoration techniques for tropical grasslands are still at its infancy, and attempts to restore campo rupestre have had, so far, low to moderate success, highlighting the need for a tailored restoration framework. In a scenario of increasing degradation and scarcity of on-site restoration experiments, we propose 10 principles to improve our ability to plan, implement, and monitor restoration in campo rupestre: (1) include socioeconomic dimensions, (2) implement active restoration, (3) keep low soil fertility, (4) restore disturbance regimes, (5) address genetic structure and adaptation potential, (6) restore geographically restricted and specialized ecological interactions, (7) incorporate functional approaches, (8) use seed-based restoration strategies to enhance biodiversity, (9) translocation is inevitable, and (10) long-term monitoring is mandatory. Our principles represent the best available evidence to support better science and practice for the restoration of campo rupestre and, to some extent, can be useful for other megadiverse, fire-prone, and nutrient-poor ecosystems.
Termites play important roles in organic matter decomposition, nutrient cycling, and soil structure in tropical rain forests. When forests are replaced by agriculture, termite species richness, abundance, and function often decline. We compared the termite assemblage of a primary forest site with that of a low plant diversity, palm-based agroforest (five plant species) and a high plant diversity, home-garden agroforest (10 plant species) using a rapid biodiversity assessment protocol. In comparing the primary forest termite species composition to previously published studies, we found soil feeders and the Apicotermitinae to be more dominant than previously reported in Amazonia. Thirty percent of the species belonged to the Apicotermitinae, and an unusually high percentage (57%) of species were soil feeders. Unexpectedly, the palm-based agroforest, despite its lower plant diversity, was closer to primary forest in termite species composition, rate of species accumulation, and proportions of species in taxonomic and functional classes than was the home-garden agroforest. This suggests that particular plant attributes may better determine the termite assemblage than plant diversity alone in these agroecosystems. Unlike other agroecosystems reported in the literature, Apicotermitinae and soil feeders were proportionally more abundant in these agroforests than in primary forest. The ability of agroforests to support populations of soil feeders has a potentially positive effect on soil fertility in these agroecosystems; insomuch as feeding guild is a proxy for function, these closed-canopy agroforests may be able to sustain the same termite-mediated functions as primary forest. © 2009 by The Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation.
1. Termites are major decomposers in tropical regions and play an important role in soil processes. This study measured the impact of land-use intensification on the termite assemblage of lowland rain forest in Jambi Province, on the Indonesian island of Sumatra. Termite composition was assessed in seven land-use types along a disturbance gradient, from primary forest, through different silvicultural systems, to grassland and cultivated land without trees. A range of environmental variables was also measured.     2. Termite species richness and relative abundance declined as follows: primary forest > selectively logged forest > mature 'jungle rubber' (a diverse agro-forest dominated by rubber trees) > mature rubber plantation > young Paraserianthes falcataria plantation (a softwood tree) > Imperata cylindrica grassland > cassava garden. Termite richness fell from 34 species in the primary forest to one species in the cassava garden. The relative abundance of soil-feeding termites showed a significantly greater decline along the gradient than did wood-feeding termites.     3. Of the environmental variables, woody plant basal area was most strongly correlated with termite species richness (r = 0.973) and relative abundance (r = 0.980). This reflects the response of forest-adapted termites to progressive simplification of the physical structure of the habitat, resulting in the reduction of canopy cover and alteration in microclimate, and the loss of feeding and nesting sites.     4. Synthesis and applications . Comparisons with other studies show that the decline in termite species richness and relative abundance seen at Jambi is a general trend that occurs elsewhere when forests are converted to other land uses. To help mitigate the loss of termites when forests are disturbed, we recommend the following management practices: the use of reduced-impact logging techniques, maximizing forest patch size and connectivity, minimizing length of forest edges, and leaving dead wood to decay in situ .
Data are presented for termite assemblages across an anthropogenic disturbance gradient in the humid forest zone of West and Central Africa. Sampling was by standardised 100 m × 2 m transects in: primary forest, several ages of regenerating forest, agroforestry plots, short fallows, mixed food crop fields, and mechanically cleared plots. Most sites were in southern Cameroon - two additional transects were conducted in primary forest in Congo (Brazzaville). Species richness was negatively correlated with the disturbance gradient, although transects in areas with a complete or near-complete canopy were broadly similar in species richness. The strongest negative correlation was found for termite species feeding furthest down the humification gradient (group IV soil feeders) probably because these species are energetically constrained from living in non-forest habitats. In contrast species feeding and nesting in dead wood (group I wood feeders) termites, which live in the most protected micro-habitats, were significantly positively correlated with the disturbance gradient. Species composition was also strongly correlated with disturbance level in multivariate redundancy analyses. Pest species were an insignificant element of the assemblage, in part because of the distance of the sites from savanna source pools. Overall, it appears that termite-mediated wood and litter decomposition may be relatively unaffected by light to moderate disturbance intensity, but that soil-conditioning by termites might be greatly reduced in agricultural land cleared from tropical forest. © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Disturbance, particularly agricultural expansion is one of the major threats to the biodiversity and ecological functions of tropical and sub-tropical ecosystems. In this regard, we examined changes in the species richness, abundance, and diversity of termites across different disturbance treatments in a sub-tropical semi-arid savanna in south eastern Zimbabwe. Nine transects (100 × 2 m) representing three habitat disturbance treatments (primary woodland; grazing area; agricultural field) were sampled for termites using a rapid biodiversity assessment protocol. Termites were more abundant and species-rich in primary woodland and grazing area than in the agricultural field. Twelve termite species from three sub-families were present, with Microtermes sp. constituting 35% of the identified termite species. Termite feeding group structure differed significantly among land-use types, and of all termites present, wood-feeding termites were the most abundant while soil-feeders were rare in the agricultural field. In conclusion the observed pattern in termite species richness and relative abundance indicates that termites are very resilient to natural disturbance and might actually benefit from some natural disturbances like they did in the grazing area of this study, but they are not resilient to extreme anthropogenic disturbance. Although there was no notable difference in termite species richness and relative abundance between agricultural field and primary woodland, the pattern observed across the three sites may be potential support for the IDH suggesting that intermediate levels of physical disturbance intensity influence the structure and functioning of termite assemblages in semi-arid savanna. © 2017, Springer International Publishing AG.
Restoring small-scale habitat heterogeneity in highly diverse systems, like tropical forests, is a conservation challenge and offers an excellent opportunity to test factors affecting community assembly. We investigated whether (1) the applied nucleation restoration strategy (planting tree islands) resulted in higher habitat heterogeneity than more homogeneous forest restoration approaches, (2) increased heterogeneity resulted in more diverse tree recruitment, and (3) the mean or coefficient of variation of habitat variables best explained tree recruitment. We measured soil nutrients, overstory and understory vegetation structure, and tree recruitment at six sites with three 5- to 7-year-old restoration treatments: control (no planting), planted tree islands, and conventional, mixed-species tree plantations. Canopy openness and soil base saturation were more variable in island treatments than in controls and plantations, whereas most soil nutrients had similar coefficients of variation across treatments, and bare ground was more variable in control plots. Seedling and sapling species density were equivalent in plantations and islands, and were substantially higher than in controls. Species spatial turnover, diversity, and richness were similar in island and plantation treatments. Mean canopy openness, rather than heterogeneity, explained the largest proportion of variance in species density. Our results show that, whereas canopy openness and soil base saturation are more heterogeneous with the applied nucleation restoration strategy, this pattern does not translate into greater tree diversity. The lack of a heterogeneity-diversity relationship is likely due to the fact that recruits respond more strongly to mean resource gradients than variability at this early stage in succession, and that seed dispersal limitation likely reduces the available species pool. Results show that planting tree islands facilitates tree recruitment to a similar degree as intensive plantation-style restoration strategies. © 2013 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Evaluations of the success of different conservation strategies are still in their infancy. We used four different measures of project outcomes-ecological, economic, attitudinal, and behavioral - to test hypotheses derived from the assumptions that underlie contemporary conservation solutions. Our hypotheses concerned the effects of natural resource utilization, market integration, decentralization, and community homogeneity on project success. We reviewed the conservation and development literature and used a specific protocol to extract and code the information in a sample of papers. Although our results are by no means conclusive and suffer from the paucity of high-quality data and independent monitoring (80% of the original sample of 124 projects provided inadequate information for use in this study), they show that permitted use of natural resources, market access, and greater community involvement in the conservation project are all important factors for a successful outcome. Without better monitoring schemes in place, it is still impossible to provide a systematic evaluation of how different strategies are best suited to different conservation challenges.
Global targets to halt biodiversity losses and mitigate climate change will require protecting rainforest beyond current protected area networks, necessitating responsible forest stewardship from a diverse range of companies, communities and private individuals. Robust assessments of forest condition are critical for successful forest management, but many existing techniques are highly technical, time-consuming, expensive or require specialist knowledge. To make assessment of tropical forests accessible to a wide range of actors, many of whom may be limited by resources or expertise, the High Conservation Value Resource Network (HCVRN), with the SE Asia Rainforest Research Partnership (SEARRP), developed a South East Asian version of the Forest Integrity Assessment (FIA) tool as a rapid (< 1 hour) method of assessing forest condition in the field, where non-experts respond to 50 questions about characteristics of the local environment while walking a site transect. Here, we examined the effectiveness of this survey tool by conducting ∼ 1000 assessments of forest condition at 16 tropical rainforest sites with varying levels of disturbance in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo. We found good agreement (R-squared range: 0.50–0.78) between FIA survey scores and independent measures of forest condition, including biodiversity, vegetation structure, aboveground carbon and other key metrics of ecosystem function, indicating that the tool performed well. Although there was variation among assessor responses when surveying the same forest sites, assessors were consistent in their ranking of those sites, and prior forest knowledge had a minimal effect on the FIA scores. Revisions or further training for questions where assessors disagree, for example, on the presence of fauna at a site, could improve consistency. We conclude that the FIA survey tool is a robust method of assessing forest condition, providing a rapid and accessible means of forest conservation assessment. The FIA tool could be incorporated into management practices in a wide range of forest conservation schemes, from sustainability standards, to community forestry and restoration initiatives. The tool will enable more organizations and individuals to understand the conservation value of the forests they manage and to identify areas for targeted improvements. © 2021 The Authors. Ecological Solutions and Evidence published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Ecological Society.
Forest Ecosystem has a significant role in assuring food security and sovereignty as well as national defense and security. Sustainable forest management is an effective framework to reduce and to add fuel to the impact of Green Houses Gas (GHG) emission changes. Petungkriyono is one of the last tropical forests in Java and provides biodiversity including rare flora and fauna. This area stores outstanding biodiversity that must be maintained, managed utilized to give meaning to humanity. The objective of this study is to analyze how a collaborative management perspective implemented in Petungkriyono as alternative policies that can be recommended to the government. This research shows that a collaborative management perspective significant factor to obtain sustainable development. Further application collaborative management approach recommended with the support of the government on the policy, rules, and human resource development. Through co-management, it was expected to improve the understanding of what people wanted, helped people to identify the issues, arranged the completion priority, increased commitment, social awareness independence. The collaboration between the private sector, local government, and community empowerment a particularly important factor in the success of sustainability management. © The Authors, published by EDP Sciences, 2020.
The pace of deforestation in tropical forests has achieved unprecedented rates, requiring effective and achievable conservation mitigations that are also easily understood by society and policy makers. In this context, we report the outcomes from a large-scale project located in the threatened Atlantic Forest (SISBIOTA network) to understand how deforestation affects ecological patterns and processes in human-modified landscapes. In particular, we compiled data from 28 studies that evaluated habitat quality, biodiversity maintenance or ecological processes and scrutinised their responses along the gradient of forest loss. After a decade of research effort, we provide evidence of key changes in forest quality, species diversity and ecological processes that are ultimately affecting forest functioning of the remaining patches. As deforestation progresses, we unveiled a clear retraction of local vegetation structure, in which forests become similar to secondary forests, as are characterised by retaining shorter and thinner trees, higher foliage density and increased canopy openness. Besides being hotter, patches embedded within deforested landscapes present reduced quality, evidenced by low fruit production and quality. Such changes cascade to disruptions in biodiversity maintenance and ecological processes. Specifically, forest-specialist species exhibit reduced diversity (e.g., juvenile and adult trees, birds and mammals) and for some groups, are compensated by the increase in habitat-generalist species. Furthermore, forest patches immersed in deforested landscapes experience strong alterations in nutrient cycling and carbon stocks, increase of leaf herbivory, reduction of frugivory, and finally, a simplification in bird-plant interactions. Preventing deforestation is imperative, but restoration and rewilding are also required to safeguard forest-dweller species and, consequently, enable ecological functionality. © 2023
We address the controversy over REDD+ financing for commercial loggers who reduce emissions by adopting improved forest management (IFM). We argue that REDD+ incentives should be available to commercial loggers who adopt IFM as long as carbon accounting is rigorous and safeguards are followed. Further, we argue that where full forest protection is not feasible, IFM should be advanced as a priority REDD+ strategy because it can (i) achieve robust emissions reductions without generating leakage or increasing the risk of non-permanence, (ii) generate a variety of local community benefits as a low-carbon development strategy, (iii) maintain native forest biodiversity, and (iv) reduce the likelihood of deforestation, particularly when forest management is community-based. We discuss solutions to some of the remaining challenges to creating incentives for IFM within a REDD+ mechanism. We encourage continued refinement of safeguards to ensure that verified climate benefits of IFM also generate social and biodiversity benefits. REDD+ financing is needed to catalyze the shift to IFM, but IFM should not be dependent (or at least not fully dependent) upon REDD+ financing for long-term financial viability. Measuring, monitoring, and validating emissions reductions from IFM have been a particular challenge, although new technologies and methods are promising. Technologies and methods used to account for avoided deforestation are usually not sensitive enough to detect changes in forest management practices. Funding is needed for research to develop and refine affordable methodologies for measuring, monitoring, and validating emissions reductions achieved through IFM. © Bronson W. Griscom and Rane Cortez.
#VALUE!
Animals can have both positive (e.g. via seed dispersal) and negative (e.g. via herbivory) impacts on plants. The net effects of these interactions remain difficult to predict and may be affected by overhunting and habitat disturbance, two widespread threats to tropical forests. Recent studies have documented their separate effects on plant recruitment but our understanding of how defaunation and logging interact to influence tropical tree communities is limited. From 2013 to 2016, we followed the fate of marked tree seedlings (n = 1489) from 81 genera in and outside experimental plots. Our plots differentially excluded small, medium and large-bodied mammal herbivores in logged and unlogged forest in Malaysian Borneo. We assessed the effects of experimental defaunation and logging on taxonomic diversity and plant trait (wood density, specific leaf area, fruit size) composition of seedling communities. Although seedling mortality was highest in the presence of all mammal herbivores (44%), defaunation alone did not alter taxonomic diversity nor plant trait composition. However, herbivores (across all body sizes) significantly reduced mean fruit size across the seedling community over time (95% confidence interval (CI): 20.09 to 20.01), particularly in logged forest (95% CI: 20.12 to 20.003). Our findings suggest that impacts of mammal herbivores on plant communities may be greater in forests with a history of disturbance and could subsequently affect plant functional traits and ecological processes associated with forest regeneration. © 2018 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.
Invariably, insects are overlooked when tropical forest management issues are discussed, because there are so many species, they are taxonomically intractable and so poorly known. Often people take the view that if you look after the vegetation and vertebrates, the insects will look after themselves. This may be true for some functional groups, but for saproxylic insects, this seems unlikely. Their study deserves high priority, since they are dependent on the very resource - wood - whose removal from the ecosystem is the usual object of forest management. Given the current international effort to develop 'criteria and indicators' to monitor sustainable forest management for biodiversity values, there is a window of opportunity for sound ecological research on saproxylic insects to influence the formulation of forest policy such that their needs can be taken into account. There is already a large body of knowledge on temperate and boreal region saproxylic insects, and on the effects that logging has on them, but knowledge of the tropical forest situation lags far behind. This paper proposes a research agenda to enable the needs of saproxylic insects to be taken into account in natural forest management in the tropics. Basic questions, such as whether logging has so far had an impact on tropical saproxylic insects, and whether there are workable sampling techniques to investigate this, still remain to be addressed and deserve high priority. The links between the responses of saproxylic insects and more 'charismatic' study species need to be investigated. We also need to know whether there is a correlation between the intensity of logging and the response of saproxylic insects, and, critically, whether we would be justified in measuring some surrogate aspects of forest structure (as potential habitat for saproxylic insects) rather than the saproxylic insects themselves, and modelling this to determine likely impacts of different management regimes. We consider such an ambitious research agenda as justified given the scale of impact that forest use and management is likely to have on tropical forest insects in the future.
Forest management data is available for many tropical countries, representing a large and spatially rich source of tree level data. Over the past decade, we have collected and digitized over 1000 Costa Rican natural forest management plans, spanning 30 years and spread out over approximately 26,700 km(2) along the country's Atlantic coast, northern lowlands, and southern Pacific coast. In order to analyze this unique collection of tree inventory data we developed a system to ensure the standardization, quality control, and reliable management of the dataset. We developed a relational geodatabase, forming logical associations between and within the spatial and tabular components of the forest management data. In this study, we outline the data standardization procedures established to permit the comparison of data across time and space. Further, we describe quality checks built-into the database's functionality to identify and reduce the presence of errors. The final customized forest management geodatabase efficiently stores a large and diverse dataset through the integration of logical relations, quality checks, and flexible data access across 32 tables and over 250,000 tree records. Through the use of quality tests, the database provides a means to improve overall data integrity and illustrates the magnitude, sources, and types of errors present in the initial dataset. Finally, the value of a comprehensive database for the management of forest data is demonstrated through an exploratory analysis of standardized tree taxonomic information. With this analysis, we begin to explore the potential strengths, weaknesses, and applications of forest management data for future ecological studies (e.g. species diversity assessment). For instance, although most of the forest management data (tree inventories and censuses) is collected using common names in the field, our standardization process has allowed us to depict trends similar to those found in ecological studies (e.g. dominant species for different ecosystems). Overall, our forestry geodatabase represents the most complete record of natural forest management practices in Costa Rica to date. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Tropical biodiversity is seriously threatened by deforestation but few studies have quantified its impact. We aimed to measure the impact of forest clearance and different methods of establishing Terminalia ivorensis (Combretaceae) forest plantations on the abundance, richness and composition of ants, the most abundant group of arthropods in tropical forest canopies, in the Mblamayo Forest Reserve in Cameroon. For canopy ants, we quantified the effects of different methods of plantation establishment by sampling two sets of plots subjected to complete clearance, partial mechanical clearance and partial manual clearance relative to uncleared forest reference plots. For leaf-litter ants, we quantified the impacts of different levels of forest disturbance along a gradient from near primary forest to complete forest clearance. 2. A total of 97 ant species was recorded from the canopy (from approximately 48 500 individuals), at an average of 213 (±45) ants m-2. Jack-knife estimates of species richness showed that at one site, Bilik, 87% more species occurred in the partial manual clearance plot than the complete clearance plot, with the partial mechanical clearance plot intermediate. At the other site, Ebogo, ant richness did not vary between treatments. Ants were 20 times more abundant in the partial manual clearance plot in Ebogo than the partial manual clearance plot in Bilik, largely due to a numerous Technomyrmex species that might have reduced ant richness on this plot. 3. Cluster analysis of the similarities in ant species composition between plots, calculated by the Morisita index, showed that site and treatment affected species composition. Neither treatment nor site affected the relative number of species in different nesting categories. 4. A total of 111 ant species (from 3650 individuals) was recorded from the leaf litter, at an average of 52 (±4.6) ants m-2. Species numbers were greatest in the two partial clearance plots in Ebogo (52-53 species), lowest in the two complete clearance plots (37), and intermediate and most variable in the three uncleared forest plots (40-52). Cluster analysis showed that species composition was not affected by treatment, while neither treatment nor site affected the relative number of ant species in different feeding categories. 5. Despite some local effects by dominant species, our results support the view that deforestation can reduce arthropod species richness. This study is unique in showing that reforestation methods (using a single tree species) can have a marked effect on arthropod species richness and composition. Specifically, it reveals that ant species richness can be greater in plantations established after partial manual clearance than complete clearance.
Lianas contribute substantially to plant diversity and to local people's livelihood in tropical forests around the world. However, their species composition and the factors that determine their distribution in dry Afromontane forests are less explored. In this study, we quantified the diversity and density of lianas under various anthropogenic disturbance levels in Chilimo dry Afromontane forest of Ethiopia. We also assessed their importance to the local people. All woody species ≥10 cm and lianas having ≥1 cm diameter size at the point of measurement were recorded in 72, 20 m × 20 m plots distributed on seven transect lines with 2 km distance between transects. We found twenty-four woody vines that belong to 19 genera and 15 families, having an overall density of 1358 liana stems per hectare. These lianas contributed about 25% to the woody plant diversity of the study forest. Six liana-climbing modes were recorded. Stem twiners were predominant in terms of species richness while Scrambler armed climbers were the most abundant species. Liana species richness and abundance were significantly different among the low, moderate, and high forest disturbance levels (p < 0.05) and Liana diversity significantly reduced in highly disturbed forest plots (p < 0.01). Human disturbance indirectly hinders liana assemblage, as liana species richness and abundance showed a positive relationship (p < 0.05) with tree species richness and abundance. The five most abundant species were Carissa spinarum, Rubus steudneri, Rosa abyssinica, Jasminum abyssinicum, and Urera hypselodendron. All the enumerated liana species identified had medicinal, veterinary, food, fence, traditional house construction, fuelwood, grazing, artisan work, and honeybee forage importance to the local residents. Carissa spinarum, Clematis simensis, and Rosa abyssinica were found to be the most important species to the local people having 2, 1.54 and 1.53 importance value index, respectively. There is a need of implementing effective forest management through strengthening the ongoing participatory forest management program to reverse the negative impacts of anthropogenic forest disturbances and to sustain dry Afromontane lianas and their roles in biodiversity and socioeconomic aspects. © 2020 The Authors
By 2010, Sumatera Island of Indonesia had lost the highest annual forest cover due to oil palm (Elaeis guineensis Jacq.) expansion, leading to adverse environmental impacts. The introduction of oil palm agroforestry (OPAF) within the social forestry program was to reduce these environmental impacts, conserve biodiversity, enhance wildlife habitat, and improve smallholder household resilience. However, the information on OPAF implementation progress and its benefits and ecological impacts still need to be explored. This research aims to measure the diversity of birds in young OPAF by comparing birds' diversity in four land covers: young oil palm agroforestry (three years after establishment), old oil palm agroforestry (20 years after establishment), oil palm monoculture, and secondary forest. We indicated 43 bird species from 25 families across all land covers. The secondary forest had the highest valueof bird diversity index value of 2.80. The second was the first young oil palm agroforestry (2.42), followed by old OPAF, oil palm monoculture, and the second young OPAF with index values of 2.30, 2.19, and 2.16, respectively. Enrichment planting on oil palm monoculture through OPAF development could help restore tropical forests' structural complexity while also providing more suitable bird habitats. © Published under licence by IOP Publishing Ltd.
Many forest conservation projects seek to preserve biodiversity by protecting habitats from exploitation or degradation. Although such efforts are often motivated by global concerns, habitat protection also yields domestic benefits. Some of these are intangible or difficult to quantify; others, such as watershed protection and the production of nonforest timber products, are immediate and tangible. There are two rationales for quantifying the domestic benefits of habitat conservation. The first is motivational. Host countries capture only a small proportion of the global benefits which stem from biodiversity conservation. Demonstration of palpable local benefits could help to build support for biodiversity-oriented projects. Second, the magnitude of domestic benefits could influence project financing. Sufficiently large net domestic benefits could justify financing of a project on narrow economic grounds, with biodiversity conservation as a by-product. This review finds that the quantifiable benefits of forest preservation in providing hydro logical services and nontimber forest products are highly variable. Locally important in some situations, these classes of domestic benefits may in general be smaller than popularly supposed. This underscores the need for financing conservation from the Global Environmental Facility or other global sources rather than placing the burden entirely on domestic resources.
The effect of climatic change on tropical vegetation is of global and regional concern because of the high biodiversity and the potential feedback to the carbon, water, and nutrient cycles. One of the most critical aspects for assessing broad-scale consequences of climate change is our understanding of how vegetation may change. Models relating vegetation and environmental conditions can be developed for large regions. For a simple application of static models of vegetation - Environment relationships, one would have to assume that the probability of species (or vegetation) occurrence conditional on environmental conditions is constant in time (abbreviated as the POCEC assumption). This assumption is critical and difficult. In this paper, we evaluate how the spatial arrangement of forest pattern may constrain vegetation change as predicted by a spatially static artificial neural network (ANN) model. We have relaxed the POCEC assumption by subjoining a spatially dynamic component based on the cellular automata approach. The ANN model quantifies a most suitable forest type based on the conditional probability of vegetation in the environmental space, whereas the cellular automata model imposes spatial constraints on the transition to the best-suited type. We adapt the cellular automata algorithm to successively increase spatial constraints, hence relaxing the POCEC assumption. Our study area is located in Northern Queensland and encompasses 20 000 km2. We evaluate the effect of the + 1 °C mean annual temperature and the - 10% mean annual precipitation change. A comparison of predictions of vegetation change with the different models indicates that the spatial arrangement of vegetation in the 'Wet Tropics' region may impose relatively few constraints for the region's potential change. Depending on the strength of spatial effects included in the models, the predicted future vegetation patterns differ from 1 to 10% of the study area. However, if in addition to spatial constraints ecological constraints also are considered (e.g. prohibiting several transitions that would appear very unlikely to experienced forest researchers), the predictions may differ by as much as 27%, showing a relatively strong dependence of predictions on assumptions about patch-level processes. Furthermore, using different models allows us to assess the uncertainty associated with predictions. The results demonstrate a relative certainty of a predicted decrease of notophyll rainforest types and an increase of medium open forests and woodlands, respectively, whereas the predictions of mesophyll vine forest and wet sclerophyll vegetation differ strongly among different models. © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
The conversion of tropical habitats has dramatic implications on biodiversity and represents one of the greatest conservation challenges of our time. Seasonally Dry Tropical Forests (SDTF), which are disjointly distributed throughout the Neotropics, are especially susceptible to human activities. The Caatinga Dry Forest, located in the semi-arid interior of northeastern Brazil, represents not only the largest and most biologically diverse nucleus of SDTF, but also the world’s most densely populated semi-arid region, with ever-growing pressure on its natural resources. To prevent illegal logging, conservation agencies looked at forest management, where an area is divided in smaller stands which are gradually logged and allowed to regrow for a period of time, when a new cutting cycle should reinitiate. The impacts of these management schemes on biodiversity, however, remain largely untested. We conducted standardized avian surveys to evaluate the effects of forest management on the avian community at a 1,670 ha privately owned property located on the Chapada do Araripe, northeastern Brazil. This area was divided in 22 forest stands, half of which had already been logged at the time of our sampling, creating a gradient of logged and natural forests and an 11-yr chrono-sequence of forest regeneration. Our results show that logged areas present fewer individuals, fewer species, and different avian assemblages than unlogged forests. Such differences are mostly driven by forest-dependent species, which were overwhelmingly affected by forest management. Our results show that although logged forests tend to recover its height after a decade, they do not recover the originally forest cover, measured by the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index. Likewise, decade-long recovering stands continue to show lower species richness, lower bird abundance, and different avian composition than unlogged forests. We identified a set of bird species that are more affected by forest management (ecological losers) and a group of birds that apparently benefit from the referred changes in land use (ecological winners). We conclude that completely managing an entire area may cause the extirpation of several forest-dependent species. We therefore suggest keeping logged and unlogged plots intermingled, to avoid local extinctions and the complete modification of the original avifauna. © Copyright © 2021 Ribeiro, Las-Casas, Lima, Silva and Naka.
Ambitious pledges to restore over 400 million hectares of degraded lands by 2030 have been made by several countries within the Global Partnership for Forest Landscape Restoration (FLR). Monitoring restoration outcomes at this scale requires cost-effective methods to quantify not only forest cover, but also forest structure and the diversity of useful species. Here we obtain and analyze structural attributes of forest canopies undergoing restoration in the Atlantic Forest of Brazil using a portable ground lidar remote sensing device as a proxy for airborne laser scanners. We assess the ability of these attributes to distinguish forest cover types, to estimate aboveground dry woody biomass (AGB) and to estimate tree species diversity (Shannon index and richness). A set of six canopy structure attributes were able to classify five cover types with an overall accuracy of 75%, increasing to 87% when combining two secondary forest classes. Canopy height and the unprecedented “leaf area height volume” (a cumulative product of canopy height and vegetation density) were good predictors of AGB. An index based on the height and evenness of the leaf area density profile was weakly related to the Shannon Index of tree species diversity and showed no relationship to species richness or to change in species composition. These findings illustrate the potential and limitations of lidar remote sensing for monitoring compliance of FLR goals of landscape multifunctionality, beyond a simple assessment of forest cover gain and loss. © 2019 Elsevier B.V.
Simple Summary A large portion of tropical forests around the world have been impacted by human disturbances such as clearcutting or selective logging. Impacts from these disturbances may remain long after the trees grow back, as other aspects of forest structure may have changed. Forests that are recovering from disturbances still play an important role for wildlife, though their conservation value compared to undisturbed forests is not well understood. To examine how different types of human disturbance impact tropical forest birds, we surveyed and compared bird communities in three different forest habitats: undisturbed primary forest, selectively logged forest (low disturbance), and forest replanted on abandoned agricultural fields (high disturbance). Our surveys occurred 19 years after any logging or agriculture, allowing our forest sites time to regrow. We found that while bird communities at low-disturbance sites were similar to undisturbed sites, high-disturbance sites had fewer bird species, with ant-following birds being particularly underrepresented. We related these results to vegetation structure measurements, which suggested that reducing tree density and vegetation ground cover in high-disturbance forests may improve these areas as tropical forest bird habitats.Abstract As tropical forests are frequently impacted by human disturbance, forests in various stages of disturbance recovery are increasingly important for maintaining biodiversity. However, much remains unclear regarding the impacts of prior disturbance intensity on wildlife in regenerating forests. Here, we used mist net capture data to compare bird communities in three tropical forest habitats representing various disturbance intensities: undisturbed primary forest, selectively logged forest (low disturbance), and secondary forest regenerating on abandoned agricultural fields (high disturbance). We found that after a 19-year recovery period, low-disturbance sites contained similar bird communities to undisturbed sites. High-disturbance sites, however, had lower species richness and distinct bird communities, with fewer insectivores and more nectarivores than other sites. Structural equation models revealed that the impacts of disturbance intensity on bird communities were partially explained by changes in vegetation structure: ant-following insectivore abundance declined with disturbance intensity as ground cover vegetation increased, and nectarivore abundance increased with disturbance intensity as tree density decreased. Our results suggest that selectively logged forests can regain pre-disturbance bird diversity and vegetation structure within two decades, provided that they are protected from further disturbance and located near source species pools. Increasing tree density and decreasing ground-level vegetation in secondary forests may improve these areas as habitats for forest-interior birds.
The planting of non-timber forest products (NTFPs) in the understory of tropical forests is promoted in many parts of the world as a strategy to conserve forested lands and meet the economic needs of rural communities. While many studies of NTFP management have focused on the effects of harvesting on wild populations, the impacts of understory NTFP plantations, or enrichment plantings, on forest community composition and structure have not been investigated. We assessed the effects of understory plantations of the palm Chamaedorea hooperiana Hodel, on community composition and structure of an old growth tropical rain forest in the Los Tuxtlas Biosphere Reserve in southeastern Mexico. A blocked design consisting of four C. hooperiana plantation sites each paired with an adjacent site of unmanaged forest was used to compare the plant species richness and diversity, stem density, basal area and size class structure in plantations versus unmanaged forest. In each site, 12 10 m diameter plots were established for a total of 96 plots (4 blocks x 2 sites x 12 plots). Although the stem density, diversity, richness and basal area of large overstory trees (≥20 cm dbh) were unaffected by the establishment and management of understory palm plantations, the stem density, species richness and basal area of woody species in smaller size classes (<10 cm dbh) were significantly lower in plantation sites than in similar unmanaged forest sites. The density of naturally occurring, economically valuable palm species was unaffected by the C. hooperiana plantations, indicating that these understory species are spared when plantations are established and maintained. However, plantation sites showed significant reductions in the density of the midstory palm Astrocaryum mexicanum, the most abundant plant in unmanaged forest sites. The removal of vegetation in NTFP plantations may result in the fragmentation and/or elimination of local populations of understory and midstory plant species. In addition, changes to the composition of advanced regeneration due to the removal of canopy tree seedlings and saplings may have implications for future patterns of forest regeneration and composition. Nonetheless, NTFP cultivation offers a promising alternative to more destructive forms of land uses in the tropics and warrants further attention as a forest management strategy. © 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Litterfall has a strong influence on biodiversity and on the chemical and physical characteristics of the soil. Its production can be quite variable over time and space, and can be influenced by both natural and anthropogenic factors. We evaluated litterfall production and its relationship with rainfall, species richness, and the densities of the arboreal vegetation. Thirty litter traps were constructed with 1.0 m2 nylon mesh (1.0 mm) and randomly installed within a 2000 m × 500 m area of arboreal/shrub Caatinga (dryland) vegetation. Litter samples were collected monthly from November/2010 to June/2012, and the collected material was classified, dried, and weighted. Species richness and tree densities were determined by conducting phytosociological surveys in 20 m × 20 m plots surrounding each of the litter traps. The litterfall accumulation rate was 3.673 Mgha–1yr–1, similar to values from other seasonally dry tropical forests. Litterfall production was continuous, and principally accompanied the rainfall rate, but with a time interval of 2 to 3 months, with the greatest accumulation at the beginning of the dry season and the least during the rainy season. The different fractions of materials demonstrated distinct accumulation rates, with leaves being the principal category. Litterfall production was found to be related to tree density, but no link was found to species richness. The observed temporal heterogeneity of litterfall production demonstrated a strong link between rainfall and the dynamics of nutrient cycling in the semiarid region of Brazil. © 2015, Instituto Internacional de Ecologia. All Rights Reserved.
Secondary forests are increasingly recognized for conserving biodiversity and mitigating global climate change, but these and other desired outcomes can only be achieved after decades of regeneration, and secondary forests are frequently recleared before they recover to predisturbance conditions. We used a time series of aerial photographs (1947-2014) to evaluate multidecadal persistence of secondary forests across a 320 km(2) landscape in southern Costa Rica. Secondary forests had relatively short lifespans, with 50% recleared within 20 years and 85% recleared within 54 years of when they were first observed. Larger forest fragments and forests near rivers had a lower reclearance hazard, but forest persistence did not differ over time, indicating that regional forest regeneration may be generally ephemeral. Costa Rica has made an international commitment to restore 1 million ha of degraded land by 2020. Depending on how this is achieved, only half that target may remain forested by 2040.
Despite a 79% reduction in deforestation rates since 2004 in the Brazilian Amazon, the current gross forest loss of 6207 km2 year−1 remains significant, promoting continuous habitat fragmentation. This study assessed the status of forest fragmentation in 2014 across the Brazilian Amazon applying a Morphological Spatial Pattern Analysis (MSPA). Our analysis provides the first 60-m-resolution fragmentation map for the entire Brazilian Amazon, including not only the commonly evaluated fragmentation classes such as core, edge and islet, but also four specific metrics measuring the effects of fragmentation on forest patterns (perforation, bridge, loop and forest branches). Areas of intense forest fragmentation were detected not only along the “arc of deforestation” of the eastern and southern Brazilian Amazon but in other regions as well. Considering a 1020-m edge width, we found that 28% (~891,000 km2) of the remnant forest was in non-core classes. Among these classes, bridge (i.e., forest corridors too narrow to contain core area) was the most representative (10.8%). The proportion of core area varied greatly among states, from 82.8% of the remaining forest in Amazonas to 26.1 and 13.5% in Maranhão and Tocantins, respectively. The detailed diagnosis of tropical forest fragmentation is a critical step for proposing solutions to maintain the stability of tropical forest services, including carbon storage, water and nutrient cycling, and biodiversity. © 2016, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
There is critical need for more information on the status of forests in Central Asia, to inform conservation management. Here we assess the status and use of the globally important, threatened walnut-fruit forests of Dashtijum Nature Reserve, Tajikistan. We use a mixed methods approach combining a semi-structured interview based socio-economic survey with statistical analysis. Thirty-three tree species were recorded, with Rosaceae the most common family. The mean basal area of the forest was 20.8 m(2)per ha and most tree species exhibited stable population structures. Resource use was prevalent throughout the community; most households harvested at least one fruit or nut species (78%), firewood (88%) and grazed livestock (85%). Most respondents noted declines in availability of fruits, nuts and firewood and reported a decrease in the overall area and quality of grazing. Statistical analysis and machine learning identified that distance to nearest settlement significantly affected forest total basal area, tree species richness and the Shannon index, a metric of diversity sensitive to rare species. Our results suggest that conservation management by the government and NGOs is partly effective but there is a need for increased enforcement of grazing restrictions, to prevent further forest degradation.
The relationships between biodiversity and aboveground biomass in forest ecosystems have been intensively studied in recent decades. Still, the mechanisms that underlie it remain highly debated. We hypothesized that overstorey species diversity and individual tree size variation contribute to aboveground biomass and understorey species diversity through the niche complementarity effect, while weaken the relationship between understorey aboveground biomass and individual tree size variation due to the mixed effects of tree development, biotic interaction and reduced available resources by over storey strata. The integrative relationships of species diversity and tree size variation (variation in diameter at breast height-DBH) with aboveground biomass were analysed at overstorey and understorey strata across 125 plots in a 5-ha subtropical forest in Eastern China. For comparison, we tested these relationships at individual strata (isolation modelling), and whole-community level, by using linear structural equation model while accounting for the effects of soil nutrients. The integrative modelling accounted for 35, 31, 16, 12, 4, and 0% of the variation in understorey aboveground biomass, overstorey aboveground biomass, overstorey DBH variation, overstorey species diversity, understorey species diversity, and understorey DBH variation, respectively. Overstorey DBH variation and species diversity had the positive direct effects on overstorey aboveground biomass. Overstorey species diversity significantly promoted the understorey species diversity, but DBH variation and aboveground biomass of overstorey strata had negligible effects on the diversity and aboveground biomass of understorey strata. Soil nutrients had positive direct effect on overstorey DBH variation, but negative direct effects on overstorey and understorey aboveground biomass and overstorey species diversity. These results provide strong evidence for the niche complementarity effect for driving positive relationships of species diversity and individual tree size variation with aboveground biomass at overstorey strata. The strong and consistent negative effects of soil nutrients on overstorey aboveground biomass and species diversity suggest an important mechanism that high species diversity of overstorey strata with great tree size variation on nutrient-poor soils is crucial for driving high aboveground biomass in subtropical forest ecosystems. In conclusion, this study suggests that no sole and ubiquitous relationship between biodiversity and aboveground biomass exists in a structurally complex forest, but rather that the magnitude and direction of this relationship is greatly dependent on the forest strata where available resources shift substantially. We argue that ecological models for predicting aboveground biomass would be improved by including separate effects of overstorey and understorey diversity. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
The Indigenous Lands in Brazil today resemble a steam locomotive, where the government and the indigenous add wood to the boiler and the conservationists push the brakes. Arranged on the rails and along the way of this locomotive are more than 100 million hectares of the largest tropical forest on the planet. In this article we evaluate the advance of soybean cultivation and fire foci in indigenous lands using remote sensing and discuss the possible effects of a liberation of the economic exploitation in these territories intended by the Brazilian government and requested by the indigenous people themselves. We present that even with the prohibition of economic exploitation on indigenous lands, there are large concentrations of fires in those territories which undermine public policies in Brazil, both in maintaining biodiversity as the assumed climate agreements. © 2019 Elsevier Ltd
A rich understanding of the productivity, carbon and nutrient cycling of terrestrial ecosystems is essential in the context of understanding, modelling and managing the future response of the biosphere to global change. This need is particularly acute in tropical ecosystems, home to over 60% of global terrestrial productivity, over half of planetary biodiversity, and hotspots of anthropogenic pressure. In recent years there has been a surge of activity in collecting data on the carbon cycle, productivity, and plant functional traits of tropical ecosystems, most intensively through the Global Ecosystems Monitoring network (GEM). The GEM approach provides valuable insights by linking field-based ecosystem ecology with the needs of Earth system science. In this paper, we review and synthesize the context, history and recent scientific output from the GEM network. Key insights have emerged on the spatial and temporal variability of ecosystem productivity and on the role of temperature and drought stress on ecosystem function and resilience. New work across the network is now linking carbon cycling to nutrient cycling and plant functional traits, and subsequently to airborne remote sensing. We discuss some of the novel emerging patterns and practical and methodological challenges of this approach, and examine current and possible future directions, both within this network and as lessons for a more general terrestrial ecosystem observation scheme. © 2020
Aim Many vertebrate species globally are dependent on forests, most of which require active protection to safeguard global biodiversity. Forests, however, are increasingly either being disturbed, planted or managed in the form of timber or food plantations. Because of a lack of spatial data, forest management has commonly been ignored in previous conservation assessments. Location Global. Methods We combine a new global map of forest management types created solely from remote sensing imagery with spatially explicit information on the distribution of forest-associated vertebrate species and protected areas globally. Using Bayesian logistic regressions, we explore whether the amount of forested habitat available to a species as well as information on species-specific threats can explain differences in IUCN extinction risk categories. Results We show that disturbed and human-managed forests dominate the distributional ranges of most forest-associated species. Species considered as non-threatened had on average larger amounts of non-managed forests within their range. A greater amount of planted forests did not decrease the probability of species being threatened by extinction. Even more worrying, protected areas are increasingly being established in areas dominated by disturbed forests. Conclusion Our results imply that species extinction risk and habitat assessments might have been overly optimistic with forest management practices being largely ignored so far. With forest restoration being at the centre of climate and conservation policies in this decade, we caution that policy makers should explicitly consider forest management in global and regional assessments.
herpetofauna of the Baja California Peninsula, Mexico, consists of 172 species, including 18 anurans, three salamanders, 140 squamates, and 11 turtles. Among the 10 recognized geographic regions, the total number of herpetofaunal species ranges from a low of 27 in the Baja California Coniferous Forest Region to 84 in the Gulf Islands Region. The individual species occupy from one to 10 regions (x = 3.3). The Gulf Islands Region is of the greatest significant conservation importance, inasmuch as it contains the largest overall number of species (84), the largest number of single-region species (39), and the greatest number of peninsular endemics (50). A similarity dendrogram based on the Unweighted Pair Group Method with Arithmetic Averages (UPGMA) indicates that the two most closely related regions are the Central Gulf Coast Region and the Arid Tropical Region, while the most distantly related region is the Baja California Coniferous Forest Region. Among the distributional categories, the greatest number of species are the non-endemics (81 of 172, or 47.1%), followed by the peninsular endemics (77, 44.8%), and finally, the non-natives (14, 8.1%). The principal environmental threats to the herpetofauna of the Baja California Peninsula are land conversion and habitat loss, water diversion and overuse, invasive species, livestock grazing, illegal trade, off-road activities, infectious diseases, and climate change. We assessed the conservation status of the native species by employing the SEMARNAT, IUCN, and EVS systems. Of the 158 native species, 85 are included in NOM-059-SEMARNAT, 15 are in the IUCN Threatened categories, and 76 have high EVS values. Two Relative Herpetofaunal Priority (RHP) methods were used to identify the rank order significance of the 10 geographic regions, and the highest ranks for both methods were obtained for the Gulf Islands Region. Thirty protected areas are located in the Baja California Peninsula, and they comprise almost one-half of the total area. All but eight of the 158 native herpetofaunal species are represented within the system of protected areas. Few herpetofaunal surveys of the protected areas have been completed thus far, so this is a major conservation goal for the future.
There are few scientific studies evaluating the impact of the loss of wetlands on the banks of tropical rivers on assemblages of small non-flying mammals. To understand the possible deleterious effects of hydroelectric construction in tropical forests on this group of mammals, we used data from 2 years of monitoring carried out during the period before the filling of a hydroelectric plant reservoir in the Brazilian Amazon, and related them to vegetation, soil and topography. We captured 659 individuals of 20 small-mammal species. The species assemblage composition in the flooded areas was a subset of species that occurred in both floodable and non-floodable areas, and only one species was captured exclusively in the flooded area. Species composition was influenced by the proportion of sand, by soil nutrient concentration and distance from water bodies. We conclude that there is no evidence that the flooding of low-lying areas along the Madeira River would negatively affect the assemblage of non-flying small mammals in the short term because the remaining areas have similar assemblages of small mammals as those destined for flooding. Whether the area lost will be important for population dynamics will depend on the conservation of the remaining areas.
The impacts of grazing on rangelands have historically been studied within the framework of the equilibrium model, which predicts significant impacts of grazing on ecosystems. However, in recent decades, studies have observed a non-equilibrium pattern, suggesting that abiotic factors play a primary role compared to grazing. These studies are primarily focused on rangelands, despite animal husbandry occurring in other biomes, such as seasonally dry tropical forests. Our study examines the influence of goat grazing on biodiversity and forest succession in the Brazilian dry forest (Caatinga). Considering its high interannual precipitation variability, we hypothesize a response that aligns with the non-equilibrium paradigm. We established a gradient of grazing intensity and history in areas at different stages of vegetation succession. A survey of tree - shrub and herbaceous species was conducted at each site and the biomass of both strata was quantified. Linear mixed models and Permanova were employed to assess differences in richness, composition, structure, and biomass among the areas. Our results suggest that grazing (history and intensity) and forest fallow age did not affect species richness, but only species composition. Low and high grazing intensity drive ecosystems toward similar compositions, which align with the non-equilibrium model predictions. Biomass in the herbaceous layer remained unaffected by grazing history, intensity, or forest fallow age, whereas woody biomass was influenced by grazing intensity in older forest fallows. Although trees in low-intensity grazing sites were significantly taller compared to those in other levels, overall, grazing did not disrupt the natural succession process. Older forest fallows exhibited greater diversity and higher basal area compared to new forest fallows, irrespective of grazing intensity. Our findings suggest that: a) grazing has minimal effects on biodiversity and biomass due to non-equilibrium dynamics, and b) with appropriate management, grazing can coexist with the conservation of the Caatinga. © 2024
Aim: We analysed the effects of grazing on the diversity and structure of dung beetle communities to see whether the biogeographical and ecological contexts influence dung beetle responses. We hypothesized that the responses of dung beetle communities are modulated by both the ecological conditions resulting from the transformation of native vegetation into grazing areas, and the history of the species inhabiting different biogeographical provinces. Location: The state of Hidalgo, in the Mexican Transition Zone, central Mexico. Methods: We used a standardized hierarchical sampling procedure in three biogeographical provinces located in Hidalgo. Within each province, we identified the dominant vegetation types, and within these we identified the sites with native vegetation and those modified by grazing. The design included 800 baited pitfall traps, and allowed us to study the response of dung beetle communities with different biogeographical histories to ecological context. Results: We captured 8707 beetles belonging to 37 species and 17 genera in the subfamily Scarabaeinae. We found that grazing areas only had a negative effect on dung beetle diversity in tropical forest; conversely, in dry environments (pine-oak forest and xerophilous scrubland) diversity in grazing areas was higher than in the native vegetation sites. We did not detect a clear effect in cloud forest sites. Species turnover between the native vegetation and pastures was high locally, and low over larger spatial scales (vegetation type or biogeographical province). In all four vegetation types grazing was associated with differences in dung beetle community composition. Main conclusions: The impact of grazing on dung beetle diversity is dependent to a considerable degree on the local ecological conditions and the biogeographical context that has shaped the composition of communities over time. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
The biodiversity of tropical rainforests is under extreme pressure due to the expansion of agricultural land. Beyond the immediate risk of species extinction, the intensification of land use can alter species' behaviour with consequences for the entire ecosystem. In this study we investigated the impact of land use on the acoustic behaviour of cicadas in the highly biodiverse Ecuadorian Chocó region. We used passive acoustic monitoring (PAM) for the collection of audio data, from which we identified and analysed the sound activity of cicadas and the structure of daily patterns along a chronosequence of forest recovery. At landscape scale we studied the impact of a surrounding either dominated by agricultural land use or forests on the acoustic behaviour of cicadas. Cicada sound activity was significantly lower in active agriculture compared to undisturbed old-growth forest and increased along the forest recovery gradient. The diurnal pattern changed from simple in active agriculture to more complex and highly synchronized along the recovery gradient towards old-growth forests. A surrounding dominated by agricultural land use additionally reduced the sound activity of cicadas and simplified the diurnal pattern in old-growth forests. Taken together, agricultural land use at local and landscape scales affects overall activity, diurnal patterns and synchrony of vocalizing song cicadas. This is a concerning trend considering the direct link between chorusing and fitness for cicadas. However, mature restoration forests embedded in forest dominated landscape surroundings showed restored cicada song behaviours similar to those of old-growth forests, which underlines the conservation value of advanced secondary forests and the importance to support forest regeneration in the tropics. © 2024 The Author(s). Insect Conservation and Diversity published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Royal Entomological Society.
Historically, clear-cutting and selective logging have been the commercial logging practices. However, the effect of these pervasive timber extraction methods on biodiversity in tropical forests is still poorly understood. In this study, we compared abiotic factors, species diversity, community composition, and structure between ca. 40-year-old clear-cut (MCC); ca. 40-year-old selectively logged (MSL); and tropical old growth montane rain forests (MOG) on Hainan Island, China. Results showed that there were a large number of trees with a diameter at breast height (DBH) < 30 cm in the two logged forests. Additionally, the two logged forests only had 40% of the basal area of the large trees (DBH ≥ 30 cm) found in the old growth forest. The species richness and Shannon-Wiener diversity indices generally showed no difference among the three forest types. MCC had 70% of the species richness of the large trees in the MOG, whereas MSL and MOG had similar species richness. High value timber species had similar species richness among the three forest types, but a lower abundance and basal area of large trees in MCC. The species composition was distinct between the three forests. Large trees belonging to the family Fagaceae dominated in the logged forests and played a more important role in the old growth forest. Huge trees (DBH ≥ 70 cm) were rare in MCC, but were frequently found in MSL. Most abiotic factors varied inconsistently among the three forest types and few variables related to species diversity, community structure and composition. Our study indicated that MSL had a relatively faster recovery rate than MCC in a tropical montane rain forest after 40 years, but both logged forests had a high recovery potential over a long-term. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Forest restoration is an increasingly important tool to offset and indeed reverse global deforestation rates. One low cost strategy to accelerate forest recovery is conserving scattered native trees that persist across disturbed landscapes and which may act as seedling recruitment foci. Ficus trees, which are considered to be critically important components of tropical ecosystems, may be particularly attractive to seed dispersers in that they produce large and nutritionally rewarding fruit crops. Here, we evaluate the effectiveness of remnant Ficus trees in inducing forest recovery compared to other common trees. We studied the sapling communities growing under 207 scattered trees, and collected data on seed rain for 55 trees in a modified landscape in Assam, India. We found that Ficus trees have more sapling species around them (species richness=140.19.9) than non-Ficus trees (79.5 +/- 12.9), and significantly more saplings of shrub and large tree species. Sapling densities were twice as high under Ficus trees (median=0.06/m(2)) compared to non-Ficus (0.03/m(2)), and seed rain densities of non-parent trees were significantly higher under Ficus trees (mean=12.73 +/- 3/m(2)/wk) than other fruit or non-zoochorous trees (2.19 +/- 0.97/m(2)/wk). However, our regression model found that canopy area, used as a proxy for tree size, was the primary predictor of sapling density, followed by remnant tree type. These results suggest that large trees, and in particular large Ficus trees, may be more effective forest restoration agents than other remnant trees in disturbed landscapes, and therefore the conservation of these trees should be prioritized.     Hindi Abstract ??????? ????????? ?? ?? ?????? ???? ?? ??? ?? ?????????? ?????????? ??? ?? ???? ?? ????? ???? ??? ????? ??? ???? ?????? ?? ???????, ?? ?? ????????? ??????? ??? ??? ??? ??? ?? ????? ??????? ?? ?????? ?? ??? ??? ????? ?? ???? ???, ???? ?? ???? ?? ??? ???? ??? ???? ?? ?? ?? ???? ?? ?????? ??? ???? ??????? ?? ????, ????? ??? ?? ??? ????????? ?? ??????? ?? ???? ???? ?? ????? ?? ?? ?? ???? ??? ???? ?? ?????? ?? ??????? ?? ???????? ???? ???, ???????????? ??????????? ????? ?? ??? ?????????? ??? ???? ???? ???? ???? ???? ?? ?????????? ????????? ?? ???? ?????? ?? ???? ??????? ?? ?????? ?? ????????? ?????? ?? ????????? ???? ??? ???? ???? ?? ??? ????? ??? ?? ????????? ??????? ??? ??? ????? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ???? ???? ????? ?? ???????? ?? ????? ???? ?? ?? ?????? ??? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ????? ????? ???? ???-???? ??????? ?? ?????? (??????? ????????=??.?+/-??.?) ?? ????? ??? ???? ??????? ?? ?????? ?? ???? ?????? ??? ?? ???? (???.?+/-?.?) ?????, ???????? ? ???? ?????? ?? ?????????? ?? ???? ??? ????? ???-???? ??????? ?? ?????? (???????=?.??/??.(?)) ?? ????? ??? ???? ??????? ?? ?????? ?? ???? ???? ???? ????? ?? ????? ?? ???? ?????? (?.??/??.(?)) ?? ?? ???-????? ?????? ?? ??? ????? ?? ?????? ??? ?? ?? ?? ???-?????????????? ?????? (???=?.??+/-?.??/??.(?)/??????) ?? ????? ??? ???? ??????? ?? ?????? ?? ???? ?????? (??.??+/-?/??.(?)/??????) ???? ???? ???????, ????? ???????? ????? ?? ???? ?? ??? ??? ???? ??????, ???? ???? ?? ?? ????????? ?? ??? ??? ?????? ???? ?? ????? ??????? ?? ???, ??? ????? ?? ???????? ???? ??? ?? ?????? ?????? ??? ??, ???? ????? ?? ????? ??? ?? ???? ??????? ?? ?????, ??????: ???? ??????? ??? ?? ????????? ??????? ??? ?? ?????????????????? ?? ???? ??? ?? ?? ???? ?? ?????? ?? ??????? ?????????? ?? ???? ?? ???? ???? ???????
Background Species turnover (beta-diversity) along elevational gradients is one of the most important concepts in plant ecology. However, there is a lack of consensus about the main driving mechanisms of tree beta-diversity at local scales in very diverse ecosystems (e.g., Andean mountains), as well as how the sampling effect can alter beta-diversity estimations. Recently, it has been hypothesized that patterns of change in beta-diversity at local scales along elevational gradients are driven by sampling effects stemming from differences in the size of the species pool rather than by underlying community assembly mechanisms. Thus, we aim to evaluate the relative extent to which sampling effects, such as species pool size, grain size, and tree size cut-off, determine species sorting, and thus, the variability of beta-diversity at local scales along elevational gradients in the northwest of Colombia. Results Using 15 1-ha permanent plots spread out along a 3000 m elevational gradient, we used standardized beta-deviation to assess the extent to which either sampling effects or the community assembly mechanisms determine the changes in species composition at local scales. Standardized beta-deviation was measured as the difference between the observed and null beta-diversity divided by the standard deviation of the null beta-diversity. We found that the magnitude of change in local beta-deviation along the elevational gradient was significant and dependent on the employed spatial grain size and tree size cut-off. However, beta-deviation increased with elevation in all sampling designs, which suggests that underlying community assembly mechanisms play a key role in shaping local beta-diversity along the elevational gradient. Conclusions Our findings suggest that grain size enlargement and the inclusion of trees with small diameters will improve our ability to quantify the extent to which the community assembly mechanisms shape patterns of beta-diversity along elevational gradients. Overall, we emphasize the scale-dependent nature of the assessment of beta-diversity. Likewise, we call for the need of a new generation of enlarged forest inventory plots along gradients of elevation in tropical forests that include small individuals to improve our understanding about the likely response of diversity and function to global change.
The Indian Ocean Coastal Belt (IOCB) of South Africa is a natural forest-grassland mosaic, nested within an anthropogenic, mixed land-use matrix. Given the ongoing threat of agricultural expansion and urbanisation, we assessed the value of a buffer habitat (Coastal dense bush) for conserving forest species. We investigated the influence of microhabitat complexity on mammal communities within forest and dense bush habitats, using occupancy modelling. We found vertical stratification gradients as observed in studies of tropical forest chronosequence, i.e. increased foliage density in lower habitat layers and decreased foliage density in higher habitat layers for dense bush, and vice versa for forest. Structural composition suggests that dense bush is within a successional stage of secondary forest regeneration. Bushbuck (Tragelaphus scriptus) occupancy was higher in forest than dense bush, while the opposite was true for blue duiker (Philantomba monticola). Large-spotted genet (Genetta tigrina), Cape porcupine (Hystrix africaeaustralis) and marsh mongoose (Atilax paludinosus) occupancy remained constant between habitats. Grey duiker (Sylvicapra grimmia) occupancy varied greatly between dense bush (0.48 +/- 0.01) and forest (0.16 +/- 0.01). Dense bush appeared to maintain natural forest assemblages, and may play a crucial role in buffering IOCB forest patches, given their highly-restricted distribution. However, dense bush habitats have no protection status, but play a role in the conservation of forest plants and animals. Therefore, we advocate the inclusion of dense bush habitats in conservation networks focused on forests.
Archaea and bacteria communities play pivotal roles in tropical forest ecosystems’ functioning, especially nutrient cycling, plant phenology, and health. The objective of this study was to explore the diversity of archaeal and bacterial communities in forest soil ecosystem of Côte d’Ivoire and to identify abiotic factors that influence their composition. Using high-throughput amplicon sequencing targeting the V4V5 hypervariable region of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene, we analyzed 22 soil samples taken from the 2 main forest areas of Côte d’Ivoire, namely the semi-deciduous moist forest and the evergreen moist forest, both of which are located in the humid and sub-humid areas of the country. The analysis revealed that the biodiversity at the phyla level was congruent with previous studies. Richness and Shannon diversity indices revealed the dominance of bacteria over archaea in all studied soils. Moreover, the predominant bacterial community consisted of Proteobacteria (29.8%), Acidobacteria (15.5%), and Actinobacteria (14.2%), while the archaeal community was dominated by Thaumarchaeota (1.93%). However, at the genus level, patterns emerged. The most abundant and ubiquitous members at the genus level included Bradyrhizobium, Rhodoplanes, Bacillus (bacteria), and Nitrosophaera (archaea). While bacterial core microbiome members were found in almost all soils, Nitrososphaera genus were selective to sub-humid bioclimate and cropland land use. These patterns were correlated to the soils’ physicochemical characteristics, bioclimate, and land use. This study sheds light on the intricate relationships between abiotic factors and microbial communities in Côte d’Ivoire’s forest soils and helps to identify keys species for future soil management. © 2024 by the authors.
To assess the impact of soil conditions on regeneration establishment we chose three diversity indexes as quantitative indicators of the understory of degraded secondary tropical forest, and selected two different function groups of species for subsequent restoration management. By applying redundancy analysis (RDA) the factors affecting understory diversity and species richness and number of different function groups were investigated. RDA showed that soil conditions had a positive effect (all contribution rates exceeded 55%) in explaining regeneration diversity, grouped species richness and number. Soil available P were the main factors affecting understory diversity and species richness, while pH value and available K were the main factors affecting species number and target species. The response of regeneration to pH value, available P and available K were different. This analysis could be used to determine suitable soil conditions for different restoration purposes. The results should be useful for effective and scientific management of regeneration restoration in the future. © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
Piper aduncum, a tree species native to the Neotropics, has been introduced to other tropical regions and successfully invades secondary forest in fallow land after small scale slash-and-burn agriculture in Papua New Guinea (PNG). However, the effect of P. aduncum invasion on soil chemical properties as well as soil biota remains poorly understood. To fill this knowledge gap, we compared soil chemistry, soil microbiota and soil fauna between sites invaded by P. aduncum and sites with secondary native vegetation, where P. aduncum absent. Soils under P. aduncum had significantly lower P content at 0-5 cm depth, lower NO3- at 5-10 cm depth and lower N and C content at both depths compared to soil under secondary vegetation where P. aduncum absent. Sites invaded by P. aduncum also harbored lower microbial biomass measured by phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) analysis, especially at 5-10 cm depth. The composition of microbial communities, based on PLFA and amplicon sequencing methods, also differed between soils invaded and uninvaded by P. aduncum, while soil macrofauna did not show any significant difference in the density of various faunal groups between invaded and uninvaded sites. Furthermore, we studied soil chemistry and foliar nitrogen in food gardens established after clearing of secondary vegetation in sites where P. aduncum had been experimentally excluded for five years. These gardens did not differ in soil chemistry compared to the control gardens where P. aduncum was not cleared. However, P. aduncum removal was associated with a higher N content in the leaves of sweet potatoes (Ipomoea batatas), but not bananas (Musa spp.). Our results suggest that P. aduncum has negative effect on soil microbiota and may slowdown nutrient turnover and availability as well as growth of plants on invaded soil. This finding requires further attention and may have practical implication for food gardening in tropical rainforests.
Reforestation is the largest natural climate solution, while potentially reversing the biodiversity crisis, especially in tropical countries. Dry tropical forests are of particular interest because they experienced greater historic loss, and offer large reforestation opportunities. This study addressed the potential of secondary forests in dry tropical systems regenerating after 60 + years in cattle pasture to accumulate carbon while increasing floristic diversity. Total carbon and woody species diversity were quantified within experimental treatments established 15 years ago. Initial active management practices included removing exotic grass with herbicide, excluding cattle by constructing live fences, and monitoring succession relative to proximity to forested riparian zones and slope position. Overall, carbon accumulated relatively slowly in this landscape (1.30 MgC Ha-1 Yr-1). Differences were seen between management practices and landscape characteristics. Lower slope plots, adjacent to forested zones, had significantly more carbon than upper slope plots, isolated from riparian zones. The initial application of herbicide decreased total carbon. However, natural regeneration of two valuable timber species with small seeds, Astronium graveolens and Cedrela odorata, benefited from this initial treatment. Live fences that were initially planted to exclude cattle significantly increased carbon of regenerating woody species. Lianas were abundant at this successional stage. Almost half of all inventoried trees (44%) had at least one liana climbing through them, with the most common species being Bauhinia glabra and Macherium microfolium. Some valuable timber tree species found within older, protected riparian forests were not yet regenerating in any treatment, such as the wind-dispersed species, Cieba pentandra, and the animal dispersed species, Hymenaea coubaril. These species may need to be actively planted at the mid-successional stage (~15–20 years) to restore biodiversity. A trade-off between timber value, diversity, and carbon sequestration must be considered in reforestation programs and this depends on landscape characteristics and management. Passive management, even with invasive grass species, is a practical option when sites are located near forested riparian zones due to low cost and high timber value of a suite of native species that naturally regenerate. No intervention is needed other than continual protection from fire and grazing. However, low-cost management, such cutting lianas and enrichment planting at the mid-successional stage, is likely to increase carbon accumulation and diversity. More active management, such as planting drought-tolerant, higher timber value tree species, is recommended at sites isolated from forested riparian zones on upper slopes where carbon accumulation is lower. Tropical forest regeneration mechanisms in proximity to forest fragments can be surprisingly resilient if chronic human impacts are removed. © 2020 Elsevier B.V.
The mid-domain effect (MDE) explains altitudinal patterns of species diversity of mountainous plants at different elevations. However, its application is limited by the species life form and family flora in different layers of plant communities. To verify the MDE hypothesis at the plant community level, we chose a mountain with representative characteristics of the study area in the east of the Loess Plateau, China, such as obvious elevation (from 1324 to 2745 m) and latitude (from 36 degrees 23 ' to 39 degrees 03 ') gradients and considerable vegetation types (mainly coniferous and broad-leaved forests). We measured the life forms, families, and species diversity indices of tree, shrub, and herb communities along different elevations. We determined that the family numbers of the herb and shrub communities presented unimodal patterns across an altitudinal gradient, and the highest values occurred at intermediate elevations. The importance values of dominant families in the shrub and tree communities presented unimodal patterns, but the lowest values occurred at intermediate elevations. The species diversity indices of the herb, shrub, and tree communities conformed to unimodal change patterns following an altitudinal gradient, but the greatest diversity occurred at high, low, and intermediate elevations, respectively. At higher elevations, forbs and grasses grew well, whereas sedges grew well at lower elevations. Responses of different tree life forms to the altitudinal gradient were greater for evergreen coniferous tree species than for deciduous coniferous and deciduous broad-leaved tree species. We concluded that the MDE hypothesis of species diversity for mountainous plants is influenced greatly by the community life form and family at the plant community level in a temperate semi-arid region of the Loess Plateau, China. This conclusion tested and modified the MDE hypothesis and may be valuable for fueling prediction of biodiversity models and for the comparison with similar studies in arid and semi-arid mountainous regions.
Despite the importance of tropical ecosystems for climate regulation, biodiversity, water and nutrient cycles, only a few Critical Zone Observatories (CZOs) are located in the tropics. Among these, most are in humid climates, while very few data exist for semi-arid and sub-humid climates, due to the difficulty of estimating hydro-geochemical balances in catchments with ephemeral streams. We contribute to fill this gap by presenting a meteorological and hydro-geochemical dataset acquired at the Mule Hole catchment (4.1 km2), a pristine dry deciduous forest located in a biosphere reserve in south India. The dataset consists of time series of variables related to (i) meteorology, including rainfall, air temperature, relative humidity, wind speed and direction, and global radiation, (ii) hydrology, including water level and discharge at the catchment outlet, (iii) hydrogeology, including manual (monthly) and/or automated (from 15 min to hourly) groundwater levels in nine piezometers and (iv) geochemistry, including suspended sediment content in the stream and chemical composition of rainfall (event based), groundwater (monthly sampling) and stream water (storm events, 15 min to hourly frequency with an automatic sampler). The time series extend from 2003 to 2019. Measurement errors are minimized by frequent calibration of sensors and quality checks, both in the field and in the laboratory. Despite these precautions, several data gaps exist, due to occasional access restriction to the site and instrument destruction by wildlife. Results show that large seasonal and interannual variations of climatic conditions were reflected in the large variations of stream flow and groundwater recharge, as well as in water chemical composition. Notably, they reveal a long-term evolution of groundwater storage, suggesting hydrogeological cycles on a decadal scale. This dataset, alone or in combination with other data, has already allowed to better understand water and element cycling in tropical dry forests, and the role of forest diversity on biogeochemical cycles. As tropical ecosystems are underrepresented by Critical Zone Observatories, we expect this data note to be valuable for the global scientific community. © 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
We assessed the impacts of forest-to-pasture conversion on the dynamic of soil microbial communities, especially those involved in the N-cycle, and their potential functions, using DNA-metagenomic sequencing coupled with the quantification of marker genes for N-cycling. We also evaluated whether the community's dynamic was reestablished with secondary forest growth. In general, the microbial community structure was influenced by changes in soil chemical properties. Aluminum and nitrate significantly correlated to community structure and with 12 out of 21 microbial phyla. The N-related microbial groups and their potential functions were also affected by land-use change, with pasture being clearly different from primary and secondary forest systems. The microbial community analysis demonstrated that forest-to-pasture conversion increased the abundance of different microbial groups related to nitrogen fixation, including Bacteroidetes, Chloroflexi and Firmicutes. In contrast, after pasture abandonment and with the secondary forest regeneration, there was an increase in the abundance of Proteobacteria taxa and denitrification genes. Our multi-analytical approach indicated that the secondary forest presented some signs of resilience, suggesting that the N-related microbial groups and their potential functions can be recovered over time with implications for future ecological restoration programs. © 2020 Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
It would appear from the proportion of South African forests in protected areas that the habitats of vertebrate species are well protected. However, this simple figure is misleading. Firstly, the small total area of remaining forests (3000 km(2)) alters the vulnerability of the fauna. Secondly, a large proportion of the threatened fauna is restricted to forests and many are found in regions subject to heavy human exploitation. The apparent complacency regarding forest vertebrate conservation in South Africa requires re-evaluation in the light of this new information. The vulnerability of fauna must be carefully evaluated before management recommendations can be made, particularly for threatened species.
Globally, tropical rainforest species are under increasing threat due to ongoing deforestation. We summarize published studies on effects of forest disturbance and conversion on tropical butterfly assemblages with a focus on forest species. Additionally, we use existing faunal monographs to extract information on the habitat affiliations of tropical forest butterflies. Based on these data, we quantify the importance of human-modified habitats for the conservation of tropical butterflies inhabiting forests across all major tropical regions. Although studies on effects of land use and forest conversion are biased by several methodological problems, the emerging pattern clearly indicates that (old-grown) secondary forests represent an important habitat type for maintaining a large proportion of forest butterflies in all major tropical regions. In contrast, agroforestry systems are only capable of protecting a small proportion of mostly widespread forest species tolerant against strong disturbance. Extinction risk of forest butterflies depends on the utilization of certain plant growth types, while host plant specialization alone does not have significant effects. Specifically, butterflies using trees as larval host plants are more likely to be absent in logged forest, whereas species that tend to be more abundant in logged forest are those with larvae feeding on lianas and grasses. Greater resource requirements may be one reason for a higher extinction risk of larger butterflies after forest fragmentation although not all studies found a relationship between extinction risk and body size. Butterfly species with narrow geographic ranges are particularly prone to local and global extinction. While widespread species dominate species assemblages of highly modified land-use systems and agroforests, endemic butterflies are more commonly found in old-growth forests. Our analyses covering all four major tropical regions underline the severe effects of forest modification. Land-use systems are only of minor importance for protecting forest butterfly species. Furthermore, they may only represent ecological sinks for a substantial proportion of the few forest species that are reported to occur in this habitat type. The future of tropical forest butterflies in all four major tropical regions hence depends on the strict protection of remaining large blocks of natural forests. © 2010, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
We study the potential of tropical multi-age multi-species forests for sequestering carbon in response to financial incentives from REDD+. Following existing carbon crediting schemes, the use of reduced impact logging techniques (RIL) allows a forest manager to apply for carbon credits whereas conventional logging (CL) does not. This paper is the first to develop a Hartman model with selective cutting in this setting that takes additionality of carbon sequestration explicitly into account. We apply the model using data for Kalimantan, Indonesia, for both private and government forest managers. The latter have a lower discount rate and are exempt from taxes. RIL leads to less damages on the residual stand than CL and has lower variable but higher fixed costs. We find that a system of carbon credits through REDD+ can increase carbon stored per hectare by 15.8% if the forest is privately managed and by 22% under government management if the carbon price equals the average 2015 price in the European Union's Emission Trading Scheme. Interestingly, awarding carbon credits to carbon stored in end-use wood products does not increase the amount of carbon stored, nor Land Expectation Value. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
In tropical regions where agricultural activities are limited, agroforestry is an alternative for both economic development and for the management and conservation of biodiversity. The potential role of different types of land use as reservoirs of dung beetle diversity in the wet tropical forest of the Pacific lowlands of Colombia is evaluated in three agroforestry systems that differ in canopy cover and the sowing density of Borojoa patinoi crops associated with timber forest. Although total species richness was similar among land use types, differences related to the decrease in the abundance and biomass of the species were remarkable, and reflected in turn by the diversity and structure of the guilds. The general pattern observed was one in which the structure of the dung beetle assemblage of B. patinoi growing below a diversified and permanent tree cover was similar to that of the primary and secondary forest. Beetle diversity in management systems with less tree cover or a high sowing density of B. patinoi was lower and very similar to that of abandoned agricultural fields. This suggests that B. patinoi agroforestry systems can be viewed as valuable instruments for biodiversity management and conservation in the wet tropical forests of the Pacific lowlands and not just as substitutes for forest, though we must be aware that structural changes in the beetle community may in turn affect the ecological processes regulated by these insects in the agrosystems under study. © 2011 Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
Fire is frequently used as tool for land management in the Amazon, but often escapes into surrounding forests, with potentially severe impacts for forest biodiversity. We investigated the effects of single wildfires on ant communities in four geographically distinct regions of the Brazilian Amazon (Roraima, Pará, Acre and Mato Grosso) where forests had burned between 8 months and 10 years before our sampling. We established 7-12 transects, 500 m each, in burned and unburned forests in each region to investigate the effects of fire on forest structure and leaf litter ant communities, which were sampled using Winkler sacks. Fire effects on forest structure were more drastic in the most recently burned forests in Acre and Mato Grosso, while the impacts of older burns in Roraima and Pará were more subtle. Ant species richness was not different between burnt and unburned areas, but community composition differed between burned and control forests in all regions except Mato Grosso. At the species level, indicator species analysis showed that a limited number of species were significant indicators of unburned control forests in all regions, except Acre. Forests structure variables and leaf litter volume were all important in shaping ant communities, but their relative importance varied between regions. Our results indicate that burned forest have different ant species communities from unburned forests, and those differences are still apparent 10 years after the disturbance, highlighting the importance of effective policies for fire management in Amazon. © 2012 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht.
Indonesia, as one of the world's largest tropical forest nations, faces significant challenges in forest conservation due to extensive exploitation and land-use conflicts. This study aims to analyze the role of key actors in the success of the Forest and Land Rehabilitation (RHL) program in Gunung Balak Register 38 Protected Forest, Lampung Province, and to develop a strategic management model to strengthen institutions in addressing future rehabilitation challenges. Employing the Soft System Methodology (SSM), this qualitative research explores complex, unstructured problems and identifies solutions for sustainable forest management. The findings highlight the critical role of collaborative governance involving BPDASHL Way Seputih Way Sekampung, farmer groups, community leaders, and local government. Their synergy has contributed to conflict resolution and economic empowerment through agroforestry, particularly the cultivation of Siger avocados. The study concludes that an integrated strategic management model focusing on institutional strengthening, economic innovation, transparent profit-sharing mechanisms, and participatory monitoring can enhance rehabilitation effectiveness. Practically, these insights offer a framework for policymakers and stakeholders to promote sustainable forest restoration while improving community welfare. © 2025 by the authors; licensee Learning Gate.
The planet earth is inhabited by diverse array of living organisms such as microorganisms, plants, animals and human beings which collectively constitute the biodiversity. Each and every element of the living component of the system has its own role, either positive or negative, to play as a system component. So preservation and conservation of living organisms, whether they are tiny or large, become immense important in playing beneficial role in maintaining biodiversity. Mega-herbivorous animal such as elephant has major impact on the terrestrial ecosystems in which they live and thus on the animals that depend on these habitats. Elephant can be referred as "keystone species" because it facilitates feeding by other herbivores that disperse seeds and supports large assemblages of invertebrates, such as dung beetles, and lower plants such as algae and fungi apart from enriching soil nutrients through dung piles. These algae and fungi are preferred nutrient plants for some reptiles such as monitor lizard and star tortoise in the semiarid tropical forests. Dung beetle accumulation attracts many insectivorous birds. Dung deposition into water holes is being benefited to the Pisces and amphibians. Seed dispersal through alimentary canal induces germination and survival capacity of the seedlings to maintain the forest heterogeneity. Elephant also does some of the silvicultural practices such as creation of paths in dense forest, maintenance of grazing lawns and height of the trees and thinning in thick vegetation cover to keep the sustainable utility of the forest. Identification of subsoil water and natural salt licks through elephants' strong sense is also shared by the other animals especially the herbivores for which intake of minerals from the natural soil is most important for many physiological activities. The pachyderm is under severe threat due to various conservation problems such as loss of habitat, habitat quality and corridors, reduction of home range, population increase, impact of developmental activities, human-elephant conflict issues and poaching for ivory. Among the factors, some of them may be responsible for major proportions, and some of them involve less proportion. But these are the reasons listed as conservation problems for the long-run conservation of Asian elephant especially in Southern India. © Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018.
The threat of fire is always a consideration when establishing a forest restoration program. Two wildfires occurred in 2006 and 2007 in an established dry forest restoration project in Puerto Rico. The original goal of the project was to determine differential growth responses of native trees under the nurse tree Leucaena leucocephala versus in open sites. Tree species growth, mortality and response to the fires were evaluated according to their leaf habit, successional status, and prefire tolerance to environmental conditions. Results snowed that regardless of a species' leaf habit and successional status, trees attained greater height and lower mortality under nurse trees. In open sites, sprouting was the most common fire response and mature-forest and evergreen species had greater postfire survival than pioneers and deciduous species. Although nurse trees are typically used to help manage nutrient or light environments in reforestation projects, these trees also appear to provide a secondary benefit of limiting fire damage by reducing fuel load. © Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 2008.
Vegetation regulates microclimate stability through biophysical mechanisms such as evaporation, transpiration and shading. Therefore, thermal conditions in tree-dominated habitats will frequently differ significantly from standardized free-air temperature measurements. The ability of forests to buffer temperatures nominates them as potential sanctuaries for tree species intolerant to the increasingly challenging thermal conditions established by climate change. Although many factors influencing thermal conditions beneath the vegetation cover have been ascertained, the role of three-dimensional vegetation structure in regulating the understory microclimate remains understudied. Recent advances in remote sensing technologies, such as terrestrial laser scanning, have allowed scientists to capture the three-dimensional structural heterogeneity of vegetation with a high level of accuracy. Here, we examined the relationships between vegetation structure parametrized from voxelized laser scanning point clouds, air and soil temperature ranges, as well as offsets between field-measured temperatures and gridded free-air temperature estimates in 17 sites in a tropical mountain ecosystem in Southeast Kenya. Structural diversity generally exerted a cooling effect on understory temperatures, but vertical diversity and stratification explained more variation in the understory air and soil temperature ranges (30%–40%) than canopy cover (27%), plant area index (24%) and average stand height (23%). We also observed that the combined effects of stratification, canopy cover and elevation explained more than half of the variation (53%) in understory air temperature ranges. Stratification's attenuating effect was consistent across different levels of elevation. Temperature offsets between field measurements and free-air estimates were predominantly controlled by elevation, but stratification and structural diversity were influential predictors of maximum and median temperature offsets. Moreover, stable understory temperatures were strongly associated with a large offset in daytime maximum temperatures, suggesting that structural diversity primarily contributes to thermal stability by cooling daytime maximum temperatures. Our findings shed light on the thermal influence of vertical vegetation structure and, in the context of tropical land-use change, suggest that decision-makers aiming to mitigate the thermal impacts of land conversion should prioritize management practices that preserve structural diversity by retaining uneven-aged trees and mixing plant species of varying sizes, e.g., silvopastoral, or agroforestry systems. © 2024 The Authors
Recent research linking poverty alleviation and forest conservation has frequently focused on the potential contribution of the commercialization of Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFPs), and has consequently emphasized incomes from NTFPs rather than their consumption. This paper aims to understand the role played by the consumption of wild food plants in the livelihood of rural populations. Two methods of evaluation are used to estimate the value of the wild food plants consumed by Pwo Karen people living in the Thung Yai Naresuan Wildlife Sanctuary in western Thailand. The first calculates the time needed to gather the wild food plants (14.63 days/year per household), and the second uses the prices of commercial substitutes in the market to estimate the number of days household members would have to engage in paid work if they switched to commercial food crops (143 days/year). The paper concludes that consuming wild food plants is an efficient method of subsistence that should be encouraged. If it is not encouraged, economic growth could lead people to squander additional cash incomes on higher-status commercial food crops rather than spend it on productive investment. © 2006 SAGE Publications.
Seed transportation by animals plays a predominant role in tropical forests. The article analyses the action of wildlife on forest regeneration by considering the coevolution that has developed between plants and frugivorous animals. Various associations between certain types of fruit and certain groups of mammals or birds are described with special emphasis on the specific dispersal type arising therefrom. Dispersal is most often heterogeneous on sites that are generally favourable to seedling development. This variety of dispersal modes contributes both to colonisation of new sites and to the maintenance of plant species in given environments. In the case of pioneer plants, distribution is more homogeneous and contributes to building up the seed pool in the soil. These seeds go into dormancy and do not germinate until a gap is opened in the canopy. Hunting these frugivorous animals could have major consequences particularly for some plant species.
Seagrasses are known to provide important habitats for a diversity of fish and fisheries species. Continued research has allowed us to re-evaluate the generalisations, and identify the gaps in our knowledge regarding these habitats, particularly in an Australian context. Seagrasses generally form part of a mosaic with other habitats within a seascape that contributes to its overall biodiversity of fish. Patterns of abundance and diversity of fish between seagrass and other habitats, such as unvegetated flats and reef habitats, is inconsistent and depends on the region, fish and seagrass species, and sampling method. Edge effects, adjacent habitats, and fragmentation can strongly influence fish assemblages. Seagrass structural complexity can enhance survival and growth of juvenile fishes, but recent studies show that survival rates of individual prey do not vary greatly across seagrass densities when densities of both prey and predators increase with seagrass density. The concept of the nursery habitat has been built on data from studies in estuaries or highly seasonal seagrass habitats, whereas recent studies in marine systems or cool temperate seagrass meadows suggest that this role does not always hold. Direct grazing on seagrasses by fishes occurs mainly in tropical regions, although there is a paucity of data on this process along with several other processes, from tropical Australia. Grazing on seagrasses by fishes appears to be limited in temperate regions, with consumption of seagrass restricted mainly to omnivorous species. However, tropicalisation, that is, the immigration of tropical grazers to higher latitudes due to global ocean warming, is predicted to increase grazing rates on temperate seagrasses. Reductions in seagrass biomass caused by increased grazing will disrupt connectivity processes between seagrass meadows and surrounding habitats, and are likely to have significant ramifications for the biodiversity and ecosystem services those other coastal habitats provide. Although other habitats rely on inputs of seagrass detritus, and the immigration of fish and fisheries species from their juvenile seagrass habitats, quantitative data on this link are limited. Evidence that fisheries declines, either directly or indirectly, have resulted from seagrass loss is equivocal to date, and therefore, the quantification of this role is still needed. Managing seagrass for fisheries is complex, and many fisheries agencies embrace ecosystem-based management, but do not have direct responsibility for seagrass habitat. Significant progress has been made in our knowledge of fish and fisheries in seagrasses, but our review highlights significant knowledge gaps where further research is recommended. © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018.
Even though many globally important tropical agroforestry crops are partially or completely dependent on insect pollination, the conditions influencing pollinator abundance in these systems are often incompletely understood. This is particularly the case for cocoa midges (Diptera: Ceratopogonidae), which are essential for cocoa pollination and thus yield, but agro-ecological management frequently neglects them. We report the first assessment of cocoa midge population dynamics from two Caribbean countries across a full year, and relate this to seasonal climate variables. We used static suction traps along transects to sample insects monthly, from six cocoa farms across three Caribbean islands, with a particular focus on known pollinators of cocoa. A total of over 87,000 insects were captured, including more than 1800 cocoa midges. Midges were present in all months of the survey and on all sites, but typically comprised less than 2% of the total insects caught. At least twelve different species of cocoa midges were identified from this survey. The previous month's rainfall positively predicted cocoa midge absolute abundance and further analysis also revealed a relationship between rainfall and relative midge abundance. In particular, during drought periods, midge numbers were very low, consistent with their larval ecology. Humidity and mean daily maximum and minimum temperatures did not relate to midge abundance. Rainfall negatively influenced the Shannon-Weaver index. The findings highlight the possible threat of droughts to cocoa pollination services and the importance of proactive farm management to support them. © 2017 Elsevier B.V.
The environmental data used to calculate ecological niche models (ENM) are obtained mainly from ground-based maps (e.g., climatic interpolated surfaces). These data are often not available for less developed areas, or may be at an inappropriate scale, and thus to obtain this information requires fieldwork. An alternative source of eco-geographical data comes from satellite imagery. Three sets of ENM were calculated exclusively with variables obtained (1) from optical and radar images only and (2) from climatic and altitude maps obtained by ground-based methods. These models were compared to evaluate whether satellite imagery can accurately generate ENM. These comparisons must be made in areas with well-known species distribution and with available satellite imagery and ground-based data. Thus, the study area was the south-western part of Salamanca (Spain), using amphibian and reptiles as species models. Models' discrimination capacity was measured with ROC plots. Models' covariation was measured with a Spatial Spearman correlation. Four modelling techniques were used (Bioclim, Mahalanobis distance, GARP and Maxent). The results of this comparison showed that there were no significant differences between models generated using remotely sensed imagery or ground-based data. However, the models built with satellite imagery data exhibited a larger diversity of values, probably related to the higher spatial resolution of the satellite imagery. Satellite imagery can produce accurate ENM, independently of the modelling technique or the dataset used. Therefore, biogeographical analysis of species distribution in remote areas can be accurately developed only with variables from satellite imagery.
We tested the ability of an international Weed Risk Assessment (WRA) protocol to predict invasion status of 230 alien plant species introduced via a botanical garden to tropical rainforest in Tanzania. The reliability and accuracy of WRA in discriminating between invaders and non-invaders was independently assessed using field data on species demography and distribution. The WRA rejected 83% of known invaders, and accepted 74% of non-invaders. Only 1% of accepted species were known invaders at the site. WRA performance varied among different growth forms, and underestimated the risks arising from palm species. Among those species that had naturalised, the WRA was better at identifying invaders of open rather than forest habitats. The WRA score was significantly correlated with how widespread species had become at the site, suggesting some capacity to predict spatial spread at a landscape scale. Knowledge of propagule pressure and residence time did not increase explanatory power. These results indicate that the WRA was able to discriminate between invaders and non-invaders with accuracy comparable to similar assessments in temperate and sub-tropical regions. It could be made more effective by weighting traits important in tropical forests e.g. certain growth forms, shade tolerance etc. more heavily. Such a modified WRA could be used successfully elsewhere in the palaeotropics as a screening tool to identify the risk of invasion arising from plants introduced for agroforestry, horticulture or landscaping. Given the increasing pressures on tropical forests and importance of agroforestry to local economies, the WRA protocol represents a useful conservation tool. (C) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
The loss of forest area globally due to change of land use, the importance of forests in the conservation of biodiversity and in carbon and other biogeochemical cycles, together with the threat to forests from pollution and from the impacts of climate change, place forestry policy and practice at the center of global environmental and sustainability strategy. Forests provide important economic, environmental, social, and cultural benefits, so that in forestry, as in other areas of environmental policy and management, there are tensions between economic development and environmental protection. In this article we review the current information on global forest cover and condition, examine the international processes that relate to forest protection and to sustainable forest management, and look at the main forest certification schemes. We consider the link between the international processes and certification schemes and also their combined effectiveness. We conclude that in some regions of the world neither mechanism is achieving forest protection, while in others local or regional implementation is occurring and is having a significant impact. Choice of certification scheme and implementation of management standards are often influenced by a consideration of the associated costs, and there are some major issues over the monitoring of agreed actions and of the criteria and indicators of sustainability. There are currently a number of initiatives seeking to improve the operation of the international forestry framework (e.g., The Montreal Process, the Ministerial Convention of the Protection of Forests in Europe and European Union actions in Europe, the African Timber Organisation and International Tropical Timber Organisation initiative for African tropical forest, and the development of a worldwide voluntary agreement on forestry in the United Nations Forum on Forests). We suggest that there is a need to improve the connections between scientific understanding, policy development, and forestry practice, and also the cooperation between the various international initiatives and processes, so that the international framework is more effective and its influence is extended geographically. © Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 2008.
Introduction: Mining-impacted areas in tropical forests require the application of ecological restoration strate-gies, but this process often involves use of exotic plant species ignoring the effects on the ecological regeneration of the sites where they are introduced. Objective: To evaluate the effect of Acacia mangium plantations (exotic plant) on early ecological rehabilitation (soil and vegetation) of areas impacted by open-pit gold mining in the tropical rain forest of Choco, Colombia.Methods: 16 mining areas were selected as sampling units (eight reforested with A. mangium and eight in natu-ral succession) in two locations. In each sampling unit, a 2 x 50 m plot was established (four plots per sampling scenario and locality), where soil fertility (physical and chemical parameters) was analyzed and the number of individuals of each vascular plant species was quantified.Results: 73 species (69 genera, 45 families) were recorded. The density of individuals was higher in areas of natural succession than in those reforested with A. mangium; conversely, species richness and diversity were higher under the A. mangium plantations. Floristic similarity was low between successional scenarios (shared species 35.6 %). The soil showed better conditions (especially N-NHO3) in mining areas with A. mangium than in those in natural regeneration. Conclusions: A. mangium plantations appears to facilitate the early rehabilitation of soil fertility and vegeta-tion in abandoned mines; therefore, this species can play an important role in the implementation of ecological restoration strategies in areas impacted by open-pit gold mining in the Choco and other tropical forest systems with similar environmental and disturbance conditions.
Plantation forests and second-growth forests are becoming dominant components of many tropical forest landscapes. Yet there is little information available concerning the consequences of different forestry options for biodiversity conservation in the tropics. We sampled the leaf-litter herpetofauna of primary, secondary, and Eucalyptus plantation forests in the Jari River area of northeastern Brazilian Amazonia. We used four complementary sampling techniques, combined samples from 2 consecutive years, and collected 1739 leaf-litter amphibians (23 species) and 1937 lizards (30 species). We analyzed the data for differences among forest types regarding patterns of alpha and beta diversity, species-abundance distributions, and community structure. Primary rainforest harbored significantly more species, but supported a similar abundance of amphibians and lizards compared with adjacent areas of second-growth forest or plantations. Plantation forests were dominated by wide-ranging habitat generalists. Secondary forest faunas contained a number of species characteristic of primary forest habitat. Amphibian communities in secondary forests and Eucalyptus plantations formed a nested subset of primary forest species, whereas the species composition of the lizard community in plantations was distinct, and was dominated by open-area species. Although plantation forests are relatively impoverished, naturally regenerating forests can help mitigate some negative effects of deforestation for herpetofauna. Nevertheless, secondary forest does not provide a substitute for primary forest, and in the absence of further evidence from older successional stands, we caution against the optimistic claim that natural forest regeneration in abandoned lands will provide refuge for the many species that are currently threatened by deforestation. © 2007 Society for Conservation Biology.
The Heilong-Amur River Basin (HARB) in Northeast Asia has experienced distinct land surface changes during the past 40 years due to extensive ecological restoration programs, agricultural management, and grassland grazing in different ecosystems. However, the regional climate impact caused by the long-term spatially heterogeneous land surface changes in this mid-high latitude region is not well documented. Therefore, this study used multi-source satellite measurements records and a high-resolution land-atmosphere coupled regional climate model (WRF) to investigate the land surface changes and their associated thermal and moisture impacts across three main ecosystems over the Heilong-Amur River basin from 1982 to 2018. Firstly, satellite observations indicated an overall greening in HARB, with variations across ecosystems. The significant summer farmland greening is the most representative, with the farmland green vegetation fraction (GVF) remarkably increasing by 7.78% in summer. The forest greening magnitude is stronger in spring (3.42%) than in summer (2.85%), while the grassland vegetation showed some local browning signals in summer. Secondly, our simulated results showed the summer farmland greening accelerated evapotranspiration (ET) by 0.161 mm/d and significantly cools the surface temperature by 0.508 °C averaged at the ecosystem scale, which was highly correlated with the satellite observations but with lower cooling magnitude. The forest greening brought less surface cooling in spring than summer due to the stronger albedo feedback, despite with greater increase in GVF and ET. While with the opposite process, the local grassland browning leads to consistent warming effects, which can be detected from both satellite observations and our simulation results. Finally, our results also found that rainfall increasing averagely at the ecosystem scale can't fully compensate the water emission from enhanced ET due to the surface greening, contributing to soil moisture decline in both farmland and relative dry forests. © 2021 Elsevier B.V.
India is a biodiversity-rich country. The panorama of Indian forests ranges from tropical evergreen rain forests in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Western Ghats, and the north-eastern States, to Dry Alpine Scrub high in the Himalayas in the north. On the other extreme, tropical dry deciduous and thorn forest is found in the deserts and dry areas of Rajasthan and Gujarat. The variety and distribution of forest vegetation are large, and India is one of the 17 mega biodiversity regions of the world. Forestry in India supports a sizeable non-wood forest product-based economy apart from timber and fuelwood. In forested landscapes people are integrated with forest and make living out of it. On the other hand urbanization and infrastructure development are putting considerable pressure on forests. These issues need effective and efficient forest monitoring system. Hence in late 1980s, India entrusted Forest Survey of India to evolve robust and scientific method of forest monitoring. Thus, India has taken an early lead in establishing a forest monitoring system. The history of forest cover mapping using satellite images in the country goes back to 1983 when National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA—now known as NRSC-ISRO) prepared the first-ever forest cover map of India. Later, Forest Survey of India has been mandated with the forest cover mapping of the country in the biennial cycle since 1987. Three decades of forest cover mapping on a regular basis have been a remarkable achievement in the field of natural resource monitoring. India’s remote sensing-based periodic monitoring of forest cover, which is unique in the world, has played a major role in conservation and enhancement of forest cover of the country. Evolving with satellite data improvement and technological advancements, the methodology of forest cover mapping by FSI has seen significant changes over the years, wherein Indian remote sensing data, particularly the IRS 1C/1D LISS III data, have been the primary input in the time series mapping. This paper reviews the chronology and significance of this important forest monitoring programme of India. © 2021, Indian Society of Remote Sensing.
Selective logging has affected large areas of tropical forests and there is increasing interest in how to manage selectively logged forests to enhance recovery. However, the impacts of logging and active restoration, by liberation cutting and enrichment planting, on tree community composition are poorly understood compared to trajectories of biomass recovery. Here, we assess the long-term impacts of selective logging and active restoration for biomass recovery on tree species diversity, community composition, and forest structure. We censused all stems ≥2 cm diameter at breast height (DBH) on 46 permanent plots in unlogged, primary forest in the Danum Valley Conservation Area (DVCA; 12 plots, totalling 0.6 ha) and in sites logged 23–35 years prior to the census in the Ulu Segama Forest Reserve adjacent to DVCA (34 plots, totalling 1.7 ha) in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo. Active restoration treatments, including enrichment planting and climber cutting, were implemented on 17 of the logged forest plots 12–24 years prior to the census. Total plot-level basal area and pole (5–10 cm DBH) stem density were lower in logged than unlogged forests, however no difference was found in stem density amongst saplings (2–5 cm DBH) or established trees (≥10 cm DBH). Neither basal area, nor plot-level stem density varied with time since logging at any size class, although sapling and pole stem densities were lower in actively restored than naturally regenerating logged forest. Sapling species diversity was lower in logged than unlogged forest, however there were no other significant effects of logging on tree species richness or diversity indices. Tree species composition, however, differed between logged and unlogged forests across all stem size classes (PERMANOVA), reflected by 23 significant indicator species that were only present in unlogged forest. PERMANOVA tests revealed no evidence that overall species composition changed with time since logging or with active restoration treatments at any size class. However, when naturally regenerating and actively restored communities were compared, two indicator species were identified in naturally regenerating forest and three in actively restored forests. Together our results suggest that selective logging has a lasting effect on tree community composition regardless of active restoration treatments and, even when species richness and diversity are stable, species composition remains distinct from unlogged forest for more than two decades post-harvest. Active restoration efforts should be targeted, monitored, and refined to try to ensure positive outcomes for multiple metrics of forest recovery. © 2021 Elsevier B.V.
The benefits provided by tropical rainforests are unevenly distributed throughout the landscape and are shaped by abiotic and biotic components that influence the spatial distribution and functional traits of the species involved. We tested whether environmental stratification of the rainforest in biophysical Landscape Units (LU), defined by topography and soil, is related to the spatial distribution of diversity, abundance and productivity (standing biomass) of tree assemblages that provide potential forest products (PFP). Considering that different PFP are associated with specific plant traits, we also tested whether a phylogenetic signal exists among the species that comprise specific use categories. Non-metric multidimensional scaling ordinations and permutational analysis of variance were based on the frequency, abundance and productivity of 129 species, the PFP of which were classified as fodder, food, fuelwood, medicinal, melliferous, ornamental, plywood and timber in 15 plots of 0.5 ha each. We constructed a phylogenetic tree of the studied species and analyzed the phylogenetic signal strength (D-statistic) among them. The spatial distribution of diversity and abundance of useful species changes among the LU. Specific PFP can be provided in contrasting habitat conditions, but generally not by the same species. The PFP categories that presented a phylogenetic signal were associated with wood characteristics (fuelwood and plywood) and the palatability of the leaves and reproductive structures (fodder). The Moraceae family was significantly related to fodder and plywood, whereas Meliaceae, Myrtaceae and Sapotaceae were mostly used for fuelwood. The medicinal species presented convergent traits distributed throughout the phylogeny. However, since our study included a broad variety of plant structures, it is possible that phylogenetic dispersion can change if we consider the specific uses within each category. Our findings show that the assemblages of PFP suppliers can be clustered through biophysical units based on soil and topography, and specific categories of PFP are often supplied by phylogenetically related species. This knowledge is fundamental in order to incorporate the high diversity of tree species and their potential uses into productive reforestation and agroforestry programs. © 2020 Elsevier Ltd
Progress towards sustainable forest management in the neotropics will eventually require greater emphasis on monitoring and an adaptive approach, for which baseline data on management effects on fundamentally important plant community characteristics are still required. During the first decade following intervention, a Costa Rican rain forest appeared resilient and productive, although mortality rates rose following silvicultural treatment. Intervention did not affect floristic diversity, but abundances of lianas and some non-commercial tree species were reduced. As in any forest, precaution and best practice can reduce some management impacts on plant biodiversity, and can be evaluated by input and process indicators. Some outcome indicators of floristic change, necessary for adaptive management, are costly to evaluate, and the case study casts doubt on the use of structural indicators as surrogates for floristic ones. Permanent sample plot protocols modified as in the case study, in combination with a focal species approach, are suggested for monitoring. Focal species would have priority if the robustness of floristic diversity is confirmed by further work. Policy and institutional mechanisms to make monitoring possible are urgently needed, and attributes of forest types (limited area, unusual characteristics and degree of threat) and management operations (type and intensity of intervention) should also be used in setting priorities for monitoring.
In view of the continued decline in tropical forest cover around the globe, forest restoration has become a key tool in tropical rainforest conservation. One of the main - and least expensive - restoration strategies is natural forest regeneration. By aiding forest seed influx both into disturbed and undisturbed habitats, frugivorous birds facilitate forest regeneration. This study focuses on the tolerance of a frugivorous bird community to anthropogenic habitat disturbance within the broader context of natural forest regeneration with conservation purposes. It was carried out in the tropical cloud forest of Costa Rica's Talamanca Mountains. Bird community response and tolerance to habitat disturbance was assessed by comparing bird presence and densities along a disturbance gradient, ranging from open pastures to closed mature forests. Birds were censused along nine transects applying the variable width line transect procedure. Forty relevant frugivorous bird species were observed during 102 h of survey time. Densities were calculated for 33 species; nine species responded negatively to increasing level of disturbance and nine others positively. Results indicate that large frugivores are generally moderately tolerant to intermediate, but intolerant to severe habitat disturbance, and that tolerance is often higher for medium and small frugivores. It appears that moderately disturbed habitats in tropical cloud forests are highly suitable for restoration through natural regeneration aided by frugivorous birds. Due to a lack of large forest seed dispersers, severely disturbed habitats appear less suitable. © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Anthropized areas in the Brazilian Amazon require detailed mapping to identify zones for sustainable use. This study developed a topoclimatic zoning framework to evaluate the conservation and agroforestry potential of three native species: Carapa guianensis (Andiroba), Dipteryx odorata (Cumaru), and Bertholletia excelsa (Amazon Nut). The hypothesis was that integrating topographic and climatic data can effectively identify high-potential areas for these species to support forest restoration and sustainable management. This study applied ecological modeling and Geographic Information System (GIS) tools to classify zones into high, medium, and low potential for each species. Results showed Carapa guianensis has high potential in 64% of anthropized areas, Dipteryx odorata in 72% of the Legal Amazon, and Bertholletia excelsa in 58%, highlighting their adaptability and strategic value for restoration efforts. The findings emphasize the importance of topoclimatic zoning as a tool for conservation and sustainable use strategies. By aligning with Brazil's Payment for Environmental Services (PES) Law, this approach can foster agroforestry practices, enhance biodiversity conservation, and strengthen the Amazon bioeconomy, ensuring ecological resilience and sustainable development.
Topsoil translocation has been effective for the restoration of plant communities, but until recently this method had not been used for tropical dry forest restoration. We tested different methods of topsoil deposition for restoring a dry forest on an abandoned limestone quarry. We also tested the effects of irrigation during the first dry season after topsoil deposition. The study was conducted in the Federal District of Brazil. A 2.1-ha area was cleared of vegetation, and the topsoil from that site was deposited on an exotic pasture field 1.4 km away. First, a secondary forest was clear-cut, and the first 30 cm of topsoil were removed and translocated. The soil was transported in dump trucks to the deposition site, which had been scarified in advance, and deposited by either forming 1.25-m-tall mounds or by leveling the soil into a 40-cm or 20-cm deep layer using a hydraulic excavator. The seed bank and the availability of root and stem fragments in the soil were both surveyed. The origin of the regenerants was categorized as either from seed or resprouting. We estimated vegetation cover for each life form, and measured all trees and lianas. After six months, 74% of the tree individuals and 60% of the liana individuals came from resprouting. Ruderal herbs and shrubs germinated from seeds. After 28 months, there were 51 species of trees, 8 species of lianas, 12 species of shrubs, and 34 species of herbs in the deposition treatments. The three deposition treatments were thickly covered with herbaceous/shrubby species, and had nine times the number of species (44 vs. 5) and five times the tree density (1.17 ind./m2 vs. 0.25 ind./m2) as the non-deposition control. Tree survival was relatively high in both the non-irrigated and irrigated treatments. The total cost of topsoil translocation was 9604 USD, and the output was 0.43 ha deposited/ha excavated when forming mounds of soil, 5951 USD and output of 0.75 when leveling to a 40-cm layer, and 3551 USD and 1.5 for a 20-cm layer of deposited material. However, deposition and transportation costs are fixed costs of establishing a new quarry that can be deducted from the total cost of restoration. Topsoil translocation was effective in kick-starting the succession process of a tropical dry forest. © 2017 Elsevier B.V.
Tonle Sap Great Lake (TSL) is the largest freshwater lake ecosystem in Southeast Asia and receptacle of impressive biodiversity. However, there is surprisingly little knowledge of its ecosystem structure and functioning. The main objective of the current work was to quantify the food web structure and assess the ecosystem health status of the TSL system by constructing the first holistic food web model using Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE). The results indicate that the ecotrophic efficiency (EE) values were very high for most of functional groups (EE. >. 0.5) except molluscs (0.146) and macrophytes (0.102). The high EE values together with the MTI (Mixed Trophic Impact) analysis indicated the overexploitation and degradation of fishery resources in the TSL system. The discrete trophic levels varied from 1 (phytoplankton, macrophytes and detritus) to 3.17 (snakehead). The energy transfer in the TSL food web was based mostly on the detrital food chain (77.9%) rather than the grazing food chain (22.1%), with an average transfer efficiency of 8.27%. The ratios of total primary production to respiration (TPP/TR) and to biomass (TPP/TB) were 1.23 and 2.04, respectively, while the Ascendency and Finn cycling index (FCI) of the system were estimated at 27.4% and 23.62%. Nevertheless, the connectance index (CI: 0.253) and system omnivory index (SOI: 0.075) were in-between compared to other lake ecosystems, which indicated that the food web structure was characterized by linear, rather than web-like features. Systematic analysis and indicators suggested that the ecosystem was a relatively healthy ecosystem achieving a certain stage of maturity, albeit with a vulnerable food web structure. Accordingly, some ecosystem-based strategies are presented for the improvement of fishery management and ecosystem conservation in TSL. © 2015 Elsevier B.V.
Haiti has suffered great losses from deforestation, with little forest cover remaining today. Current reforestation efforts focus on seedling quantity rather than quality. This study examined limitations to the production of high-quality seedlings of the endemic Hispaniolan pine (Pinus occidentalis Swartz). Recognizing the importance of applying sustainable development principles to pine forest restoration, the effects of growing media and container types on seedling growth were evaluated with the goal of developing a propagation protocol to produce high-quality seedlings using economically feasible nursery practices. With regard to growing media, seedlings grew best in compost-based media amended with sand. Topsoil, widely used in nurseries throughout Haiti, produced the smallest seedlings overall. Despite a low water holding capacity and limited manganese, compost-based media provided adequate levels of essential mineral nutrients (particularly nitrogen), which allowed for sufficient seedling nutrition. Seedling shoot and root growth, as well as the ratio of shoot biomass to root biomass, were greater in polybags relative to D40s. Results indicate that economically feasible improvements to existing nursery practices in Haiti can improve the early growth rates of P. occidentalis seedlings. © 2018 by the authors.
Hawaiian tropical dry forests contain diverse assemblages of woody canopy species, including many endemic and endangered species that warrant conservation attention before completely disappearing. Today, tropical dry forests in Hawaii are not viable ecosystems. Poor land use practices, fragmentation, non-native plant invasions, and inadequate native vegetation regeneration are all factors that have contributed to their endangerment. Only an ambitious restoration programme that includes non-native ungulate exclusion, weed control, fire management, and the outplanting of seeds and seedlings will be sufficient to enhance Hawaiian tropical dry forests. We selected a 25 ha preserve within the Kaupulehu Dry Forest Preserve, located in North Kona on the Island of Hawaii, to test dry forest restoration strategies. In 1997, the preserve was fenced and all non-native ungulates were removed. Altogether, 4892 outplants were planted from 1999-2006. In 2007, we surveyed all of the outplants. The survey found 1487 live plants, 3357 dead, and 48 plants missing. This equates to an overall survival rate of 30%. Survival by vegetation type indicated that vines had the highest rate of survival (63%) followed by trees (34%). Herbs had the lowest rate of survival (12%). Twelve of a total of 35 species that were outplanted in the Kaupulehu Dry Forest Preserve accounted for more than 90% of the total surviving plants species, while five federally listed species represent almost 60% of the total. The outplanting of dry forest species into the Kaupulehu Dry Forest Preserve considerably increased the population of many federally listed endangered species. However, the high mortality of many common and important plant species of tropical dry systems highlights the importance of an outplanting programme that emphasizes ecosystem sustainability rather that species success. In equal measure, the successes and failures of the Kaupulehu outplanting project have enhanced our ability to begin to restore this unique and endangered ecosystem.
Traditional agroforestry systems (TAFS), which integrate crops with wildlife, are important reservoirs of human culture and technical experiences with a high capacity for biodiversity conservation. Our study aimed to evaluate the capacity of TAFS to conserve the floristic diversity of tropical dry forests (TDF) in the Tehuacan-Cuicatlan Valley, Mexico. We compared TAFS and TDF by measuring their forest cover, floristic composition, and structure, in addition to documenting the motivations of people to maintain native vegetation in their agricultural fields. We conducted a restricted randomized sampling of perennial plant species, including nine sites of TAFS and nine of TDF to determine the alpha, beta, and gamma diversity. Furthermore, we conducted semi-structured interviews with peasants who managed the agricultural plots we studied. We also performed workshops with people of the communities where surveys were performed. Our findings show that TAFS can maintain, on average, 68% of the species (95% of them native to the region) and 53% of the abundance of individuals occurring in the adjacent TDF. TAFS harbour 30% (39 species) of plants endemic to Mexico. Total species richness of TDF and TAFS were similar, as well as the effective number of species or communities estimated for the alpha, beta, and gamma diversity, but differed in the abundance of individuals. The high species turnover recorded in TDF (72%) and TAFS (74%) has profound implications for conservation, suggesting that it would be necessary to maintain several sites in order to conserve the regional diversity of native vegetation. Material, non-material, and regulatory contributions were reported to be the reason that peasants take into account maintaining natural vegetation. TAFS associated with TDF in the region (also called "Apancles") contain an important richness, diversity, and endemism of components of natural ecosystems, as well as provide multiple socio-ecological contributions. These systems could represent a viable alternative to reconcile biological conservation with social well-being. © 2020 by the authors.
Epiphytes are considered indicators of forest ecological integrity, but the factors that explain their abundance are still not well understood. We here evaluated tree colonization by epiphytes in old-growth monospecific reforestation stands of Astronium urundeuva (M.Allemão) Engl. (Anacardiaceae) and Eucalyptus saligna Sm. (Myrtaceae), in comparison to a neighbor seasonal tropical forest fragment under similar environmental conditions. In each forest type, we identified and measured all trees (planted and colonizers) from 5-cm stem diameter in five 200 m² plots and quantified all vascular epiphytes per tree. Tree species were categorized by bark roughness, canopy deciduousness and growth rate. The abundance of epiphytes and the frequency of host trees were higher in the A. urundeuva plantation than in the native forest, with the E. saligna stand in an intermediate position. Also, we found that host traits influenced the abundance of epiphytes in their trunks. Host trees had average stem perimeter and height both higher than non-hosts, which indicates that colonization is more likely to occur in older trees. The average abundance of epiphytes per tree was higher in species with rough bark, but no relationship was found with canopy deciduousness or tree growth rate. We evidenced, therefore, that forest plantations, even if monospecific, can provide habitat for epiphytes. However, at community level, colonization success, either in native or restored forest, depends on the relative abundance of species whose bark type favors epiphytes establishment. © 2024, Universidade Estadual de Campinas UNICAMP. All rights reserved.
Since its origins, cocoa growing has gone through a series of crises and booms, with a shift in production areas at the expense of tropical forests. Nowadays, the recent sharp rise in the global demand for cocoa more than ever calls into question the future of these forest resources. Nevertheless, in contrast with the dominant technical models, often unsustainable, part of global cocoa growing is based on complex agroforestry systems which are, in many cases, very old and still managed by farmers. To better understand the genesis and the functioning of these systems over time, we analysed the evolution of 30 cocoa agroforests, most of which were several decades old, located in central Cameroon. In this region, cocoa growing has been developing since the 1930s and experienced major changes in contexts, including the severe crisis of the 1990s. By combining field observations and historical survey data, we reconstructed the impacts of these changes over time on management practices, agroforestry structures and cocoa yields. We formalized five cocoa agroforests trajectories closely linked to main phases of cocoa growing in central Cameroon, each phase leading to changes in farmers' practices. These trajectories explain the current agroforests structures, with low (1180 in. ha(-1)) or high cocoa tree densities (2190 in. ha(-1)), mean basal area per cocoa tree which ranged from 29.4 cm(2) to 92.7 cm(2), and finally cocoa yields which varied from 542.7 to 1275.7 kg ha(-1). Our results show how the management of interacting species allows a system balance that can be temporarily broken or redesigned, suggesting the resilient and flexible nature of these complex cocoa agroforests. The properties of these cocoa agroforests gradually built over time enable adaptations and their transmission during difficult times. To cope with current challenges facing global cocoa production, we recommend that these cocoa agroforests serve as a basis to promote new cocoa cropping models to better reconcile cocoa production and the preservation of forest resources.
Butterflies are expedient biodiversity indicators of a healthy environment. As virtuous pollinators, they provide environmental and economic benefits to the agricultural and natural ecosystem. The global loss of the butterfly community, especially in tropical regions, is causing irreparable damage to the ecological landscape. This decline in population is due to habitat degradation, forest succession, loss of symbiotic relations, economic loss due to flooding, forest development plans, low grassland area, global warming, and reforestation. Moreover, the limited information on the molecular resources of butterflies impedes informed conservation planning. The Threatened Species Initiative (TSI) of Korea has started to utilize the benefits of transcriptome-guided discovery of molecular resources of a few butterfly species, and a few others are in the pipeline. The cataloging of new genes and genetic markers provides the possibility to promote selective utilization of fitness traits for adaptation of the species to the wild and a newer habitat. In this review, we assessed the versatility of whole-transcriptome information of the Korean threatened butterfly species, such as the lycaenid Protantigius superans and Spindasis takanosis, the Nymphalid butterfly, Fabriciana nerippe, and the Papilionid species Parnassius bremeri. The schema employed under TSI, including the sequencing and downstream bioinformatics pipeline, could act as a reference for research outside of Korean butterflies. While the molecular resources are available to be exploited, their utilization for conservation is still in its infancy. It is important to synthesize these studies together to catalyze further conservation work applying genomics approaches. © 2023 The Entomological Society of Korea and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.
Understanding Atlantic tropical forests' ecological dynamics and carbon storage potential in Cameroon is crucial for guiding sustainable management and conservation strategies. These forests play a significant role in carbon sequestration and biodiversity conservation. This study aimed to fill existing knowledge gaps by characterising plant communities, assessing the vegetation structure, and quantifying the potential of carbon stocks. Twelve 1-ha permanent plots were established within the Atlantic forests of Okoroba and Yingui to achieve these objectives. All the trees with diameters at breast height (DBH) ≥10 cm were inventoried, and various environmental data, including soil texture and climate information, were collected. The Multivariate Regression Trees (MRT) technique was employed to analyse species composition and identify different plant communities (PCs). Additionally, multiple regression models were used to examine the effects of environmental variables and stand size structure on non-destructive carbon stock assessments. The MRT analysis was conducted on 6425 trees spanning 317 species, 212 genera and 60 families, and it identified three distinct PCs with unique species compositions and environmental preferences. The study revealed variations in tree density, ranging from 425 to 645 N ha−1, and basal area, from 32 to 38 m2ha-1 among PCs and forest types. Although carbon stocks did not differ significantly between the PCs, they varied in distribution, ranging from 195 to 203 Mg C.ha-1. A single-factor model indicated a significant correlation between tree density with DBH ≥50 cm and aboveground biomass variability (R2 = 0.86). A multi-factor model, considering DBH ranges of 10–30 cm and 30–50 cm, explained 93 % and 94 % of biomass variability, respectively, incorporating elevation and other tree density factors. These findings enhance our understanding of carbon dynamics in Atlantic forests and support conservation and sustainable management practices. They highlight the importance of biodiversity protection in mitigating climate change and maintaining ecosystem health. © 2024
Dry tropical forest communities are among the world's most threatened systems and urgent measures are required to protect and restore them in degraded landscapes. For planning conservation strategies, there is a need to determine the few essential measurable properties, such as number of species and basal area, that best describe the dry forest vegetation and its environment, and to document quantitative relationships among them. This paper examines the relationships between forest basal area and diversity components (number of species and evenness) for a disturbed dry tropical forest of northern India. Data were collected from five sites located in the Vindhyan dry tropical forest of India, selected on the basis of satellite images and field observations to represent the entire range of conditions in terms of canopy cover and disturbance regimes. These sites represented different communities in terms of species composition. The forest was poorer in species richness, and lower in stem density and basal area than wet forests of the tropics. Across sites (communities), the diversity components and tree density were positively related with total tree basal area. Considering basal area as a surrogate of biomass and net production, diversity is found to be positively associated with productivity. A positive relationship between basal area, tree density and species diversity may be an important characteristic of the dry forest, where recurring disturbance does not permit concentration of biomass or stems in only a few strong competitors. However, the relationships of basal area with density, alpha diversity and evenness remain statistically significant only when data from all sites, including the extremely disturbed one, are used in the analysis. In some sites there was a greater coefficient of variation (CV) of basal area than in others, attributed to patchy distribution of stems and resultant blanks. Therefore, to enhance the tree diversity of these forests, the variability in tree basal area must be reduced by regulating local disturbances. Conservation activities, particularly fuelwood plantations near human settlements, deferred grazing and canopy enrichment through multi-species plantations of nursery-raised or wild-collected seedlings of desirable species within the forest patches of low basal area, will be needed to attain restoration goals, but reforestation programmes will have to be made attractive to the forest-dwelling communities. © 2006 Foundation for Environmental Conservation.
Forest biomass is one of the significant components for assessing the productivity and sustainability of the forest's ecosystem. In the present study, the mapping and estimation of above ground biomass (AGB) was performed using field observations employing allometric equations and C band Sentinel 1A and L band Advanced Land Observation System (ALOS) Phased Array L-band Synthetic Aperture Radar (PALSAR) remote sensing satellite images for the parts of north eastern Himalayan forests, Arunachal Pradesh. Total 57 transects of 500 m x 10 m size was laid in West Kameng and Tawang districts (altitude range: 1047-4161 m) of Arunachal Pradesh, in which a total of 12203 individuals of 67 tree species (Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) range: 3.18-235.45 cm) was recorded. The study exhibited higher tree density (428 individuals' ha(-1)) and basal cover (7658.63 m(2)ha(-1)) in the studied forests. The highest above ground biomass was contributed by Castanopsis indica (103.82 t ha(-1)) followed by Pinus roxburghii (46.24 t ha(-1)) and Quercus semicarpifolia (23.14 t ha(-1)). Further, AGB was estimated using the Horizontal-Horizontal (HH), Horizontal-Vertical (HV) polarizations acquired by the ALOS PALSAR 50m mosaic (2008) dataset and Vertical-Vertical (VV), Vertical-Horizontal (VH) polarizations acquired by the Sentinel 1A dataset. The relationship between field based AGB and radar backscatter for selected sample plots was established using pair wise correlation. While comparing the two satellite-based SAR images, it is observed that high correlation between radar backscatter and field based AGB was observed in ALOS PALSAR as compared to Sentinel 1A SAR. This is due to higher sensitive to backscatter values and higher penetration level of L band ALOS PALSAR as compared to C band Sentinel 1A SAR. The correlation study indicates high correlation of HV polarizations in ALOS PALSAR (HV polarization R-2= 0.63; HH polarization R-2= 0.58) as compared to Sentinel 1A (VV polarization R-2= 0.054 and VH polarization R-2= 0.044). The most accurate and reliable method to estimate AGB is the field based method, but it is time consuming and tedious. Whereas, AGB estimation by L band SAR remote sensing is time effective and can be used for larger area in comparatively less time. The present study exhibited poor species diversity in higher altitudes northeast Himalayan forests as species diversity decreases with increase in altitudes. On the other hand, the higher AGB in the studied forests may be due to favorable environmental conditions including less temperature and more nutrient availability as well as less biotic interferences in terms of anthropogenic disturbances, herbivory and grazing. The study signifies the potential use of L and C band backscatter information in the reliable estimation of spatial AGB in subtropical to alpine forests of Arunachal Pradesh.
Aim: Soil microorganisms are essential for the functioning of terrestrial ecosystems. Although soil microbial communities and functions are linked to tree species composition and diversity, there has been no comprehensive study of the generality or context dependence of these relationships. Here, we examine tree diversity–soil microbial biomass and respiration relationships across environmental gradients using a global network of tree diversity experiments. Location: Boreal, temperate, subtropical and tropical forests. Time period: 2013. Major taxa studied: Soil microorganisms. Methods: Soil samples collected from 11 tree diversity experiments were used to measure microbial respiration, biomass and respiratory quotient using the substrate-induced respiration method. All samples were measured using the same analytical device, method and procedure to reduce measurement bias. We used linear mixed-effects models and principal components analysis (PCA) to examine the effects of tree diversity (taxonomic and phylogenetic), environmental conditions and interactions on soil microbial properties. Results: Abiotic drivers, mainly soil water content, but also soil carbon and soil pH, significantly increased soil microbial biomass and respiration. High soil water content reduced the importance of other abiotic drivers. Tree diversity had no effect on the soil microbial properties, but interactions with phylogenetic diversity indicated that the effects of diversity were context dependent and stronger in drier soils. Similar results were found for soil carbon and soil pH. Main conclusions: Our results indicate the importance of abiotic variables, especially soil water content, for maintaining high levels of soil microbial functions and modulating the effects of other environmental drivers. Planting tree species with diverse water-use strategies and structurally complex canopies and high leaf area might be crucial for maintaining high soil microbial biomass and respiration. Given that greater phylogenetic distance alleviated unfavourable soil water conditions, reforestation efforts that account for traits improving soil water content or select more phylogenetically distant species might assist in increasing soil microbial functions. © 2022 The Authors. Global Ecology and Biogeography published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
International commitments advocate large-scale forest restoration as a nature-based solution to climate change mitigation through carbon (C) sequestration. Mounting evidence suggests that mixed compared to monospecific planted forests may sequester more C, exhibit lower susceptibility to climate extremes and offer a broader range of ecosystem services. However, experimental studies comprehensively examining the control of tree diversity on multiple C stocks and fluxes above- and belowground are lacking. To address this gap, we leverage data from the Sardinilla experiment in Panama, the oldest tropical tree diversity experiment, which features a gradient of one-, two-, three- and five-species mixtures of native tree species. Over 16 years, we measured multiple above- and belowground C stocks and fluxes, ranging from tree aboveground C, over leaf litter C production, to soil organic carbon (SOC). We show that tree diversity significantly increased aboveground C stocks and fluxes, with a 57% higher gain in aboveground tree C in five-species mixtures compared to monocultures (35.7 ± 1.8 vs. 22.8 ± 3.4 Mg C ha−1) 16 years after planting. In contrast, we observed a net reduction in SOC (on average −11.2 ± 1.1 Mg C ha−1 across diversity levels) and no significant difference in SOC3 stocks (the predominantly tree-derived, i.e., C3 plant-derived SOC fraction) between five-species mixtures and monocultures (13.0 ± 0.9 vs. 15.1 ± 1.3 Mg C ha−1). Positive tree diversity effects persisted despite repeated climate extremes and strengthened over time for aboveground tree growth. Structural equation models showed that higher tree growth in mixtures enhanced leaf litter and coarse woody debris C fluxes to the soil, resulting in a tightly linked C cycle aboveground. However, we did not observe significant links between above- and belowground C stocks and fluxes. Our study elucidates the mechanisms through which higher tree diversity bolsters the climate mitigation potential of tropical forest restoration. Restoration schemes should prioritize mixed over monospecific planted forests. Global Change Biology© 2025 The Author(s). Global Change Biology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Stand diversification is considered a promising management approach to increasing the multifunctionality and ecological stability of forests. However, how tree diversity affects higher trophic levels and their role in regulating forest functioning is not well explored particularly for (sub)tropical regions. We analyzed the effects of tree species richness, community composition, and functional diversity on the abundance, species richness, and beta diversity of important functional groups of herbivores and predators in a large-scale forest biodiversity experiment in south-east China. Tree species richness promoted the abundance, but not the species richness, of the dominant, generalist herbivores (especially, adult leaf chewers), probably through diet mixing effects. In contrast, tree richness did not affect the abundance of more specialized herbivores (larval leaf chewers, sap suckers) or predators (web and hunting spiders), and only increased the species richness of larval chewers. Leaf chemical diversity was unrelated to the arthropod data, and leaf morphological diversity only positively affected oligophagous herbivore and hunting spider abundance. However, richness and abundance of all arthropods showed relationships with community-weighted leaf trait means (CWM). The effects of trait diversity and CWMs probably reflect specific nutritional or habitat requirements. This is supported by the strong effects of tree species composition and CWMs on herbivore and spider beta diversity. Although specialized herbivores are generally assumed to determine herbivore effects in species-rich forests, our study suggests that generalist herbivores can be crucial for trophic interactions. Our results indicate that promoting pest control through stand diversification might require a stronger focus on identifying the best-performing tree species mixtures. © 2016, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Forest fires remain a devastating phenomenon in the tropics that not only affect forest structure and biodiversity, but also contribute significantly to atmospheric CO2. Fire used to be extremely rare in tropical forests, leaving ample time for forests to regenerate to pre-fire conditions. In recent decades, however, tropical forest fires occur more frequently and at larger spatial scales than they used to. We studied forest structure, tree species diversity, tree species composition, and aboveground biomass during the first 7 years since fire in unburned, once burned and twice burned forest of eastern Borneo to determine the rate of recovery of these forests. We paid special attention to changes in the tree species composition during burned forest regeneration because we expect the long-term recovery of aboveground biomass and ecosystem functions in burned forests to largely depend on the successful regeneration of the pre-fire, heavy-wood, species composition. We found that forest structure (canopy openness, leaf area index, herb cover, and stem density) is strongly affected by fire but shows quick recovery. However, species composition shows no or limited recovery and aboveground biomass, which is greatly reduced by fire, continues to be low or decline up to 7 years after fire. Consequently, large amounts of the C released to the atmosphere by fire will not be recaptured by the burned forest ecosystem in the near future. We also observed that repeated fire, with an inter-fire interval of 15 years, does not necessarily lead to a huge deterioration in the regeneration potential of tropical forest. We conclude that burned forests are valuable and should be conserved and that long-term monitoring programs in secondary forests are necessary to determine their recovery rates, especially in relation to aboveground biomass accumulation. © 2008 Springer-Verlag.
Species diversity and density of trees were assessed in four 1-ha plots (at 457–925 m in elevation) in the Eastern Ghats of the Andhra Pradesh region comprising mostly of tropical deciduous forests based on a census of all trees with girth at breast height ≥ 15cm. We compared tree community characteristics like stem density, basal area, diversity, and species composition of four plots using a tree dataset of eight belt transects (5 m × 1000 m) in the study area. A total of 2,227 individuals of 44 families, 98 genera, and 129 species were recorded. Combretaceae, Euphorbiaceae, and Anacardiaceae, showed the greatest importance value index. It was noticed that the most species were contributed by Euphorbiaceae and the tree density varied from 435 ha–1 to 767 ha–1 with an average basal area of 25.82 m2/ha. Shannon–Weiner index (H') ranged from 3.76 to 3.96, the Simpson index ranged from 0.96 to 0.97, evenness index ranged from 0.60 to 0.78, and species richness index ranged from 10.04 to 11.24. At present the biodiversity of these forests are under threat due to the anthropogenic and upcoming mining activities. The present study will help us to understand the patterns of tree species composition and diversity in the Eastern Ghats of India. © 2016 National Science Museum of Korea (NSMK) and Korea National Arboretum (KNA)
Disturbance can alter tree species and functional diversity in tropical forests, which in turn could affect carbon and nutrient cycling via the decomposition of plant litter. However, the influence of tropical tree diversity on forest floor organisms and the processes they mediate are far from clear. We investigated the influence of different litter mixtures on arthropod communities and decomposition processes in a 60-year-old lowland tropical forest in Panama, Central America. We used litter mixtures representing pioneer and old growth tree species in experimental mesocosms to assess the links between litter types, decomposition rates, and litter arthropod communities. Overall, pioneer species litter decomposed most rapidly and old growth species litter decomposed the slowest but there were clear nonadditive effects of litter mixtures containing both functional groups. We observed distinct arthropod communities in different litter mixtures at 6 mo, with greater arthropod diversity and abundance in litter from old growth forest species. By comparing the decay of different litter mixtures in mesocosms and conventional litterbags, we demonstrated that our mesocosms represent an effective approach to link studies of litter decomposition and arthropod communities. Our results indicate that changes in the functional diversity of litter could have wider implications for arthropod communities and ecosystem functioning in tropical forests.     Abstract in Spanish is available with online material.
Mixed plantations might contribute to sustainable land use because of complementary nutrient use. Our objective was to assess the nutrient economy of five native tree species and their response to different neighbor trees in an experimental plantation in Panama. In our study, H. crepitans was the least nutrient efficient tree species. H. crepitans produced less biomass in mixtures than in monocultures while Cedrela odorata - the most nutrient efficient species - produced more biomass independent of stem growth rates because they acquired more nutrients in mixtures than in monocultures.Three-species mixtures had increased mean Ca concentrations in branches and stems and increased N, P, K, Ca, and Mg storage in aboveground biomass compared to monocultures suggesting complementary resource uptake. Our results highlight the need to properly consider species-specific nutrient requirements and species interactions when designing tree mixtures for afforestation.
Large-scale conversion of tropical forests into oil palm monocultures has led to dramatic losses of biodiversity and ecosystem functions. While ecological restoration is urgently needed in many oil palm landscapes, there is a lack of scientific knowledge of sustainable management strategies. We established experimental tree islands of varying sizes (25 m2 to 1,600 m2) and diversity levels (1, 2, 3 and 6 species) in an oil palm plantation in Sumatra, Indonesia. Six native multi-purpose tree species including Archidendron pauciflorum (Jengkol), Durio zibethinus (Durian), Parkia speciosa (Petai), Shorea leprosula (Meranti), Peronema canescens (Sungkai) and Dyera polyphylla (Jelutung) were planted between living and felled oil palms. Here, we analyse the controlling factors of tree growth and survival during the first 4 years at the level of local neighbourhood and tree island. We found a significant effect of diversity levels on tree productivity, that is, basal area was higher in multi-species than in single-species tree islands. This overyielding was attributed to enhanced tree growth, while mortality had no effect. In the local neighbourhood, tree species richness had a positive effect on tree growth during the first year only, indicating that selection and dominance of well-performing species at high level of diversity are most likely driving overyielding. Trees grew better away from living oil palms, suggesting tree-palm competition. Proximity to felled oil palms increased growth especially during the first years, during which the planted trees might have benefited from the additional available space and resources. Despite positive edge effects from the conventional oil palm management in the surrounding, tree island size had an overall positive effect on tree growth. Synthesis and applications. We planted native trees in an oil palm landscape following a tree island pattern. The establishment success differed widely among the six planted species. The selection of particular species is a decisive factor to foster a positive relationship between diversity and tree growth. Planting larger tree islands (e.g. 1,600 square metres) is a better option to enhance tree growth, but tree-palm competition implies a trade-off between tree growth and palm oil production in the tree islands. © 2019 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology © 2019 British Ecological Society
Forest inventory and diversity assessments are essential to understand the tree population structure and diversity status of forests and to provide information for biodiversity recovery planning. But, unfortunately, the vast majority of forests in developing countries lack inventory data, particularly the dry forests and savanna woodlands where timber potential is considered to be low. Consequently the tree population structure and diversity status of these forests are often insufficient for sound management. In this study, the structure and composition of tree species were studied in a dry semi-deciduous forest in Afram plain, Ghana. The site's status in terms of level of degradation/disturbance was also determined. Two-long rectangular plots (each 20m×2000m) were established, 200m apart, in five locations within a 40-hectare (ha) area. Each of the plots was sub-divided into 20quadrats (20m×100m). All tree species ≥10cmdiameter at breast height (dbh) were identified and their diameters over bark measured at 1.3m. The forest condition was scored and habitat types classified. In total 44 tree species with 831 individuals belonging to 25 families were recorded at the study site. This corresponds to an average of 21 treesha-1 of which 17 haddbh ≤30cm. Trees with dbh ≥70cm were less than one tree ha-1 (mean 0.8ha-1). The Simpson (0.06) and Shannon (4.52) indices reveal a poorly stocked and less diverse forest. Five species (Lophira sp., Daniellia oliveri, Pterocarpus erinaceus, Terminalia glaucescens and Ficus sur) accounted for 50% of the total individuals recorded with the Fabaceae being the most species-rich family recording 22% of all the species in the studied area. Tree basal area (1m2ha-1) and volumes (13m3ha-1) were at least 49% lower than national means for dry semi-deciduous forest to which the study sites belong. Based on basal area cover, D. oliveri was the single dominant species. The mean forest condition score was 5.7 and vegetation cover type was largely open forests with less than 2% forest cover. These results suggest the area is highly degraded and the loss of biodiversity may be more significant than previously thought. This would indicate a need for rehabilitation interventions and doubling of conservation management efforts in the area. Three pathways of intervention have been recommended: (a) protecting intact native forest and ecological corridors, and undertaking enrichment riparian plantings to protect waterways, (b) developing agroforestry practices for biodiversity conservation in agroecosystems, and (c) establishing plantations in the severely degraded areas. © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
Land-use change threatens biodiversity in tropical landscapes, but its impact on rainforest regeneration remains poorly known. In fact, the landscape-scale patterns driving the diversity of regenerating plants within forest fragments have been rarely explored, and we are uncertain whether such drivers vary across regions with different land-use change patterns. We assessed the effect of landscape composition (forest cover and matrix openness) and configuration (forest patch density) on species diversity of sapling assemblages (trees ≥30 cm height and <1 cm diameter) in old-growth forest fragments from three Mexican rainforest regions with different disturbance levels (n = 20 landscapes per region). We separately assessed old-growth forest specialists (OGS) and forest generalist (FG) species to test the hypotheses that: (a) OGS species show recruitment limitation (‘loser’ species), and can therefore be negatively impacted by landscape changes, especially by forest loss and matrix openness in more deforested regions; and (b) FG species can regenerate and even proliferate in more disturbed landscapes (‘winner’ species). We recorded ~24,000 plants from 415 species. Landscape composition showed stronger effects than landscape configuration. The diversity of OGS species generally decreased in more deforested landscapes dominated by open matrices, and FG species followed the opposite response, especially in the regions with high-to-intermediate degree of disturbance. Overall, forest fragmentation (patch density) showed weak or no effects on species diversity, especially after controlling for forest cover effects (i.e. fragmentation per se). In contrast to the fragmentation threshold hypothesis, the effect of fragmentation was independent of the regional context. Moreover, FG species were affected by landscape attributes operating at larger scales than OGS species. Synthesis. Our findings support our hypotheses, and suggest that forest loss and matrix openness, not fragmentation per se, can cause the recruitment failure of tree assemblages in highly deforested rainforests. This can be related to source and dispersal limitation in more deforested landscapes with treeless matrices. Therefore, to promote the regenerative potential (resilience) of forest patches in human-modified tropical landscapes, conservation programs should focus on preventing forest loss (even the smallest forest patches) and improving matrix quality with treed elements, particularly in highly deforested tropical regions. © 2021 British Ecological Society
Background: The ability of overstory tree species to regenerate successfully is important for the preservation of tree species diversity and its associated flora and fauna. This study investigated forest regeneration dynamics in the Cat Ba National Park, a biodiversity hotspot in Vietnam. Data was collected from 90 sample plots (500 m2) and 450 sub-sample plots (25 m2) in regional limestone forests. We evaluated the regeneration status of tree species by developing five ratios relating overstory and regeneration richness and diversity. By examining the effect of environmental factors on these ratios, we aimed to identify the main drivers for maintaining tree species diversity or for potential diversity gaps between the regeneration and the overstory layer. Our results can help to increase the understanding of regeneration patterns in tropical forests of Southeast Asia and to develop successful conservation strategies. Results: We found 97 tree species in the regeneration layer compared to 136 species in the overstory layer. The average regeneration density was 3764 ± 1601 per ha. Around 70% of the overstory tree species generated offspring. According to the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s Red List, only 36% of threatened tree species were found in the regeneration layer. A principal component analysis provided evidence that the regeneration of tree species was slightly negatively correlated to terrain factors (percentage of rock surface, slope) and soil properties (cation exchange capacity, pH, humus content, soil moisture, soil depth). Contrary to our expectations, traces of human impact and the prevailing light conditions (total site factor, gap fraction, openness, indirect site factor, direct site factor) had no influence on regeneration density and composition, probably due to the small gradient in light availability. Conclusion: We conclude that the tree species richness in Cat Ba National Park appears to be declining at present. We suggest similar investigations in other biodiversity hotspots to learn whether the observed trend is a global phenomenon. In any case, a conservation strategy for the threatened tree species in the Cat Ba National Park needs to be developed if tree species diversity is to be maintained. © 2022, The Author(s).
Tropical forest conservation and management can significantly benefit from information about the spatial distribution of tree species. Very-high resolution (VHR) spaceborne platforms have been hailed as a promising technology for mapping tree species over broad spatial extents. WorldView-3, the most advanced VHR sensor, provides spectral data in 16 bands covering the visible to near-infrared (VNIR, 400–1040 nm) and shortwave-infrared (SWIR, 1210–2365 nm) wavelength ranges. It also collects images at unprecedented levels of details using a panchromatic band with 0.3-m of spatial resolution. However, the potential of WorldView-3 at its full spectral and spatial resolution for tropical tree species classification remains unknown. In this study, we performed a comprehensive assessment of WorldView-3 images acquired in the dry and wet seasons for tree species discrimination in tropical semi-deciduous forests. Classification experiments were performed using VNIR individually and combined with SWIR channels. To take advantage of the sub-metric resolution of the panchromatic band for classification, we applied an individual tree crown (ITC)-based approach that employed pan-sharpened VNIR bands and gray level co-occurrence matrix texture features. We determined whether the combination of images from the two annual seasons improves the classification accuracy. Finally, we investigated which plant traits influenced species detection. The new SWIR sensing capabilities of WorldView-3 increased the average producer's accuracy up to 7.8%, by enabling the detection of non-photosynthetic vegetation within ITCs. The combination of VNIR bands from the two annual seasons did not improve the classification results when compared to the results obtained using images from each season individually. The use of VNIR bands at their original 1.2-m spatial resolution yielded average producer's accuracies of 43.1 ± 3.1% and 38.8 ± 3% in the wet and dry seasons, respectively. The ITC-based approach improved the accuracy to 70 ± 8% in the wet and 68.4 ± 7.4% in the dry season. Texture analysis of the panchromatic band enabled the detection of species-specific differences in crown structure, which improved species detection. The use of texture analysis, pan-sharpening, and ITC delineation is a potential approach to perform tree species classification in tropical forests with WorldView-3 satellite images. © 2019 International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Inc. (ISPRS)
Background: Within the highly bio-diverse 'Northern Vietnam Lowland Rain Forests Ecoregion' only small, and mostly highly modified forestlands persist within vast exotic-species plantations. The aim of this study was to elucidate vegetation patterns of a secondary hillside rainforest remnant (elevation 120-330 m, 76 ha) as an outcome of natural processes, and anthropogenic processes linked to changing forest values.     Methods: In the rainforest remnant tree species and various bio-physical parameters (relating to soils and terrain) were surveyed on forty 20 m x 20 m sized plots. The forest's vegetation patterns and tree diversity were analysed using dendrograms, canonical correspondence analysis, and other statistical tools.     Results: Forest tree species richness was high (172 in the survey, 94 per hectare), including many endemic species (> 16%; some recently described). Vegetation patterns and diversity were largely explained by topography, with colline/sub-montane species present mainly along hillside ridges, and lowland/humid-tropical species predominant on lower slopes. Scarcity of high-value timber species reflected past logging, whereas abundance of light-demanding species, and species valued for fruits, provided evidence of human-aided forest restoration and 'enrichment' in terms of useful trees. Exhaustion of sought-after forest products, and decreasing appreciation of non-wood products concurred with further encroachment of exotic plantations in between 2010 and 2015. Regeneration of rare tree species was reduced probably due to forest isolation.     Conclusions: Despite long-term anthropogenic influences, remnant forests in the lowlands of Vietnam can harbor high plant biodiversity, including many endangered species. Various successive future changes (vanishing species, generalist dominance, and associated forest structural-qualitative changes) are, however, expected to occur in small forest fragments. Lowland forest biodiversity can only be maintained if forest fragments maintain a certain size and/or are connected via corridors to larger forest networks. Preservation of the forests may be fostered using new economic incentive schemes.
The large-scale exploitation and conversion of tropical forests causes growing concern about the continued existence of the rich biodiversity of these forests. In the framework of the interdisciplinary STORMA project in Lore Lindu National Park area in Central Sulawesi, we studied tree diversity in six different land use types in the margins of submontane rain forest: undisturbed forest, forest with rattan extraction, selectively logged forest, cacao forest gardens, cacao plantations with mixed canopy of planted trees, and cacao plantations with a monospecific canopy. By analyzing such a finely subdivided use gradient it was attempted to answer the question how human usage and biodiversity conservation in the study area may be reconciled. Tree species (dbh > 10 cm) were sampled in 24 plots of 0.25 ha in all six land use types (4 replicates each). In total, 251 tree species (143 genera, 59 families) were recorded. Number of tree species per 0.25 ha was 51-63 in primary forest and gradually decreased towards the studied cacao systems. However, when native and cultivated tree species were considered separately, significant differences were detected among plantation types in terms of tree diversity. Tree endemism in forest plots totalled ca. 15% and was in good accordance with endemism in woody plants of Sulawesi. The number of endemic species was strongly reduced in cacao systems, although percentage endemism did not decline significantly in cacao forest gardens. Roughly one third of tree species in the forest plots were of economic importance as commercial timber trees; timber diversity was little affected by moderate human use of the forest but was significantly reduced in cacao forest gardens and dropped to near zero in other plantation types. The mean basal area of 57 m(2) (36-80 m(2)) per ha in natural forest was lower than the previously recorded value from the study area but is still almost double as high as the mean value typical for tropical lowland forests in Southeast Asia.     The results of this study support the notion that tree diversity in the sub-montane forests of Central Sulawesi is unusually high and rich in large-sized timber trees, although tree size varies locally. Moderate human use of the forest ecosystems does not significantly affect tree diversity. We conclude that conservation of tropical tree diversity is compatible with human exploitation of tropical forest as long as a canopy of native trees is maintained. Future conservation policies in rain forest margin areas should therefore focus on developing measures aimed at sustainable use of the natural resources. Promotion of such activities may help to stabilize tropical rain forest margins in Central Sulawesi.
This research surveyed human-impacted littoral forests in southeastern Madagascar to determine (i) how forest structural features, indicative of human impact, are related to total, utilitarian, and endemic tree diversity; (ii) the distribution, abundance, and demographics of tree species groups (i.e., total, useful, endemic) across the landscape; and (iii) the amount of basal area available per human use category. We also use these data to consider issues of sustainable use and how human impact may influence littoral forest tree community composition across the landscape. Within 22 transects of 400 m 2 each, we recorded a total of 135 tree species and 2155 individuals. Seventy-nine species (58%) were utilitarian and 56 (42%) were nonutilitarian species. Of the 2155 individuals, 1827 (84%) trees were utilitarian species. We recorded 23 endemic species (17% of the total species) and 17 (74%) of these were utilitarian species. Basal area was significantly correlated with Shannon Weiner Index values for total (r∈=∈0.64, P < 0.01), utilitarian (r∈=∈0.58, P < 0.01), and endemic tree diversity (r∈=∈0.85, P < 0.01). Basal area was significantly correlated with the Simpson's index values for the endemic species (r∈=∈0.74, P < 0.01). These correlations suggest that endemic tree species, of high global conservation value, may be the species group most influenced by changes in forest structure. Utilitarian species constituted 84% of the total basal area. The use category contributing the highest amount of basal area to the landscape was firewood. The results presented herein demonstrate that the landscape of southeastern Madagascar, commonly perceived as degraded, retains high value for both global conservation purposes and for local livelihoods. Thus, valuable opportunities may exist for developing conservation incentives that leverage both global and local conservation needs. © 2005 Springer Science+Business Media, Inc.
Nations worldwide have committed to restoring millions of hectares of forest as a strategy to mitigate climate change with many other co-benefits. Paradoxically, the suitability of climatic conditions for the trees being planted at the restoration sites is changing, which may reduce the long-term viability of these projects. We assessed the potential future viability of trees planted as part of Ecuador's National Reforestation Plan from 2014 to 2017, committed under the global Bonn Challenge. We selected the 10 most frequently planted tree species (all native) in 1237 restoration sites in northwest Ecuador. We modeled the species' climatic suitability at the restoration sites under Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) 4.5 and 8.5 using 14 individual general circulation models for the 2030s, 2050s, and 2070s. We combined the 14 suitability models to create continuous climatic suitability models for each species. We then assessed the species suitability against three modeling thresholds simultaneously. Seven of the species showed high and medium climatic viability, all of these species were native to the region of planting. Three species showed low climatic viability; two of these are native to the country but not to the region being restored. Our results also show how using continuous rather than discrete modeling can affect viability assessments. Our study suggests the importance of including climate niche modeling in restoration projects; however, choosing to plant species that are within their native distribution range may be a good strategy in tropical regions if climate niche projections are not available.
The understanding of silviculture of native species in a determined region is fundamental for the selection of more appropriate species for using in ecological restoration. Trema micrantha (Cannabaceae), a pioneer species which is widely distributed, shading and attractive to birds, is intensively planted in restoration projects of the southeastern Brazilian Atlantic Forest. In order to get information regarding to the performance of this species in subtropical forests (subject to the yearly frosts), we analyzed its early growth in a planting carried out with 70 native tree species in 3 x 2 m spacing in four plots of 40 x 54 m. Semiannually, we collected data of 72 individuals of Trema micrantha. These data were statistically analyzed using the Statistical Software Assistat-beta submitted to Tukey test (p<0.05) and graphically described by R. Trema micrantha showed excellent performance at 3.5 years of age in root collar diameter (12.01 ± 5.24 cm), total height (5.95 ± 1.44 m), crown projection area (22.56 ± 11.26 m²) and crown volume (61.34 ± 37.46 m³), enduring severe frosts with a yearly survival rate of 78%. Based on the results obtained, and considering that this species has broad natural distribution, we recommend its extensive use also in forestry restoration projects in the subtropical regions of Brazil. © 2018, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria. All rights reserved.
Active restoration may be necessary to the recovery of degraded tropical dry forests, which are highly threatened but relatively understudied compared to other forest ecosystems. A greater understanding of how different treatments affect various performance metrics and general outcomes is needed. A literature review of active restoration from 2000 to 2019 identified 30 tropical dry forest restoration-related peer-reviewed articles. Grazing (50% of studies), fire (37%), and cultivation (27%) were the most frequent causes of dry forest ecosystem degradation, and invasive non-native species were reported present in the majority of studies. Common site management needs thus included control of competitive vegetation, as well as supplemental irrigation. Outplanted species were most often selected for their functional traits (57%) or local abundance (32%), while only three studies focused on reintroducing or enhancing populations of rare, endangered, or sensitive species. Survival was the most common metric used to measure outplanted seedling performance (88%) and ranged from 13% to 80% (mean 45%). Seedlings planted in mixed assemblages had significantly higher survival rates (median 63%) than those in single species plots (29%), and a moderately positive relationship was observed between survival and the number of species planted. Survival was significantly higher for treatments in which non-native vegetation was continuously controlled throughout the study (median 61%), as well as treatments that received supplemental water for a portion of (63%) or the entire (51%) monitoring period. Survival rates tended to be higher in protected sites (54%) than in sites without any protection status (30%), but this difference was not statistically significant. The cause of seedling mortality, reported in 63% of studies, was most often attributed to desiccation (including soil conditions, timing or lack of precipitation, competition for available water). In general, variation in the format and level of detail reported in the results limited the cross-study analysis that could be performed. Metrics other than survival were often underreported, particularly reproductive measures. The majority of papers also did not report project costs (80% of studies) or community engagement (73%). Results suggest that more diverse metrics and outcomes should be regularly reported in active restoration literature in order to improve best practices and broaden the scope of future research. Remotely-sensed metrics, for example, have the potential to complement field-based evaluations and increase the frequency of future monitoring efforts. © 2020 Elsevier B.V.
Habitat loss and degradation are key drivers of the current biodiversity crisis. Most research focuses on the question of which traits allow species to persist in degraded habitats. We asked whether a species' trophic position or niche width influences the resilience of species in degraded habitats and to what extent habitat degradation affects trophic interactions between species. We used nitrogen isotope ratios (15N:14N, expressed as delta 15N value) to quantify and compare trophic positions and niche widths of understory birds inhabiting old-growth and young secondary forests in the Pacific lowlands of Costa Rica. We found that a species' trophic position rather than its trophic niche width determined its persistence in secondary forests. Species feeding at lower trophic levels in old-growth forests were less likely to persist in secondary forests than those occupying a higher trophic position in old-growth forests. This pattern is likely induced by the occurrence of relatively large-bodied habitat specialists with a flexible and high-trophic level diet in secondary forests. These habitat specialists likely caused generalist bird species to lower their trophic position relative to conspecifics in old-growth forests. Regarding trophic niche widths, species in secondary forests tend to have larger niche widths than old-growth forest species. However, as old-growth forest specialists and generalists did not differ in their niche widths, no systematic effect of trophic niche width on species persistence after forest disturbance was found. This is the first study that shows a systematic effect of trophic position on the persistence of a wide range of bird species in a disturbed forest ecosystem. It therefore provides important insights into species' responses to habitat degradation and the conservation value of secondary forests. To improve habitat quality for old-growth forest birds and facilitate avian seed dispersal, the creation of large contiguous forest patches should be prioritised when implementing reforestation measures.     We studied whether an understory bird species' trophic position or niche width determines its persistence after forest disturbance in the Pacific lowlands of Costa Rica. Using stable isotope methodology, we found a significant effect of trophic position: Species feeding at low trophic levels in old-growth forests were less likely to persist in secondary forests. The dataset provides insights into species' responses to habitat degradation and the conservation value of the secondary forests in the study area, which are useful for planning of future conservation measures in the region.image
This review presents how the boreal and the tropical forests affect the atmosphere, its chemical composition, its function, and further how that affects the climate and, in return, the ecosystems through feedback processes. Observations from key tower sites standing out due to their long-term comprehensive observations: The Amazon Tall Tower Observatory in Central Amazonia, the Zotino Tall Tower Observatory in Siberia, and the Station to Measure Ecosystem-Atmosphere Relations at Hyytiäla in Finland. The review is complemented by short-term observations from networks and large experiments. The review discusses atmospheric chemistry observations, aerosol formation and processing, physiochemical aerosol, and cloud condensation nuclei properties and finds surprising similarities and important differences in the two ecosystems. The aerosol concentrations and chemistry are similar, particularly concerning the main chemical components, both dominated by an organic fraction, while the boreal ecosystem has generally higher concentrations of inorganics, due to higher influence of long-range transported air pollution. The emissions of biogenic volatile organic compounds are dominated by isoprene and monoterpene in the tropical and boreal regions, respectively, being the main precursors of the organic aerosol fraction. Observations and modeling studies show that climate change and deforestation affect the ecosystems such that the carbon and hydrological cycles in Amazonia are changing to carbon neutrality and affect precipitation downwind. In Africa, the tropical forests are so far maintaining their carbon sink. It is urgent to better understand the interaction between these major ecosystems, the atmosphere, and climate, which calls for more observation sites, providing long-term data on water, carbon, and other biogeochemical cycles. This is essential in finding a sustainable balance between forest preservation and reforestation versus a potential increase in food production and biofuels, which are critical in maintaining ecosystem services and global climate stability. Reducing global warming and deforestation is vital for tropical forests. © 2022 The Author(s).
Tropical montane cloud forests (TMCF) under natural disturbances have shown high endemism in early successional vegetation. However, little is known about anthropogenic disturbances and plant endemism in TMCF under ancient agricultural management. In this sense, I assessed the number of species, abundance, and frequency of endemic vascular plants in temporary plots of cultivated and young fallow areas from two maize-based systems: milpa shifting cultivation (MS) and semi-permanent cropping (SP) in Oaxaca, México. Overall, both agricultural stages and systems harbored endemic species, seven in total, but most of such species were found in the fallow stage than in the cropping stage, and in the MS system than in the SP system. A single Asteraceae herbaceous endemic species (Melampodium mimulifolium) was commonly recorded in cultivated fields, but almost exclusive to the SP cropping system. Seven species were recorded in fallows, where the narrow-range endemic tree species Clethra integerrima (Clethraceae) was the most abundant and frequent, but almost exclusive to the MS cropping system. In more permanent and intensified agricultural systems within biodiversity hotspots, only ruderal endemic herbaceous species can persist. In contrast, in low intensity managed agricultural systems, like ancient agroforestry, not only can endemic tree species prosper, but also restricted endemic trees can be found. Indigenous agricultural systems in biodiversity hotspots should not be seen as a threat, but rather as complementary areas for endemism conservation. © 2020, Springer Nature B.V.
Inadequate funding from developed countries has hampered international efforts to conserve biodiversity in tropical forests. We present two complementary research approaches that reveal a significant increase in public demand for conservation within tropical developing countries as those countries reach upper-middle-income (UMI) status. We highlight UMI tropical countries because they contain nearly four-fifths of tropical primary forests, which are rich in biodiversity and stored carbon. The first approach is a set of statistical analyses of various cross-country conservation indicators, which suggests that protective government policies have lagged behind the increase in public demand in these countries. The second approach is a case study from Malaysia, which reveals in a more integrated fashion the linkages from rising household income to increased household willingness to pay for conservation, nongovernmental organization activity, and delayed government action. Our findings suggest that domestic funding in UMI tropical countries can play a larger role in (i) closing the funding gap for tropical forest conservation, and (ii) paying for supplementary conservation actions linked to international payments for reduced greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in tropical countries.
Tropical forests and peatlands provide important ecological, climate and socio-economic benefits from the local to the global scale. However, these ecosystems and their associated benefits are threatened by anthropogenic activities, including agricultural conversion, timber harvesting, peatland drainage and associated fire. Here, we identify key challenges, and provide potential solutions and future directions to meet forest and peatland conservation and restoration goals in Indonesia, with a particular focus on Kalimantan.     Through a round-table, dual-language workshop discussion and literature evaluation, we recognized 59 political, economic, legal, social, logistical and research challenges, for which five key underlying factors were identified. These challenges relate to the 3Rs adopted by the Indonesian Peatland Restoration Agency (Rewetting, Revegetation and Revitalization), plus a fourth R that we suggest is essential to incorporate into (peatland) conservation planning: Reducing Fires.     Our analysis suggests that (a) all challenges have potential for impact on activities under all 4Rs, and many are inter-dependent and mutually reinforcing, implying that narrowly focused solutions are likely to carry a higher risk of failure; (b) addressing challenges relating to Rewetting and Reducing Fire is critical for achieving goals in all 4Rs, as is considering the local socio-political situation and acquiring local government and community support; and (c) the suite of challenges faced, and thus conservation interventions required to address these, will be unique to each project, depending on its goals and prevailing local environmental, social and political conditions.     With this in mind, we propose an eight-step adaptive management framework, which could support projects in both Indonesia and other tropical areas to identify and overcome their specific conservation and restoration challenges.
Tropical forests have undergone extensive transformation because of increasing tourism development, in addition to historic clearing for agricultural and cattle grazing activities. Altogether, these activities have had an important effect on bird diversity, reducing the habitat available to many species. In this study, the role of tropical forest remnants located between different land use types was evaluated for species diversity, composition, and distribution of the bird community at Akumal region in Quintana Roo, Mexico. Point counts were used to quantify the avifauna by habitat, and Shannon's and Simpson's diversity index were used to determine bird diversity. Additionally, bird species were classified according to seasonality and trophic guild by type of habitat. A total of 160 species and 50 families was recorded, of which 100 species were permanent residents, 47 winter visitors and 11 transients. Mature tropical forest and tropical forest remnants had higher species richness than those of modified environments. This study supports the importance of tropical forest remnants as shelters for bird species in landscapes with tourism developments, and the relevance of these remnants to maintaining high bird diversity.
In an analysis of current approaches to assessing the effects of deforestation on biodiversity, this article re-examine's the concept of biodiversity in the light of recent advances in ecological theory and outlines a rational framework for applying the concept of risk analysis to the assessment and reduction of the negative impacts of tropical deforestation on biodiversity. A broader perspective is suggested which stresses ecosystem function as well as biodiversity, the need to integrate ecological, economic and social values when assessing the impacts of deforestation and the prospects for conservation and sustainable use. -Author
Tropical forest restoration strategies have the potential to accelerate the recovery of the nutrient cycles in degraded lands. Litter production and its decomposition represent the main transfer of organic material and nutrients into the soil substrate. We evaluated litter production, accumulation on the forest floor, and its decomposition under three restoration strategies: plantation (entire area planted with trees), island (trees planted in patches of three different sizes) and control (natural regeneration) plots. We also compared restoration strategies to young secondary forest (7-9yr). Restoration treatments were established in 50x50m plots in June 2004 at six sites in Southern Costa Rica. Planted tree species included two native timber species (Terminalia amazonia and Vochysia guatemalensis) interplanted with two N fixers (Erythrina poeppigiana and Inga edulis). Litter was collected every 15 days between September 2008 and August 2009 in 12 0.25m 2 litter traps distributed within each plot; litter that accumulated on the soil surface was collected at four locations (0.25m 2 quadrats) within each plot in February and May 2009. Total litter production in plantation (6.3Mg/ha) and secondary forest (7.3Mg/ha) did not differ, but were greater than in islands (3.5Mg/ha) and control (1.4Mg/ha). Plantation had greatest accumulation of litter on the soil surface (10.6Mg/ha) as compared to the other treatments (SF=7.2; I=6.7; C=4.9). Secondary forest was the only treatment with a greater annual production of litter than litter accumulation on the soil surface. Carbon storage in litter was similar between plantation and secondary forest, and significantly greater than the other treatments. No differences were found for carbon concentration and storage in the soil among treatments. There was also high variability in the production and accumulation of litter and carbon among sites. Active restoration treatments accelerated the production of litter and carbon storage in comparison to areas under natural recovery. However, the nutrient cycle has not necessarily been restored under these conditions, as high litter accumulation on the soil surface indicates a low decomposition rate, which slows nutrient return to the soil.
Current theory on non-equilibrium communities, thresholds of irreversibility, and ecological resilience suggests the goal of ecological restoration of degraded communities is not to achieve one target, but to reestablish the temporal and spatial diversity inherent in natural ecosystems. Few restoration models, however, address ecological and management issues across the vegetation mosaic of a landscape. Because of a lack of scientific knowledge and funds, restoration practitioners focus instead on site-specific prescriptions and reactive rather than proactive approaches to restoration; this approach often dooms restoration projects to failure. We applied a state-transition model as a decision-making tool to identify and achieve short- and long-term restoration goals for a tropical, moist, evergreen forest on the island of Santa Cruz, Galapagos. The model guided the process of identifying current and desirable forest states, as well as the natural and human disturbances and management actions that caused transitions between them. This process facilitated assessment of opportunities for ecosystem restoration, expansion of the definition of restoration success for the system, and realization that, although site- or species-specific prescriptions may be available, they cannot succeed until broader landscape restoration issues are identified and addressed. The model provides a decision-making framework to allocate resources effectively to maximize these opportunities across the landscape, and to achieve long-term restoration success. Other restoration models have been limited by lack of scientific knowledge of the system. State-transition models for restoration incorporate current knowledge and funds, are adaptive, and can provide direction for restoration research and conservation management in other degraded systems. Copyright © 2005 by the author(s).
Tropical forest recovery in pastures is slowed by a number of biotic and abiotic factors, including a lack of adequate seed dispersal and harsh microclimatic extremes. Accordingly, methods to accelerate forest recovery must address multiple impediments. Here, we evaluated the ability of "tree islands" to serve as "recruitment foci" in a two-year study at three sites in northern Honduras. Islands of three sizes (64, 16, and 4 m2) and at two distances to secondary forest (20 and 50 m) were created by planting 2 m tall vegetative stakes of two native species: Gliricidia sepium (Fabaceae) and Bursera simaruba (Burseraceae), each in monoculture. Open-pasture "islands" of equal sizes served as controls. Tree islands reduced temperature and light (PAR) extremes as compared to open pasture, creating a microenvironment more favorable to seedling establishment. Seed-dispersing birds (quantified at one site only) showed an overwhelming preference for islands; 160 visits were recorded to islands compared with one visit to open pasture. Additionally, frugivores visited large islands more often, and for longer time periods, than small islands, thereby increasing the likelihood of a dispersal event there. In total, 144 140 seeds belonging to 186 species were collected in islands; more than 80% were grasses. Tree islands increased zoochorous tree seed rain; seed density and species richness were greater in tree islands than in open pasture, and large islands had greater seed density than smaller islands (Gliricidia only), suggesting that they are more effective for restoration. Distance to forest did not affect seed rain. A total of 543 seedlings and 41 species established in islands; >85% were zoochorous. Seedling density did not differ among treatments (mean 0.2 seedlings/m2 for islands vs. 0.1 seedlings/m2 for pasture), although an increasing trend in tree islands over the course of two years suggests that seedling recruitment is accelerated there. Lastly, similar seedling densities were censused in the 1 m perimeter surrounding islands, suggesting that islands can expand outward into pasture. Planting vegetative stakes to create tree islands in pastures accelerates forest recovery by overcoming a number of impediments, and presents a simple, broadly applicable alternative for facilitating forest regeneration in abandoned pastures. © 2006 by the Ecological Society of America.
Aboveground carbon storage in forests can be influenced by both structural and compositional diversity of plant communities. However, the relative and interactive effects of structural and compositional diversity on multilevel aboveground carbon storage across forest strata and how these relationships vary with altitude and soil nutrients remain unclear. Using data obtained from 34 tropical forest plots (total area 8.5 ha) in Hainan Island, China, we analyzed the relationships between aboveground carbon at four levels (litter, understory, overstory, and whole-community) with structural diversity (diameter and height diversity) and compositional diversity (species diversity and evenness) in the understory and overstory. The direct and indirect effects of altitude, soil nutrients (total N and total P and N/P ratio), structural diversity, and compositional diversity on aboveground carbon were explored via Bayesian structural equation modeling. The results showed that structural diversity, rather than compositional diversity, in overstory stratum determined aboveground carbon. Specifically, overstory structural diversity was negatively associated with understory carbon, while positively associated with overstory and whole-community carbon. Furthermore, diversity‑carbon relationships were slightly affected by soil nutrients but strongly by altitude. Specifically, the relationship between overstory and whole-community carbon content with overstory tree height diversity weakened with altitude, while their relationship with overstory diameter diversity strengthened. Altitude directly and indirectly affected overstory tree height and diameter diversity through overstory species diversity, thereby reducing understory and increasing overstory and whole-community carbon. Altitude directly promoted litter carbon. We provide evidence that the effects of plant diversity on aboveground carbon storage are forest strata- and altitude-dependent. As overstory structural diversity plays a crucial role in storing aboveground carbon at all altitudes, we proposed that focusing on overstory structural diversity would be promising for predicting trends in how plant diversity affects aboveground carbon in response to climate change. © 2022 Elsevier B.V.
This book is an excellent resource for scientists, political decision makers, and students interested in the impact of peatlands on climate change and ecosystem function, containing a plethora of recent research results such as monitoring-sensing-modeling for carbon-water flux/storage, biodiversity and peatland management in tropical regions. It is estimated that more than 23 million hectares (62 %) of the total global tropical peatland area are located in Southeast Asia, in lowland or coastal areas of East Sumatra, Kalimantan, West Papua, Papua New Guinea, Brunei, Peninsular Malaysia, Sabah, Sarawak and Southeast Thailand. Tropical peatland has a vital carbon-water storage function and is host to a huge diversity of plant and animal species. Peatland ecosystems are extremely vulnerable to climate change and the impacts of human activities such as logging, drainage and conversion to agricultural land. In Southeast Asia, severe episodic droughts associated with the El Niño-Southern Oscillation, in combination with over-drainage, forest degradation, and land-use changes, have caused widespread peatland fires and microbial peat oxidation. Indonesia’s 20 Mha peatland area is estimated to include about 45-55 GtC of carbon stocks. As a result of land use and development, Indonesia is the third largest emitter of greenhouse gases (2-3 Gtons carbon dioxide equivalent per year), 80 % of which is due to deforestation and peatland loss. Thus, tropical peatlands are key ecosystems in terms of the carbon-water cycle and climate change. © Springer Japan 2016.
Tropical forests account for at least 50% of documented diversity, but anthropogenic activities are converting forests to agriculture and urban areas at an alarming rate, with potentially strong effects on insect abundance and diversity. However, the questions remain whether insect populations are uniformly affected by land conversion and if insect conservation can occur in agricultural margins and urban gardens. We compare butterfly populations in tropical secondary forests to those found in sugarcane and urban areas in coastal Guyana and evaluate the potential for particular butterfly communities to inhabit human-modified landscapes. Butterflies were sampled for 1 yr using fruit-baited traps in three separated geographical locations on the coast. We used nonmetric multidimensional scaling to assess differences in species assemblages and a generalized linear mixed model to evaluate abundance, species richness, evenness, and diversity. The secondary forests in all three locations supported higher butterfly abundance and diversity than other human-modified areas, although the magnitude of this effect varied by season and location. However, each land use supported its own type of butterfly community, as species composition was different across the three land uses. Sugarcane field margins and urban gardens supported populations of butterflies rarely found in our tropical secondary forest sites. Land management practices that encourage forest conservation along with butterfly-friendly activities in human settlements and agricultural areas could improve butterfly conservation. To this end, butterfly conservation in Guyana and other tropical landscapes would benefit from a shift from inadvertently to actively making the landscape attractive for butterflies. © 2017 The Authors.
The study of plant-insect interactions constitutes a large and growing branch of ecology that includes the two most diverse groups of higher organisms. This field of research addresses issues ranging from species-specific evolutionary arms races to the immense diversity of tropical plant communities to the effects of insect herbivores on reforestation. The time in plant ontogeny when these relationships are most influential is likely the vulnerable seedling stage because stored resources are scarce, effectively increasing negative effects of herbivory on plant growth and survival. This chapter examines the effects of seedling herbivory in the tropics, demonstrating the importance of herbivores to individual plant species as well as plant community composition; it closes by discussing the application of this knowledge to tropical forest restoration. Many, but not all, studies of seedling herbivory conclude that herbivore damage limits plant performance. In addition, abundant examples of plant adaptations to tolerate or avoid herbivory exist. For example, even young plants have strong chemical antiherbivore defenses, supporting the hypothesis that herbivory is costly to seedlings. The potential for herbivores to have positive effects on forest diversity is described in the Janzen-Connell hypothesis. According to this model, herbivores lead to enhanced diversity by negatively affecting seedling survival, particularly when conspecific seedlings are growing at high densities (negative density dependence) or near their parent plant (negative distance dependence). Few studies have explicitly tested the assumption that density dependent effects are mediated by herbivores, and even fewer have demonstrated resultant increases in diversity. However, new empirical support is emerging for the importance of herbivores in negative density and negative distance dependence. Herbivores also play a significant role in both actively managed and natural forest regeneration. For example, the growth of seedlings planted in reforestation is negatively affected by herbivory damage, and herbivores impact seedling survival and diversity in forests recovering from disturbances such as fire. Restoration projects could therefore benefit from explicitly considering ecological measures to manipulate herbivory. © 2013 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. All rights reserved.
Plant species effects on soil nutrient availability are relatively well documented, but the effects of species differences in litter chemistry on soil carbon cycling are less well understood, especially in the species-rich tropics. In many wet tropical forest ecosystems, leaching of dissolved organic matter (DOM) from the litter layer accounts for a significant proportion of litter mass loss during decomposition. Here we investigated how tree species differences in soluble dissolved organic C (DOC) and nutrients affected soil CO2 fluxes in laboratory incubations. We leached DOM from freshly fallen litter of six canopy tree species collected from a tropical rain forest in Costa Rica and measured C-mineralization. We found significant differences in litter solubility and nutrient availability. Following DOM additions to soil, rates of heterotrophic respiration varied by as much as an order of magnitude between species, and overall differences in total soil CO2 efflux varied by more than four-fold. Variation in the carbon: phosphorus ratio accounted for 51% of the variation in total CO2 flux between species. These results suggest that tropical tree species composition may influence soil C storage and mineralization via inter-specific variation in plant litter chemistry.
The global tree cover has kept reducing in the last two decades, mainly in tropical forests, despite the global efforts to conserve biodiversity and the ecosystem services that provides. Considering South America is the region that had the highest rate of net forest loss (2000–2020), it is crucial to understand the deforestation dynamics of each country and their regions for the evaluation of effective national conservation actions. Here, we carried out a spatiotemporal analysis of the deforestation rates from 2000 to 2020 on a national and regional scale, including the forest loss inside protected areas, in Peru. It was found that Peru lost 3.4 million ha of forest between 2000 and 2020, mainly in the Not Flooded Rainforest region. National deforestation rates accelerated, while within protected areas rates showed a very small increase. Regional deforestation rates followed the national pattern with one exception—the Coast region. Our results evidence the success of the national conservation strategy based on protected areas to avoid deforestation in all regions, except in the Andean. Moreover, the increment in deforestation rates is aligned with the growth in road infrastructure; increments in anthropic activities; and the more frequent and intense natural extreme events that vary according to the region. Therefore, it is urgent to differentiate the drivers of deforestation that operate at the national versus the regional scale, consider the inclusion of all forest types in the monitoring system, and the strengthening of policies related to land use change at all scales. © The Author(s) 2024.
Forest management involving the selective logging of exotic species in order to reestablish native flora alters microclimatic conditions and selects for species with heightened capacity to adapt to the new conditions. This study investigated whether, after forest management involving the removal of eucalyptus, ultrastructural adjustments in the chloroplast fostered the photoacclimation of the most abundant regenerating native species in a Brazilian Atlantic forest biological reserve. The influence of seasonality on photosynthetic activity and water use efficiency after the forest management was also assessed. To achieve this, in the rainy season mature leaves of native tree saplings (Xylopia sericea, Siparuna guianensis, and Byrsonima sericea) were subjected to ultrastructural analyses and the C isotopic composition (δ                             13                             C) was determined; and in the dry and rainy season gas exchange and chlorophyll a fluorescence were measured. Species samples were obtained in: secondary forest, a eucalyptus understory with 15 years of regeneration before and 12 months after the management, and from herbarium samples from eucalyptus understories collected at the beginning of forest regeneration (9–16 years ago, for δ                             13                             C analyses only). Ultrastructural alterations such as the reorganization of thylakoids, starch grain changes, and the presence of plastoglobules and oils were verified after the management in all the species. F                             v                             /F                             m                              values varied between 0.80 and 0.90 regardless of the management or season of the year. There was a reduction of C assimilation after the management, especially in the dry season.                              13                             C enrichment was observed for B. sericea, S. guianensis, and X. sericea in herbarium samples (−31.4‰, −32.0‰, and −31.4‰, respectively) and after the forest management (−31.2‰, −32.5‰, −31.4‰), while samples depleted in                              13                             C were registered before the management (−33.4‰, −33.3‰, −33.2‰) and in the secondary forest (−34.0‰, −33.9‰, and −33.6‰). The data suggest that ultrastructural alterations may have aided in maintaining electron flow after the increase in irradiance due to the forest management, avoiding photochemical stress, as evidenced by F                             v                             /F                             m                              values. The forest management increased the efficiency of water use and fostered abiotic conditions similar to those present at the beginning of the understory regeneration. These previous conditions favored the current high level of abundance of these three species, highlighting the importance of monitoring to ensure that the management practices do not promote the future dominance of few species at the expense this biome's high biodiversity.                          © 2018 Elsevier B.V.
Owing to difficulties associated with measuring root biomass accurately in space and time, below-ground root biomass is often calculated indirectly from above-ground biomass measurements via general allometric equations. Of concern is that general equations may not provide accurate site-specific calculations for accurate carbon stock assessments. This review comparing more than 100 root-related studies conducted in SE Asia shows highly variable and uncertain below-ground woody carbon (BGC) biomass estimates for many vegetation types associated with on-going land-use changes throughout the region. Most BGC data exist for Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand; only a few studies have been conducted for Brunei, Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Singapore, Timor Leste and Vietnam. While substantial data exist for a variety of forests and timber-plantations, little work has focused on key transition land-covers including rubber, oil palm, swidden fallows, agroforests, grasslands, and croplands. Mangroves (12-219 Mg C ha(-1)), peat forests (11-71 Mg C ha(-1)) and other forest types (11-74 Mg C ha(-1)) have the highest BGC values. The limited data for rubber plantations (5-32 Mg C ha(-1)), oil palm plantations (4-22 Mg C ha(-1)), swidden fallows (3-16 Mg C ha(-1)), and non-swidden agroforestry (316 Mg C ha(-1)) indicate modest differences in the amount of BGC for several land covers that are at the heart of ongoing debates regarding the human and environmental impacts of agricultural intensification. The paucity of data currently in existence for the region highlights the need for additional field investigations following accepted protocols of root biomass to facilitate efforts to improve carbon stock estimates. Government agencies, private enterprises, and development agencies could help lead the way in developing a better forest carbon database by teaming with researchers to assess total ecosystem carbon stocks prior to vegetation being removed for construction, mining, or stand rotations. (C) 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Unconditional conservation payments are increasingly used by non-governmental conservation organizations to further their environmental objectives. One key objective in many conservation projects that use such unconditional payments schemes is the protection of tropical forest ecosystems in buffer zone areas around protected parks where the scope of instating mandatory restrictions is more limited. We use a randomized controlled trial to evaluate the impact of unconditional livelihood payments to local communities on land use outside a protected area-the Gola Rainforest National Park-which is a biodiversity hotspot on the border of Sierra Leone and Liberia. High resolution RapidEye satellite imagery from before and after the intervention was used to determine land use changes in treated and control villages. We find support for the hypothesis that unconditional payments, in this setting, increase land clearance in the short run. The study constitutes one of the first attempts to use evidence from a randomized control trial to evaluate the efficacy of conservation payments and provides insights for further research. © 2019 The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Agricultural and Applied Economics Association. All rights reserved.
Establishing connectivity in tropical lowland forests is a major conservation challenge, particularly in areas dominated by agriculture. Replanting schemes have been widely utilized as a method for reconnecting once contiguous forest patches. However, these approaches require funds for both initial planting and subsequent site maintenance. Furthermore, identifying sites for habitat rehabilitation schemes is difficult and may require purchasing of land, sometimes at great expense. Underproductive, often unprofitable, areas of agriculture have the potential to aid in re-establishing forest connectivity via natural forest regeneration. We identified an area of natural forest regrowth, previously cleared for agriculture and abandoned due to high levels of flooding. We assessed the structural regrowth of this forest after a 17-year period, and examined its efficacy as corridor habitat for Bornean elephants. Regrowth areas had re-established tree canopy areas similar to that of adjacent forest, as well as a randomly selected site of uncleared forest. Flooding in the area hampered the regrowth of some sections of the site; however, similar to 79% of the site exhibited canopy coverage. Aboveground carbon levels have returned to 50% those of uncleared forests, with flooding resulting in areas of reduced vegetation regeneration. Elephants have shown increasing usage of the regenerated forest, suggesting that the area has regenerated its suitability as elephant corridor habitat. We have shown that what would traditionally be thought of as low-quality, flood-prone areas for habitat restoration can be a useful, cost-effective tool for wildlife corridor management. We propose that natural regeneration of reclaimable, underproductive agriculture has the potential to play a key role in lowland tropical forest connectivity, reconnecting now isolated populations of endangered Bornean elephants. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Malayan sun bear (Helarctos malayanus) is a forest-dependent species globally threatened by loss of suitable habitat and hunting. Understanding how sun bears utilise habitat in more degraded landscapes is increasingly important for the effective conservation of the species. We studied how landscape and plot attributes affect sun bear habitat use along a gradient of logging disturbance in a lowland forest site of Sumatra. We conducted surveys of bear claw marks to indicate sun bear habitat use at plot and landscape scales, and inform forest restoration strategies that benefit the conservation management of the species. We recorded 12 habitat features and the presence/absence of claw marks in 262 plots in four different habitat types. We reduced the number of habitat variables using Principal Components Analysis (PCA), resulting in four derived habitat factors. We used these factors in a Discriminant Analysis to refine habitat classifications of plots, and modelled presence/absence of claw marks using the PCA factors in a binary logistic regression. We inventoried tree species in a subset of randomly selected plots with claw marks alongside paired control plots with no claw marks. We compared tree community compositions in these plots using ANOSIM and SIMPER analyses. Based on claw mark signs, sun bear habitat use appeared to be non-random and was significantly associated with gradients of increasing habitat intactness, from non-forest habitat to least disturbed forest. Two PCA factors explained the probability of bears utilising a given habitat, which increased with tree biomass and decreased with understorey cover. At the plot level, tree family and species compositions were significantly different between plots without and with claw marks. The abundance and use of Olacaceae stems was significantly higher in plots with claw marks. Incorporating forest restoration strategies that enhance or increase more intact forest and the availability of key tree resources should benefit the conservation of sun bears and encourage natural forest regeneration in these degraded landscapes. We also emphasise the conservation value of degraded forest habitats for this species while ensuring bear movement and connectivity within modified landscape matrices. © 2019 Elsevier Masson SAS
Ecological restoration of degraded lands is of great importance for sustainable development of environment. In order to determine the biological potential of species to aid soil restoration, it is necessary to evaluate litter production, its temporal variation, their rate of decomposition and nutrient release. In this study therefore, we examined patterns of litter fall production, quality of litter, and decomposition pattern of selected multipurpose tree species, viz., Shorea robusta, Tectona grandis, Hardwickia binnata, Butea monosperma and dry mix trees in the dry tropical deciduous forest of vindhyan highland, India. Average litter fall was 4.76 ± 1.21 Mg ha-1yr-1 and varied significantly among species as follows dry mix > S. robusta > T. grandis > B. monosperma > H. binnata. Leaf litter comprised of the highest fraction in all the species. In the litter bag experiment, mass loss and mineralization rate were significantly different among the species and were assumed to be effected by the initial chemical composition of the litter. Similar release of carbon and nitrogen was studied at monthly interval in the same litter bags. Annual relative mass loss was evidently higher in the dry mix trees, H. binnata and B. monosperma followed by T. grandis and S. robusta. Nitrogen percentage increased significantly as decomposition progressed for all the species and a decrease was observed at the later stages of decomposition. The carbon percentage during decomposition showed a significant decrease throughout the study. Species with higher initial concentration of nitrogen and comparatively lower initial lignin, lignin:N and C:N ratio litter decomposed at faster rate than the other selected species, viz., (dry mix > H. binnata > B. monosperma > T. grandis > S. robusta). Mass loss showed significant positive correlation with N mineralization rate. Carbon, lignin, lignin:N and C:N showed significant negative correlations with decay rate. The study recommended that for biological restoration of soil mix plantation would be the most appropriate. While H. binnata and B. monosperma individually shows the better results for the rapid recovery of degraded lands as their rate of litter decomposition is relatively faster than T. grandis and S. robusta. Although, T. grandis and S. robusta species shows higher litter production but their release of nutrient is slow in to the soil. The faster decomposition increases the more release of nutrient in to the soil and thus increases the rate of organic matter turnover and enhances nutrient cycling. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Exotic tree plantations may serve as catalysts for native forest regeneration in agriculturally degraded landscapes. In 2001, we evaluated plant species regeneration in the understory of a 7-year-old experimental Eucalyptus saligna forest in Hawaii approximately 1 year after the cessation of 5 years of herbicide. These forests were organized in a 2 × 2-factorial design of planting density (1 × 1-or 3 × 3-m spacing) and fertilization (unfertilized control and regular fertilization), which resulted in varying resource availabilities. We found that understory biomass was highest under high light conditions, regardless of fertilization treatment, whereas species richness was lowest under fertilized 1 × 1-m plots. The understory was dominated by species exotic to Hawaii. The most common tree species, the noxious weed Citharexylum caudatum, was particularly successful because high light-saturated photosynthesis rates and a low light compensation point allowed for high growth and survival under both light conditions. To assess longer-term recruitment patterns, we resurveyed a portion of this site in 2006 and also surveyed five Eucalyptus plantations in this region of Hawaii that differed in age (5-23 years), species ( E. saligna, E. grandis, E. cloeziana, E. microcorys ), and management (experimental, industrial, nonindustrial stewardship); all were established on previous agricultural sites within approximately 3 km of native-dominated forest. Again, very few native species were present in any of the stands, indicating that within certain landscapes and for native species with certain life history traits, exotic plantations may be ineffective nursery ecosystems for the regeneration of native species. © 2007 Society for Ecological Restoration International.
Forest canopy gaps caused by natural disturbances represent the primary driver of forest regeneration dynamics, modifying several ecological factors such as the light environment within an ecosystem. Canopy openings constantly change the shape and structure of forests as well as tree species diversity. The analysis of forest canopy gap spatial patterns in old-growth forests can provide helpful information for their conservation. Moreover, it can be an important reference for outlining sustainable forest management to restore and maintain the original biodiversity and accelerate forest succession towards old-growth characteristics. The main goal of this research was to assess a first forest gap size distribution and analyze their spatial pattern in an old-growth beech (Fagus sylvatica L.) forest in the Pollino National Park (Italy) strict reserve, with no human influence in at least the past 70 years due to its remote location. Using an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-based canopy height model (CHM), we detected and classified 196 canopy gaps ranging from 10 to 343 m(2). The gap size-frequency reflected a power-law distribution. Using second-order statistics, following the K and L Ripley's function, we found that the canopy gaps were spatially clustered distributed. These preliminary results show the predominance of small-scale disturbances, confirmed by the spatial structure analyses highlighting the single tree nature of these processes influenced by site-specific conditions.
The ecological value of tropical forests in water conservation district has been of great interest because of their rich vegetation types and higher biomass density than any other land cover types, it is urgent to evaluate the ecological value of tropical forests in water conservation district. However, the monitoring of tropical forests in water conservation district is faced with many problems, such as high forest density, complexity and diversity of the forest structure, complex topography and climate conditions, and the difficulty of access for investigators. In order to solve the above difficulties, this study combined 3D point cloud reconstruction based on Unmanned Aerial Vehicle - Structure from Motion (UAV-SfM) technology with forest type classification based on the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) method, combined with a small amount of forest permanent sample plot survey data, to accurately evaluate the forest biomass distribution and forest biodiversity in water conservation district. The results show that the overall classification accuracy of the 20 forest types in water conservation district based on the CNN method is 0.61, the overall Kappa coefficient is 0.59, and the conditional Kappa coefficient is concentrated in the range of 0.43–0.85. The Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of the plane measurement of UAV-SfM technology is 0.432 m, and the RMSE of the elevation measurement is 0.989 m, the effect of this UAV technology in tropical forest monitoring is superior. Using the techniques mentioned above, this study can effectively and accurately monitor and evaluate the biomass distribution and biodiversity of tropical forests in the water conservation district. Based on the precision forest ecological monitoring data, this study can develop a scientific and reasonable sustainable forest management plan for the water conservation district according to the distribution of forest biomass and biodiversity. The combination of UAV-SfM technology and the CNN method is an innovative attempt, and the integration of UAV and artificial intelligence technology solves practical problems faced by sustainable forest management. UAV and artificial intelligence will also provide an important foundation for forest ecological environment sustainability assessment research. © 2021 Elsevier Ltd
In highly diverse tropical landscapes, urban and peri-urban forests can play a crucial role as reservoirs of biodiversity. However, urbanization has negatively impacted the natural and anthropogenic vegetation, including the composition, diversity, and functions of urban forests. Tree regeneration plays an essential role in the long-term functionality of forests. Few studies have investigated how natural regeneration occurs in urbanized tropical landscapes, as well as the factors that drive this process. We assessed whether natural regeneration of the tropical montane cloud forest is occurring in urban and peri-urban forests and examined the influence of environmental factors (elevation, annual precipitation, air temperature, canopy cover, and soil physicochemical characteristics) on the regeneration. We used the density and diversity of seedlings, saplings, and juveniles of trees and shrubs in 42 plots across seven urban and peri-urban sites in the Neotropical city of Xalapa, Mexico. In the natural regeneration, 42 tree and 22 shrub species were recorded. Of these species, 83% were native and 17% were non-native. There was a lower abundance of tree (34%) compared to shrub (66%) individuals. Early-successional species were more abundant (51%) than intermediate (35%) and late-successional (14%) species. The numbers of species in the seedling, sapling, and juvenile stages, and the number of early-successional species, were higher in urban than in peri-urban forests. The species richness of both native and non-native taxa was higher in urban than in peri-urban forests (95% CI). We found no significant differences in the density of the young life stages, the density of successional groups, or the density of native and non-native species, between urban and peri-urban forests, probably due to high variability across the sites. Canopy cover had a consistently positive effect on density in most groups. Forest type, soil phosphorus, and soil bulk density also explained densities, except for the late-successional species, where these factors were not statistically significant. The limited richness and density of late-successional species highlight the need to assist the regeneration of this vulnerable group. Understanding natural regeneration patterns can inform the management and restoration of urbanized areas in the distributional regions of tropical montane cloud forest, one of the most important and threatened tropical ecosystems. © 2023 Elsevier B.V.
This work deals with the experimental management of secondary succession in a tropical forest region in Uxpanapa, Veracruz, México. The goal is to establish a system of 'diversified units', which will maintain production and biodiversity while obtaining valuable products, primarily for self-sufficiency, and secondarily as cash crops. Three different diversifield units of production have been identified: a) the traditional 'milpa', maize polyculture, b) the diversified home orchard and c) the enriched fallows. These units were established in three secondary forests areas, where once thinned or cleared, valuable annual and perennial species were introduced. Total biomass and product yields were analyzed, also labour invested on each production unit was recorded, units were compared on an efficiency basis. Maize yield of polyculture is low but total production is more than twice that of maize monoculture. Efficiency in the polyculture is also higher and its weeds were better controlled. After three years the 'milpa' has become an orchard with more than 150 individual fruit trees belonging to 10 different species. Enriched secondary forests show the highest biomass production in the open treatment, 68% transmittance, and the highest survivorship in the moderate shade treatment, 37%. Schizolobium parahybum and Cordia alliodora were the most successful forest species due to their fast growth. © 1993 Kluwer Academic Publishers.
A growing set of researchers and policy makers argue, somewhat counterintuitively, that regulated timber extraction can help conserve forests in developing countries by discouraging illegal logging and land-use change. However, rigorous tests of that hypothesis are rare. We use matched difference-in-differences models to measure the net effect on tree cover loss of awarding timber extraction permits to Mexican communal land-holding organizations. Our findings suggest that permits do not have large systematic effects on tree cover loss. We are able to discern statistically significant effects only in select subgroups of forest management units, not in our national sample. Moreover, subgroup effects are relatively modest and vary in sign. Subgroups in which permits have discernible effects are defined by, among other things, levels of privation and the opportunity costs of retaining forest cover-results that suggest forest governance and the demand for cleared land moderate permits' effects.
Regional model analyses of forest growth are critical for capturing global aspects of tropical rainforest carbon exchange. This research presents the development of a multi-model approach for assessing forest growth and biomass accumulation within the wet tropics bioregion (WTB) based on 10 years of available data and existing model parameter sets. The Tropical Rainforest Growth (TRG) model system employs the 3-PG and 3-PGS models to account for both old-growth rainforest and forest regeneration from seedlings in response to human-induced and natural disturbances. Above-ground biomass (AGB) stocks of the mature forest throughout the WTB for 2000 were estimated to be ∼202 t C/ha. Replacement of areas of old-growth with commercial timber plantations decreased overall AGB stocks to approximately 146 t C/ha. However, plantation carbon accumulation rates were higher than the mature rainforest, representing their potential to accumulate more biomass over a longer analysis time period. As tropical cyclones may significantly alter the carbon stocks of old-growth rainforests, the effect of tropical cyclone Rona on the WTB was assessed. The cyclone had a minimal impact on total AGB stocks within the region, yet these systems are an important factor to be considered in carbon and forest regeneration modelling activities in the tropics. The TRG system is an advanced modelling tool providing a rapid process-based assessment of biomass stocks and accumulation dynamics within Australia's tropical rainforest bioregion and has the potential for application in tropical forest ecosystems at both national and international levels. © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Less than a quarter of Earth's terrestrial ecosystems remain intact. Protected areas (PAs) are far exceeded in area by natural habitats that have been transformed for agriculture, and PAs are too small to safeguard viable wildlife populations. It is therefore imperative to understand the use of agricultural matrix habitats by native wildlife. In this study we seek to understand how the world's mammalian carnivore species (order Carnivora) use agricultural land. We assessed relationships between agroecosystem type, carnivore species traits and conservation status, and carnivore occurrence at agricultural sites, investigated the prevalent human-carnivore conflicts in anthropogenic landscapes, and identified knowledge gaps. We reviewed 129 studies reporting agroecosystem use by native carnivores to understand which agroecosystem types are used by different species, and which factors may affect their occurrence in these habitats. We uncovered records of 97 wild and two domesticated carnivore species within 41 types of crop in temperate and tropical regions that we classified into four agroecosystem types (agroforestry, tree plantations, perennial cropland, and annual cropland). Non-threatened carnivore species were more likely to use agricultural ecosystems than threatened species. Adult body mass, energetic trophic level, and locomotion mode were significant predictors of carnivore occupancy in agricultural lands. Our results depict a globally consistent pattern, in which the use of agroecosystem landscapes by mammalian carnivores is related to both species traits and habitat quality. We emphasise the rarity of threatened carnivore and apex predator species in agroecosystems, which strengthens the paramount importance of retaining native habitat within agricultural landscapes. Understanding the role of agricultural habitat matrices, the influence of management intensification, and the threshold areas of native habitats within anthropogenic landscapes are essential for prescribing ways to prevent further erosion of the world's carnivores in human-modified landscapes.
Selective logging is the most widespread use of tropical forests. Building logging roads facilitates access to previously remote rainforests, and so proper management is essential for ensuring biodiversity retention in logged landscapes. Terrestrial mammals often directly use logging roads (via movement corridors, hunting or foraging), making them vulnerable to poorly managed roads. Here we explore how the presence, arrangement and use of logging roads influence terrestrial mammal occupancy and detection within a Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) certified logged forest in Guyana. We compared camera trap data from20 natural ‘game’ trails in an unlogged area, with camera trap data from 23 sites set near to or on logging roads within the Iwokrama forest. Our findings showed high occupancy within logged areas with no statistically significant difference to unlogged areas. Higher detections were noted along secondary and feeder roads compared to skid trails and the natural trails in control areas. Additionally, our data showed a negative correlation between occupancy and distance to village for a scatter hoarding rodent, most likely driven by subsistence hunting by local communities. Our results indicate that proper road management geared towards the monitoring and guarded access of logging roads, can have a positive effect on terrestrial mammal occurrence within responsibly managed rainforests. © 2023 Elsevier B.V.
Forest fragmentation is one of the most important threats to global biodiversity, particularly in tropical developing countries. Identifying priority areas for conservation within these forests is essential to their effective management. However, this requires current, accurate environmental information that is often lacking in developing countries. The Cockpit Country, Jamaica, contains forests of international importance in terms of levels of endemism and overall diversity. These forests are under severe threat from the prospect of bauxite mining and other anthropogenic disturbances. In the absence of adequate, up-to-date ecological information, we used satellite remote sensing data and fragmentation analysis to identify interior forested areas that have experienced little or no change as priority conservation sites. We classified Landsat images from 1985, 1989, 1995, 2002, and 2008, using an object-oriented method, which allowed for the inclusion of roads. We conducted our fragmentation analysis using metrics to quantify changes in forest patch number, area, shape, and aggregation. Deforestation and fragmentation fluctuated within the 23-year period but were mostly confined to the periphery of the forest, close to roads and access trails. An area of core forest that remained intact over the period of study was identified within the largest forest patch, most of which was located within the boundaries of a forest reserve and included the last remaining patches of closed-broadleaf forest. These areas should be given highest priority for conservation, as they constitute important refuges for endemic or threatened biodiversity. Minimizing and controlling access will be important in maintaining this core. © 2010 Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
Unplanned logging is one of the greatest current threats to native forests biodiversity. About 90% of the piedmont forest in the Southern Andean Yungas has been converted to other land-use types and the remaining forests fragments are being intensively logged without management plans. Bird species, especially understory birds, are good indicators of forest diversity and integrity. The aim of this study was to identify understory bird species associated with changes in the forest structure caused by selective logging and to explore whether it is possible to use these species as a monitoring tool. We observed that Sittasomus griseicapillus, Turdus rufiventris, Lepidocolaptes angustirostris, Casiornis rufus, Thraupis sayaca, and Tolmomyias sulphurescens were associated to unlogged sites with higher density of timber-yielding and standing dead trees. Thamnophilus caerulescens, Leptotila megalura, Synallaxis scutata, Poecilotriccus plumbeiceps, and Catharus ustulatus were favoured by logging activities and associated with understory visual obstruction. Mean cut-off abundance thresholds were 2.74 ind/ha for the avian guild associated with unlogged forest and 1.79 ind/ha for the guild associated with logged forest. Sustainable forest management schemes need to retain the understory visual obstruction at values similar to those of unlogged forest (43.75%), together with an adequate density (≥10 ind/ha) of standing dead trees with at least 19.5 cm in DBH, and a minimum of 210 ind/ha of timber tree species. Bird species identified in this study can be used in monitoring schemes to evaluate the implementation of these guidelines. © 2021
Active restoration of biodiverse forest uses significant resource investment to produce rapid partial recovery of biodiversity, but with unknown longer term outcomes. Here we test the capacity of intensive high diversity rainforest restoration plantings to develop forest-like bird communities beyond their first decade of growth. Across a network comprising 16 such plantings aged 10-24years and eight old growth rainforest reference sites, spread across about 700km2 in the Australian Wet Tropics, we measured bird community composition and 18 attributes related to the sites' local and landscape vegetation cover and other spatial properties. We compiled additional information on the bird species' habitat use, movement patterns, responses to edges between forest and cleared land, and expected climate sensitivities. Data analyses showed that bird communities in restoration plantings did not become more similar to those of reference rainforest during their second decade of development. Across replanted sites, occupancy by bird species was significantly predicted by their functional traits, being least among rainforest-dependent species that were also either endemic or sedentary edge-avoiders. Occupancy by rainforest-dependent species was least when nearby remnant rainforest cover (within 200m) was lowest. Species predicted to be climate-sensitive occupied restored habitat at similar rates to other species. These findings provide a foundation for better spatial planning for both habitat-focused and species-focused restoration, and show that expectations based on promising early outcomes of intensive forest restoration projects must be tempered with awareness of likely longer term limitations, highlighting the need to set realistic restoration goals. © 2015 Elsevier Ltd.
Tropical forests play an important role in maintaining, replenishing and conserving a large portion of the planet's biodiversity. However, these forests have been converted into anthropic landscapes, threatening the persistence of wildlife. The exploitation of forest products can result in different ecological impacts at different levels of biological organization. In this study, we propose a vulnerability index to examine the susceptibility of woody plants used by locals in a human-modified landscape of the Caatinga dry forest (i.e., the Catimbau National Park). We contrasted patterns of (1) plant use by local people (risk of use, collection risk, local importance, and diversity of use), (2) plant reproductive strategies (pollination, sexual and reproductive systems, dispersal mode, flowering and fruiting phenology), and (3) the conservation status of the plant species. We combined this information to propose a vulnerability index expressing species sensitivity to human disturbances in 14 regenerating and 14 old-growth forest stands. We tested the hypothesis that regenerating forest stands will harbor more vulnerable plant species compared to old-growth forest stands. Among the 119 plant species registered in regenerating and old-growth forest stands, 80 species (67.2 %) were recorded as useful for local people in Caatinga. Specifically, about 71.8 % and 70.5 % are exploited by the rural population for some type of use in regenerating and old-growth forest stands, respectively. The most frequent type of use was medicinal, followed by construction and fuel in both regenerating and old-growth forest stands. Regarding the potentially collected plant parts, the total removal of the individual and collection of leaves exhibited similar and higher relevance in regenerating, while leaves were the most collected part in old-growth forest stands. Of the 80 plant species analyzed, 62 % and 58.5 %, respectively, were classified as exhibiting moderate and high vulnerability to extirpation in regenerating and old-growth forest stands; thus not supporting our hypothesis. Our results suggest that in the Caatinga dry forest, (1) woody plant species responsible for forest regeneration in the context of slash-and-burn agriculture are exploited for multiple uses, (2) medicinal use is the main type of use of woody plants occurring in regenerating and old-growth forest stands, (3) total removal of the individual and collection of leaves were the most collected plant parts, and (4) both regenerating and old-growth forest stands showed a high vulnerability to human disturbances in the study area. In the long term, the exploitation of vulnerable plant species may negatively affect the composition and structure of the community and, consequently, the rate and trajectory of succession. It can be expected that as populations of vulnerable plant species are reduced or extirpated from the community, ecological interactions such as pollination and dispersal, which are key to ecosystem maintenance, will change along with the services provided. © 2024 Elsevier GmbH
In humid tropical regions, the value to farmers of agroforestry systems is often difficult to assess. Based on an inventory of plant species in 14 cocoa agroforests in central Cameroon, this study developed a participatory assessment using a PRA (Participatory Rural Appraisal) scoring system to quantify the value given by farmers to each species according to their uses. Altogether, 86 species were identified. The five species most commonly found were African plum, Dacryodes edulis at 18% of the trees identified, avocado, Persea americana at 11%, limba, Terminalia superba at 10%, the fig tree, Ficus mucoso at 5% and Albizia adianthifolia at 3%. Twenty-two species (26%) were not used at all by the farmers, who defined seven different uses for the other species. Among these, the highest use value was attributed to the cocoa tree (20%). The next five tree species with high use values were, in decreasing order, the ayous, Triplochyton scleroxylon, sapelli, Entandrophragma cylindricum, African plum, Dacryodes edulis, oil palm, Elaeis guineensis, and mango, Mangifera indica. The use profile for cocoa agrofo rests showed that these are mainly managed by farmers for sales of timber and non-timber products and for home consumption of non-timber and medicinal products. These results show that technical innovations to improve cocoa agroforestry systems must take into account their multiple functions and their complexity.
The jaguar Panthera onca requires large areas of relatively intact habitats containing adequate amounts of prey to survive. Since a substantial portion of jaguar range occurs outside of strict protected areas, there is a need for economic incentives for habitat conservation, which carefully managed selective logging can provide. Forest Stewardship Council and Pan European Forest Council certifications intended to regulate wood extraction to maintain the ecological functions of forests require evidence of biodiversity and ecosystem conservation. We draw on twelve surveys across four countries and a range of biomes to present evidence that adequate logging management can maintain jaguar populations, but that they are at risk without efficient control of secondary impacts of access and hunting. Where resident, the presence of jaguars can serve as an indication that the ecological requirements of certified timber extraction are being met. We present a gradient of rigor for monitoring, recommending cost-effective options.
The decomposition of dung constitutes an ecosystem service of massive proportions. Previous studies addressing how it depends on individual invertebrate taxa have been focused on small spatial scales, neglecting the impact of large-scale factors like climate. Here, we use the concept of citizen science to quantify taxon-specific contributions to dung decomposition at the level of a nation. Young people across Finland manipulated the decomposer communities of cow pats, then measured changes in pat mass over the grazing season. In southern Finland most (90%) of the cattle dung hitting pastures decomposed in just two months, whereas 1100 km to the north the corresponding fraction was smaller (74%). Of the total invertebrate-caused decomposition (13% of dung pat mass, independent of latitude), large tunneling dor beetles in the genus Geotrupes account for 61%, hence removing dung twice as fast as do smaller dung-dwelling beetles and earthworms. Overall, this paper illustrates how ecologists may direct citizen scientists to implement massive ecological experiments. Compared to an approach based purely on professional scientists, we saved three-quarters of the costs. Ultimately, citizen science may offer a key tool for testing current ecological theories at relevant spatial scalesand for disseminating these theories in the process.
Regenerating forests are important for the maintenance of tropical biodiversity. Forest management in fragments of Atlantic forest in Brazil includes removal of exotic eucalyptus trees that were once part of plantations, in order to reestablish native flora. However, it is unclear how native tree saplings regenerating under former plantations respond to abrupt changes in environmental conditions associated with exotic tree removal. We used leaf carbon isotope composition (δ13C) and photosynthetic parameters to evaluate physiological responses of native tree saplings to canopy opening. We analyzed young and mature leaves of the three most representative species of regenerating trees (Byrsonima sericea, Siparuna guianensis, Xylopia sericea) in one secondary forest fragment and three managed areas that form an irradiance gradient (9, 85, 230 and 550 μmol m−2 s−1) in Brazilian Atlantic forest. Eucalyptus removal increased photosynthetic CO2 assimilation and stomatal conductance in mature leaves of all species, but there was no change in intercellular CO2 concentration. In young leaves, two species showed increasing A and one species showed increasing gs in response to canopy opening. Leaf δ13C did not vary significantly among species, but site and age affected δ13C, as leaves from shaded sites showed lower δ13C values (around −33‰) than leaves from lighter sites (around −30‰), and young leaves showed higher δ13C values (around −30‰) than mature leaves (around −32‰). Mature leaves showed greater photosynthesis and stomatal conductance than young leaves. The sensitivity of young leaf δ13C to irradiance increases suggests that δ13C in these organs is controlled not only through carbon imported to new leaves during growth, but also through direct responses of stomatal control and carboxylation as these young leaves develop their photosynthetic competency. Young and mature leaves showed decreased total chlorophyll/carotenoids with increasing irradiance, indicating acclimation capacity from early developmental phases. Young leaves in high irradiance sites showed susceptibility to irradiance stress (Fv/Fm around 0.7), but values for mature leaves did not show high irradiance stress (Fv/Fm around 0.8). In conclusion, forest management affected leaf δ13C of the main regenerating understory species, with site effects being more important than species-specific features for photosynthetic performance. The data also indicate that these species are resilient to forest management that includes exotic eucalyptus canopy tree removal. In this context, carbon stable isotopes can be considered as recorders of ecological change and can be used to study the effects of management on forest regeneration and photosynthetic competency. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
To understand and predict the dynamics and productivity of the world's tropical rainforests after logging is a major challenge for ecologists and forest managers. Realistic forest-dynamics models for this biome are largely lacking. Using linear mixed models, we analyse basal area development for the commercially valuable tree species of dipterocarps and the fast-growing pioneer Macaranga spp., following two selective logging methods; supervised logging (SL) and conventional logging (CL) combined with- or without pre-harvest climber cutting (SLC and SL, and CLC and CL, respectively). After logging there was an initial period of about five years before recovery started. During the 18-year study period, the average stand basal area growth rates of the dipterocarp group in the SLC treatment was double that in the CL treatment, revealing a faster recovery. Eighteen years after logging, SL and SLC treatments recovered 93% and 84%, respectively, of the initial standing dipterocarp basal area, compared to 73% and 72% recovery for the CL and CLC treatments. SLC treatments reduced the overall establishment of pioneer species (Macaranga spp.) by about 45% in contrast to CL and CLC treatments. Our study provides a framework for evaluating and comparing growth rates in tropical forests for different logging methods. The results suggest that a combination of directional felling, pre-aligned skid trails and pre-harvest climber cutting can improve future yields in tropical rainforests.
Tropical dry islands are currently facing major challenges derived from anthropogenic and climatic pressures. However, their trajectories of environmental change, which could provide relevant information applicable to biodiversity conservation, remain understudied. This is mainly due to poor micro-fossil preservation and irregular sediment deposition. Multi-proxy palaeoecological analyses spanning decades to 1000s of years can add perspective as to how vegetation, fungal communities, and the fauna responded to previous natural and anthropogenic disturbances. In São Nicolau, Cabo Verde, we used palaeoecological methods to analyse a highland soil profile (1000 m asl) dated to 5900 cal yr BP. We analysed how vegetation (abundances in pollen of native and introduced species, and leaf wax n-alkanes), ferns and fungal communities (abundance of non-pollen palynomorphs) varied over time in relation to fire (charcoal concentration) and erosion regimes (grain sizes and elemental composition). Between 5000 and 400 cal yr BP the highlands held native woody taxa such as Euphorbia tuckeyana, Dracaena draco subsp. caboverdeana, and Ficus, taxa that can be used for future reforestation programmes. From 400 cal yr BP to the present day, replacement of native taxa by introduced and cultivated taxa (Pinus, Eucalyptus, Asystasia, Opuntia) has occurred. Vegetation burning and grazing caused loss of vegetation and erosion, acting as conjoined drivers of scrubland degradation. This dataset helps to set historically contextualised restoration goals such as the re-introduction of native species, monitoring of recently introduced species and control of free grazing. This can serve as a model system for the conservation of tropical dry islands' biodiversity. © 2019
Catastrophic degradation of forests is ongoing worldwide and leads to severe forest fragmentation. Restoration plantings are often necessary to restore fragmented forests, complementing the limited natural regeneration. High genetic diversity is critical for the long-term viability of restored forests. However, there is limited knowledge of whether planted populations capture a genetic variation comparable to natural populations. We measured the efficiency of two forest restoration strategies using the common tropical oak Quercus bambusifolia. The multi-seedlot planting was established over ten years by collecting seeds from several locations in fragmented secondary forests of Hong Kong, while the single seedlot planting was established in just one year with seeds from a single natural location. We analysed the genetic diversity and genetic structure from both plantings and compared them with natural populations. The multi-seedlot planting exhibited a higher rate of genetic recovery, greater genetic diversity (He = 0.69), and higher effective population size (Ne_p = 86.5) compared to natural populations (He = 0.66, Ne_p = 64.3, on average) and the single seedlot planting (He = 0.50, Ne_p = 30.8). The multi-seedlot planting erased the effect of seed shadows which was detected in natural populations while the single seedlot planting strengthened the effect. We conclude that capturing high levels of genetic diversity in the collection of propagules is a standard requirement to ensure the long-term viability of forest restoration. Propagule collection over multiple years is required when only a few parental trees are available to avoid founder effects. © 2020 Elsevier B.V.
Monitoring programs aimed at assessing ecological restoration have often relied on the response of a single taxon owing to the difficulty of sampling multiple taxonomic groups simultaneously. Using passive acoustic monitoring, we examined the impacts of ecological restoration on all vocalizing fauna simultaneously as well as a single indicator taxon, birds. In our study, acoustic recorders were programmed to collect data along a gradient of forest regeneration consisting of actively restored (AR), naturally regenerating (NR), and mature benchmark (BM) sites in a tropical biodiversity hotspot, the Western Ghats of southern India. For all vocalizing fauna, we calculated acoustic space use, a measure that reflects the amount and pattern of sounds within each frequency bin for a given time period. AR and NR sites were not significantly different from each other, and visual examination of the acoustic space showed a lack of sounds between 12 kHz to 24 kHz for AR and NR sites, suggesting limited insect activity. When we considered the response of birds alone (from manually annotated acoustic data), we found significant differences in the proportion of detections of rainforest bird species compared to open-country bird species across all treatment types, with the highest proportion reported in BM sites (mean ± SD: 0.97 ± 0.04), followed by AR sites (0.81 ± 0.12) and NR sites (0.71 ± 0.17). Considering the varied response of different taxa to habitat recovery over two decades, we highlight the need to take a multi-taxon approach while assessing restoration programs. We show that it is now possible to do so in tropical forests using passive acoustic monitoring. © 2023 The Authors
The objective of this study was to compare the vegetation structure and soil properties among old-growth tropical dry forests representing three categories of grazing intensity by cattle (light, moderate and heavy grazing) and a category of 20-30-yr-old secondary forest experiencing occasional grazing in a locality in northwestern Mexico. Within each forest type, three 0.1 ha plots located in different grazing ranges ("potreros") were used as replicates. All woody plants (stem ≥ 2.0 cm diameter at 1.30 m height, DBH) were identified and measured in each plot. Mean basal area and above-ground biomass (AGB) were significantly higher in the moderately grazed old-growth forest. Species density was significantly lower in the secondary forest, where a leguminous tree species was dominant. Accumulation of AGB after 20-30 yr of secondary forest recovery accounted for 43% of the old-growth forest AGB. Soil properties varied among forest categories but did not follow a consistent pattern: mean total N and organic matter content were highest in the old-growth forest with moderate grazing; cation exchange capacity (CEC) was similar among the three old-growth forests categories, but it was significantly lower in the secondary forest compared to the old-growth forest with low grazing. Canonical Correspondence Analysis showed that CEC was highly correlated with the actual species distribution in the study area, especially with Acacia cochliacantha the dominant species of the secondary forest category. Resprouting capacity of the persisting species in the old-growth forests experiencing chronic disturbance could have contributed to the maintenance of some of the structural characteristics of a mature forest. Tropical secondary forests seem to accumulate AGB relatively fast, reflecting their potential for carbon storage and provision for other ecosystem services; therefore, they deserve urgent protection measures. © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Climate changes and human-mediated modifications to ecosystems have threatened the biodiversity and habitats of various species. Dacrydium pectinatum is a constructive and endangered species in the tropical mountain forests of Hainan Island, China. In this study, we established sixty-eight 30 m × 30 m permanent plots of D. pectinatum along an environmental axis of temperature and precipitation in the west (Bawangling, 30 plots), southwest (Jianfengling, 30 plots) and east (Diaoluoshan, 8 plots) of Hainan Island. Our objectives are to explore the change mechanisms of plant composition/diversity in the D. pectinatum community at distinct environmental scales and analyze the association between environmental factors (topography, soil and stand conditions) and vegetation distribution. The results showed that the diversity of D. pectinatum communities was lower than that in tropical forests at other sites around the world and much higher than that in subtropical forests at similar latitudes. At the regional scale, plant diversity showed a pattern that decreases with increasing latitude; at the local scale, diversity decreases with increasing elevation. Eight environmental factors, namely, elevation, slope, canopy density, soil organic matter, soil pH, soil total nitrogen, soil available phosphorus and soil available potassium, showed a significant correlation to species distribution. Elevation factors were identified as the determinants of the overall diversity patterns. In conclusion, our study clarified that abiotic environmental factors strongly influence the vegetation structure and diversity pattern of the D. pectinatum communities in various environmental scales. Low temperatures, high humidity, low soil nutrients, and high stand density may be the limiting factors that cause their diversity to decline. We recommend various actions to ameliorate the impact of environmental changes on the D. pectinatum community, such as protecting existing habitats, strengthening monitoring of restrictive environmental factors, appropriate thinning of higher density stands, and conducting research on genetic diversity to improve the community survivability. © 2020 The Authors
Tropical forests are critical reservoirs of biodiversity yet remain among the most-threatened ecosystems. Protected areas (PA) play a vital role in conserving these forests and their rich biodiversity. The study assessed tree species diversity and conducted a comparative analysis across the three districts of Barak valley, Cachar (D1), Hailakandi (D2), and Karimganj (D3), Eastern Indian Himalayan region. 350 quadrats (10 m × 10 m) were randomly sampled within PA, documenting 194 tree species from 126 genera and 51 families. Species richness was highest under the PA of D1 (147), followed by D3 (99), and D2 (52). Tree basal cover showed identical trends, i.e. D1 (25.6 ± 0.49 m2 ha−1), D3 (22.7 ± 0.67 m2 ha−1) and D2 (20.2 ± 0.76 m2 ha−1). Biodiversity indices (Shannon, Margalef, Pielou, etc.) was highest for D1 than other districts, while stand density peaked in D3 (1798 ± 44 stems ha−1). The most dominant species include Artocarpus chama in D1 (IVI = 25.8) and D2 (IVI = 46.9), and Tectona grandis in D3 (IVI = 49). The presence of species listed under the IUCN Red List category includes vulnerable (n = 04), critically endangered (n = 02), endangered (n = 01), and near-threatened species (n = 01). The present study reveals the rich tree diversity within the PA of Barak valley, underscoring the need for district-specific forest conservation strategies to ensure long-term sustainability. © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group on behalf of the International Water, Air & Soil Conservation Society(INWASCON).
Despite the notable plant biodiversity of the Philippines, the country still exhibits increasing anthropogenic activities in many forests of the archipelago that pose a threat to many floral species of the country. Hence, to test the hypothesis that there are differences in plant distributions and diversity between disturbed and undisturbed tropical forest patches, a rapid floristic assessment in Malinao, Aklan was conducted. A total of 106 species were sampled in both sites, with 68 present in the disturbed site, 53 present in the undisturbed site, and 12 present in both. Rarefied species accumulation curves and calculations of Shannon-Wiener Index (H) showed higher species richness and evenness in the undisturbed forest. Analysis of the similarities in species composition using the nonmetric dimensional scaling combined with the statistical test PERMANOVA showed clear significant difference between the two forest categories. In addition, one species (Artocarpus blancoi (Elmer) Merr.) that is classified as “Vulnerable” according to the IUCN was noted. Thus, standard calls for the establishment of priority areas for forest conservation in the country are recommended. © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group on behalf of the International Water, Air & Soil Conservation Society(INWASCON).
Phytoplankton community structure in coastal areas is a result of various environmental factors such as nutrients, light, grazing, temperature, and salinity. The Yucatan Peninsula is a karstic tropical region that is strongly influenced by submerged groundwater discharge (SGD) into the coastal zone. Phytoplankton community structure and its relationship with regional and local water quality variables were studied in four ports of the northwestern Yucatan Peninsula. Water quality was strongly related to SGD, and variations in phytoplankton community structure were related to local nutrient loading and hydrographic conditions, turbulence, and human impacts. Our study provides an ecological baseline for the Yucatan Peninsula and serves as a basis for establishing monitoring programs to predict changes at sites with high hydrological variation and in developing an early alert system for harmful toxic algal blooms. © 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Vascular epiphytes contribute significantly to the biodiversity of tropical forests. We aimed to identify the epiphyte species occurring in the Muriqui Trail at Serra do Brigadeiro State Park (SBSP), a priority area for Atlantic forest conservation in southeastern Brazil. We selected 10 phorophytes, from which we sampled epiphytes and took light intensity measurements at three strata: up to 4 m, 4 to 8 m, and above 8 m. Phorophytes represented eight species, eight genera, and six families. We found 25 epiphytic species from 17 genera and nine families. Ferns showed highest richness, especially Polypodiaceae. We report herein important data on epiphyte diversity in eastern Minas Gerais state (Zona da Mata), including the occurrence of species rarely cited in surveys. Fomenting local conservation along with environmental education may be pivotal for counteracting anthropic pressure on SBSP. © Creative Commons License. All the contents of this journal, except where otherwise noted, is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution License.
Slash-and-burn cultivation is a major cause of deforestation in Madagascar, and abandonment leads to the secondary vegetation dynamics, i.e. colonization by herbaceous vegetation, shrubs and trees. The study was conducted in south-eastern Madagascar in a steep transition zone along an altitudinal and a sharp precipitation gradient between a high altitude rainforest and a lowland dry tropical forest. The restoration of gaps created by abandoned fields in this narrow, winding corridor could be essential to maintain connectivity between two areas (areas 1 and 2) of Andohahela National Park. Prior to implementing restoration, baseline ecological information is needed on the reference ecosystem and vegetation resilience must be studied to identify restoration needs. This study aims to (1) assess whether cultivation practices (irrigated rice vs. cassava, maize and sweet potato) influence vegetation dynamics after abandonment; (2) study vegetation dynamics and soils over time since abandonment, and (3) compare secondary forest vegetation and soils with those of mature forest patches. Surveys of vegetation and soil were conducted in 26 secondary forest patches abandoned from 3 to >25 years (synchronic approach) and in 19 adjacent mature forest patches (controls). No relationship between age of abandonment and vegetation species richness, composition or structure was found, but clear differences were detected between secondary and mature forest patches. Secondary forests are not colonized by species from mature forests, but instead their vegetation dynamics appear to lead to the establishment of thorny thickets dominated by Mimosa delicatula, which is absent from the mature forest. (C) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
We studied species richness, composition and vertical distribution of epiphytic bryophytes in submontane rainforest of Central Sulawesi. Bryophytes were sampled on eight canopy trees and on eight trees in the forest understorey. Microclimate was measured at trunk bases and at crown bases. The total recorded number of 146 epiphytic bryophyte species is among the highest ever reported for tropical forests and underlines the importance of the Malesian region as a global biodiversity hotspot. Species composition differed significantly between understorey trees and canopy tree trunks on the one hand, and the forest canopy on the other. Fourty-five percent of the bryophyte species were restricted to canopy tree crowns, 12% to the understorey. Dendroid and fan-like species mainly occurred in the forest understorey whereas tufts were most species rich in the tree crowns. The findings reflect the different microclimatic regimes and substrates found in the understorey and in the forest canopy. The results indicate that assessments of the bryophyte diversity of tropical forests are inadequate when understorey trees and tree crowns are excluded.
Tropical forests are among the most biodiverse biomes on the planet. Nevertheless, quantifying the abundance and species richness within megadiverse groups is a significant challenge. We designed a study to address this challenge by documenting the variability of the insect fauna across a vertical canopy gradient in a Central Amazonian tropical forest. Insects were sampled over two weeks using 6-m Gressitt-style Malaise traps set at five heights (0 m–32 m–8 m intervals) on a metal tower in a tropical forest north of Manaus, Brazil. The traps contained 37,778 specimens of 18 orders of insects. Using simulation approaches and nonparametric analyses, we interpreted the abundance and richness of insects along this gradient. Diptera, Hymenoptera, and Coleoptera had their greatest abundance at the ground level, whereas Lepidoptera and Hemiptera were more abundant in the upper levels of the canopy. We identified species of 38 of the 56 families of Diptera, finding that 527 out of 856 species (61.6%) were not sampled at the ground level. Mycetophilidae, Tipulidae, and Phoridae were significantly more diverse and/or abundant at the ground level, while Tachinidae, Dolichopodidae, and Lauxaniidae were more diverse or abundant at upper levels. Our study suggests the need for a careful discussion of strategies of tropical forest conservation based on a much more complete understanding of the three-dimensional distribution of its insect diversity. © 2022, The Author(s).
Recent advances in technology and reduction in hardware costs have made the collection of acoustic environmental recordings more accessible, thereby facilitating easier acquisition of biodiversity data for monitoring, research and conservation. Despite these advances, and the growing power of machine learning and automated techniques to process acoustic data, there exists a lack of tools to facilitate accessible visualisation and exploration of long-duration acoustic recordings collected in the field. Additionally, the exclusion of forest communities and traditional beliefs and practices in tropical forest conservation, originating from colonialism and continuing through neocolonial approaches, often results in tension between conservation practitioners, projects, and forest communities. While there has been a proliferation of citizen science projects, tools and applications arising from ecoacoustics research, there is a need to respond to calls, from other citizen science domains, for this work to engage with "citizens"outside the role of 'data collector', towards more co-creative citizen science. Through the lens of participatory design, my research attends to both issues by developing alternative methods of data visualisation that enable more accessible analysis and exploration of big ecoacoustics data, while attending to questions of conservation data justice and participation in forest fringe settings. © 2023 Owner/Author.
Interventions to strengthen forest conservation in tropical biomes face multiple challenges. Insecure land tenure and unequal benefit sharing within forest user groups are two of the most important. Using original household-level survey data from 130 villages in six countries, we assess how current wealth inequality relates to tenure security and benefit flows from forest use. We find that villages with higher wealth inequality report lower tenure security and more unequal flows from forest income and externally sourced income. Furthermore, we find that wealthier individuals within villages capture a disproportionately larger share of the total amount of forest benefits available to each village, while external income often benefits poorer individuals more. These findings suggest that unless future forest conservation interventions actively work to mitigate inequalities linked to existing forest benefit flows, there is a risk that these interventions—including those associated with REDD+ activities—reproduce or even aggravate pre-existing socioeconomic inequalities within user groups, potentially undermining both their conservation and economic objectives. © 2018 The Authors
Tropical forests are converted at an alarming rate for agricultural use and pastureland, but also regrow naturally through secondary succession. For successful forest restoration, it is essential to understand the mechanisms of secondary succession. These mechanisms may vary across forest types, but analyses across broad spatial scales are lacking. Here, we analyse forest recovery using 1,403 plots that differ in age since agricultural abandonment from 50 sites across the Neotropics. We analyse changes in community composition using species-specific stem wood density (WD), which is a key trait for plant growth, survival and forest carbon storage. In wet forest, succession proceeds from low towards high community WD (acquisitive towards conservative trait values), in line with standard successional theory. However, in dry forest, succession proceeds from high towards low community WD (conservative towards acquisitive trait values), probably because high WD reflects drought tolerance in harsh early successional environments. Dry season intensity drives WD recovery by influencing the start and trajectory of succession, resulting in convergence of the community WD over time as vegetation cover builds up. These ecological insights can be used to improve species selection for reforestation. Reforestation species selected to establish a first protective canopy layer should, among other criteria, ideally have a similar WD to the early successional communities that dominate under the prevailing macroclimatic conditions. © 2019, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.
The development of easily observable measures of restoration success is essential for monitoring of the ambitious proposed global restoration targets (e.g. The Bonn Challenge; New York Declaration on Forests). Systematic reviews with meta-analyses are a good way to evaluate the performance of different organisms in the monitoring of ecological restoration. Among the arthropods, ants have a long history in environmental monitoring. We compiled a data set and performed a global meta-analysis encompassing studies conducted in different ecosystems around the world to investigate whether richness and composition of species or functional groups (FG) of ant communities can be predicted during the restoration process. Moreover, we aimed to understand the influence of restoration technique (natural regeneration or active restoration), ecosystem type (temperate or tropical), and past land use (mining or pasture) on ant communities in areas undergoing restoration processes. Notwithstanding the varied conditions in which the studies were carried out, our meta-analysis showed that reestablishment of ant FG takes place more quickly than species richness. The recovery of ant diversity is faster in tropical ecosystems and areas under natural regeneration can have higher ant diversity than the reference areas. In temperate ecosystems, mined areas under restoration are less likely to recover the number of species than FG richness. Both species and FG composition were less predictable in our meta-analysis. As the publication of new datasets is increasing, we hope that future meta-analyses can build on the present study to further describe and understand the patterns in ant communities to be used as indicators of ecosystem restoration. © 2019 Elsevier Ltd
The status and biogeography of Mesoamerican seasonally dry tropical forests (SDTF) are briefly described. Two areas with SDTF conservation initiatives, one in Oaxaca, Mexico, the other in southern Nicaragua, are described. The degree to which scientific practices have influenced their establishment is discussed. The reasons for the selection of these areas as sites for biodiversity conservation are shown to be largely determined without recourse to scientific procedures such as biodiversity assessment or systematic reserve selection. It is argued that such opportunistic reserve selection, especially where local concerns are taken into account, is inevitable and can contribute much to the conservation of Mesoamerican SDTF.
What happens when swidden cultivation systems in tropical forests become land-constrained? In this paper we report the findings of a long-term, interdisciplinary project on swidden farming, swidden farming households, and the forest landscape in a Peruvian Amazonian peasant community that has faced growing land scarcity over the past 35 years. Data were gathered at the household and plot level in 1994/95 and 2007 on land use, land cover, demographics, income and assets. By employing ‘retrospective field history assessment’, we reconstructed the historical land portfolios and demographic profiles of households since inception, enabling us to track changes in cropping and fallowing as well as land cover change and household composition through time. These data were combined with aerial photograph and satellite imagery interpretation to independently assess change in forest cover and type. We find that farmers confronted growing land scarcity through outmigration, diversification of land holdings, increased use of fallow products and of orchards as both an income source and as fallows, and agricultural innovation through the use of biochar on charcoal kiln sites and home gardens. The forest surrounding the community has become younger over time and more heterogeneous in age but more homogeneous in biodiversity. The paper concludes with five general lessons: (1) forest peasants are highly resilient to land scarcity; (2) forests play an overlooked role in agricultural intensification; (3) the ‘modal’ forest farmer does not exist; (4) early land endowment is key to understanding farmer land use and poverty dynamics; and, (5) swidden forests are social landscapes. © 2017 Elsevier Ltd
Using newly-released and globally available high-resolution remote sensing data on forest loss, we update the assessment of the cross-country determinants of deforestation in developing countries.     We validate most of the major determinants found in the previous literature, generally based on earlier time-periods, except for the role of institutional quality. Agricultural trade, hitherto relatively neglected, is found to be one of the main factors causing deforestation. Focusing on the effect of international trade, we show that countries with different levels of relative forest cover react differently to a shock in agricultural exports' value. We also emphasize that taking countries' development into account may be critical in assessing global deforestation trends. The impact of trade is high in countries still endowed with a large proportion of forest cover while it is lower in countries with smaller remaining forest cover.     We finally estimate, through a simple calibration exercise, the requirements for a cost-effective REDD+ policy for compensating trade losses in an open economy exporting agricultural commodities and endowed with tropical forests. We conclude that, in a world with increasing global demand, it might be costly to compensate totally and thus to offer the right incentives for developing countries to limit deforestation. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Around the world, there is growing desire and momentum for ecological restoration to happen faster, with better quality, and in more extensive areas. The question we ask is how can laws and governmental regulations best contribute to effective, successful, and broad-scale restoration? In the state of São Paulo, Brazil, there is a legal instrument (SMA 08-2008) whose aim is to increase the effectiveness of tropical forest restoration projects in particular. It establishes, among other things, requirements regarding the minimum number of native tree species to be reached within a given period of time in restoration projects and the precise proportion of functional groups or threatened species to be included when reforestation with native species is used as a restoration technique. There are, however, two differing perspectives among Brazilian restoration ecologists on the appropriateness of such detailed legal rules. For some, the rules help increase the chances that mandatory projects of ecological restoration will succeed. For the other group, there is no single way to achieve effective ecosystem restoration, and the existing science and know-how are far from sufficient to establish standardized technical and methodological norms or to justify that such norms be imposed. Both points of view are discussed here, aiming to help those developing new legislation and improving existing laws about ecological restoration. The precedents established in São Paulo, and at the federal level in Brazil, and the ongoing debate about those laws are worth considering and possibly applying elsewhere. © 2011 Society for Ecological Restoration International.
Due to anthropogenic activities, tropical rain forests face many challenges in sustaining biodiversity and maintaining global climates. This study explores how forest successional stage, tree composition, and stratum affect communities of saproxylic cerambycid beetles—concealed feeders that play important roles in forest nutrient cycling. Forty trees in five families (Fabaceae, Lecythidaceae, Malvaceae, Moraceae, and Sapotaceae) were sampled in a mosaic of old-growth and secondary forest on the Osa Peninsula, Costa Rica. Bait branches yielded 3549 cerambycid individuals in 49 species. Species richness was almost identical in old-growth and secondary forest, and both yielded specialists, but abundance was higher in old-growth forest. Overall community structure was most strongly influenced by host plant species; within most plant families it was also impacted by forest successional status. Moraceae was the exception, presumably because the focal tree species was abundant in both old-growth and secondary forest. Several host and old-growth specialist species reached high densities within patches of old-growth forest, but seldom colonized apparently suitable trees within secondary forest. This suggests that even small areas of old-growth forest can act as refuges, but that secondary forest may act as a barrier to dispersal. The vulnerability of specialized saproxylic insects to land use change will be linked to the ability of their preferred hosts to disperse to and persist in successional habitats; rearing studies may provide the most accurate method to monitor community changes over time. © 2017 The Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation
1. Microchiropteran bats have the potential to be important biodiversity indicator species as they are distributed globally and are important in ecosystem functioning. Survey and monitoring protocols for bats are often ineffective as sampling techniques vary in their efficacy depending on the species involved and habitats surveyed. Acoustic sampling using bat detectors may prove an alternative or complementary technique to capture methods but is largely untested in the tropics. 2. To compare the efficacy of bat detectors and capture methods in surveys, we used ground mist nets, sub-canopy mist nets and harp traps to sample bats while simultaneously recording the echolocation calls of insectivorous bats in a diversity of habitats in the Yucatan, Mexico. We described echolocation calls, analysed call characteristics to identify species, and compared species inventories derived from traditional capture methods with those derived from acoustic sampling. 3. A total of 2819 bats representing 26 species and six families were captured; 83% were captured in ground nets, 13% in sub-canopy nets and 4% in harp traps. Fourteen species and five phonic types were identified based on five echolocation call characteristics. Discriminant function analysis showed a high level of correct classification of the calls (84.1%), indicating that identification of species by their echolocation calls is feasible. 4. In all habitats, acoustic sampling and capture methods sampled significantly more species each night than capture methods alone. Capture methods failed to sample 30% of the bat fauna, and aerial insectivores were sampled only by bat detectors. 5. Synthesis and applications. Given the importance of bats in ecosystem functioning, and their potential as indicator species, developing effective methodologies to survey and monitor bats is important for sustainable forest management and biodiversity conservation. Acoustic sampling should be used with capture methods to increase inventory completeness in bat assemblage studies, and could form part of a single standardized monitoring protocol that can be used globally in tropical forests, as this method detects aerial insectivores not sampled by capture methods. © 2008 The Authors.
Here we present Tambopata: Who Owns Paradise?, a map-centric, multimedia website created to enrich an educational role playing exercise about biodiversity, conservation, and development in the Amazon (www.geography.wisc.edu/tambopata). The exercise assigns students a character from the Tambopata region of the Peruvian Amazon, and asks them to evaluate four proposed zoning plans from their assigned perspective. Using principles of web cartography, we designed the four proposal maps to communicate complex information and allow for increased exploration. Compared to the previously used static maps, the website increases opportunities for student engagement with the material, incorporates multimedia, and clarifies spatial relationships and land use patterns. The website is available publicly and can be integrated freely into other university and high school courses. © 2014, Mikaela J. Weisse.
In tropical agriculture, the vigorously growing Bracken fern causes severe problems by invading pastures and out-competing the common pasture grasses. Due to infestation by that weed, pastures are abandoned after a few years, and as a fatal consequence, the biodiversity-rich tropical forest is progressively cleared for new grazing areas. Here we present a broad physiological comparison of the two plant species that are the main competitors on the pastures in the tropical Ecuadorian Andes, the planted forage grass Setaria sphacelata and the weed Bracken (Pteridium arachnoideum). With increasing elevation, the competitive power of Bracken increases as shown by satellite data of the study region. Using data obtained from field measurements, the annual biomass production of both plant species, as a measure of their competitive strength, was modeled over an elevational gradient from 1800 to 2800 m. The model shows that with increasing elevation, biomass production of the two species shifts in favor of Bracken which, above 1800 m, is capable of outgrowing the grass. In greenhouse experiments, the effects on plant growth of the presumed key variables of the elevational gradient, temperature and UV radiation, were separately analyzed. Low temperature, as well as UV irradiation, inhibited carbon uptake of the C4-grass more than that of the C3-plant Bracken. The less temperature-sensitive photosynthesis of Bracken and its effective protection from UV radiation contribute to the success of the weed on the highland pastures. In field samples of Bracken but not of Setaria, the content of flavonoids as UV-scavengers increased with the elevation. Combining modeling with measurements in greenhouse and field allowed to explain the invasive growth of a common weed in upland pastures. The performance of Setaria decreases with elevation due to suboptimal photosynthesis at lower temperatures and the inability to adapt its cellular UV screen. © 2018 Knuesting et al. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
In Southeast Asia, Cambodia has the highest rate of wildfire, and during the early 2000s, fire activity has dramatically grown. Since wildfires are frequently multidimensional, it is still challenging to assess the relative significance of each component. Assessment of the environmental condition is highly dependent on forest fire, climate, biological, and biophysical aspects investigation using Google Earth Engine (GEE) and MODIS data. This study created a framework for identifying concerns connected to forest fires in Cambodia between 2005 and 2023. There were 975.90 km2 of observed afforestation and 35561.33 km2 of deforested area due to the forest fire. The annual average rainfall observed between 2005 and 2023 shows 9.76 mm decreased while evapotranspiration increased by 24.85 mm. While Cambodia's surface temperature decreased by 2.72 °C, latent heat (LE) increased from 0.14 W/m2 (2005) to 0.22 W/m2 (2023). Surface temperature and precipitation have negative correlation values of −0.48 (2005), −0.55 (2010), −0.54 (2015), −0.52 (2020), and −0.38 (2023). Forest fires have had a major impact on Cambodia's ecosystem and climate. This study enhances the present comprehension of the causes of forest fires in Cambodia, and the methodological framework created has great potential for application to other regions of the world that are prone to forest fires. © 2025 Elsevier Ltd
The future of the Afromontane forest of southwest Ethiopia is highly influenced by coffee management intensity. The study was conducted to investigate the woody species conservation value of a human-modified forest in southwest Ethiopia. We assessed woody species composition, regeneration and forest stand structure across three different management regimes (i.e., natural forest, coffee forest and coffee agroforest using 189 plots of 400 m(2) (20 m x 20 m). A total of 64 species belonging to 33 families were identified and recorded across the three forest management regimes. About 83% of the recorded woody species were maintained in the coffee agroforest. The three forest types shared 61% of the recorded woody species. The coffee agroforest had maintained four strata or layers of stand structure. Nevertheless, the total abundance, density and basal area of woody species decreased from the natural forest to coffee forest and coffee agroforest. The Analysis of Similarity (ANOSIM) showed significant difference between the natural forest, coffee forest and coffee agroforest (Global R-Anosim = 0.36, p < 0.001). Similar regeneration patterns were recorded under the forest management regimes. Coffee agroforests simplify the woody plant composition and stand structure of the Afromontane forest in southwest Ethiopia.
Tropical forests provide habitats for diverse flora and fauna, in addition to playing a crucial role in climate regulation. They are being recognized for their roles as nature-based solutions to many sustainable development challenges, as shown by increased political commitment and global promises to reduce the rates of deforestation and boost the restoration of degraded forest ecosystems. Understanding tropical forest dynamics and their conservation status is therefore important. This study analysed the forest stand structure, the tree species composition and the regeneration status of Londiani Forest. In the three blocks of Londiani Forest, which are Kedowa, Chebewor and Londiani, belt transects that were 25 m wide and 1 km long were established. At every 200 m along the transects, 25 m × 25 m quadrats were set up in which an inventory of all the tree species was determined. Diameter tape was used to measure the diameter at breast height (DBH) 1.3 m above the ground. With the use of a Suunto angular clinometer, the tree height was measured. A nested 5 m × 5 m quadrat within the 25 m × 25 m quadrat was used to sample the saplings, while a 1m × 1 m quadrat was used to sample the seedlings. The quantities of seedlings and saplings were used to determine the state of regeneration. The data were entered into Microsoft Excel. The total stem density, species density, basal area, species basal area, relative density and species diversity were determined and extrapolated per hectare. A total of 1308 distinct trees from 34 different species and 24 families were counted. Kedowa recorded the highest (27) species richness, followed by Chebewor (19) and then Londiani (14). There was a statistically significant difference in the species richness among the three forest blocks (p < 0.05). Within the three forest blocks, there were no statistically significant variations in the basal area distribution (p > 0.005) or in the mean DBH (F = 0.560; p = 0.729) or height class distribution (F = 0.821; p = 0.558). There was a statistically significant difference in the stem density (F = 12.22; p = 0.005) and woody species diversity (F = 0.32; p = 0.001) within the three forests blocks. The similarity index ranged from 0.34–0.47. The presence of substantial numbers of seedlings and saplings in all forest blocks was an indication that there was regeneration. © 2024 by the authors.
The Amazon region harbors the most important tropical forest in the world. However, its biodiversity is seriously threatened due to land-use change. Here, we evaluated changes in tree species diversity and composition after shifting cultivation in the northern Amazon forest, Amazon state, Venezuela, through a chronosequence approach. We selected three sites over a 12 km2 extension of an old-growth forest matrix with secondary forest patches of different stand ages. A total 45 plots (each having 20 × 50 m = 1000 m2) were established. At each site, woody plant diversity and the composition of trees having diameter ≥ 5 cm were assessed in four secondary forests (5, 10, 15, and 20 years old stands after shifting cultivation) and in one old-growth forest (>100 years old), and three plots were established in each forest type. Species richness and dissimilarity pairwise beta-diversity metric were calculated for paired plots among different forest types. We analyzed differences in diversity among the four successional stages and the old-growth forest using individual-based approach. Additionally, multivariate analyses were performed to examine differences among the sampled forest areas in terms of species composition along soil gradient. Species richness showed consistently increasing pattern along the succession to old-growth forest. Species richness in the old-growth forest was up to three times higher than in forests at early successional stages. Richness recovery rate in the 20-years old secondary forest two decades after the abandonment of shifting cultivation was on average equal to 70% of the species richness in the old-growth forest. In contrast, the recovery of species composition reached an average 25% in relation to the old-growth forest during the same period. Our results show that the effect of stand age and environmental drivers (i.e., soil properties) determine species diversity along succession. The environmental heterogeneity between successional stages can be analyzed by the differences in floristic composition and beta diversity observed among the analyzed plots. For that reason, we presume that beta diversity is the major determinant of species richness in secondary forests. The proposed approach contributes to the sustainable management of forest communities because it allows estimating the woody species diversity recovering after shifting cultivation disturbance across successional stages. © 2018 Elsevier Ltd
