15-year fertilization increased soil organic carbon stock even in systems reputed to be saturated like permanent grassland on andosols			Previous long-term experiments conducted more than 10 years ago, showed that long-term application of organic fertilizer increased soil organic carbon (SOC) of grasslands. However, it was usually assumed that, independent of the successive additions of fertilizer, soils have an upper limit to their SOC due to the inability of the soil mineral phase to fix additional carbon. Andosols of the volcanic Reunion Island are typically very rich in carbon and are usually considered as saturated in SOC. To assess the long-term effect of different types of fertilization on SOC in these soils, SOC concentrations were recorded at yearly intervals for 15 years in one arenosol site and in two andosols sites across a topo-sequence. The types of fertilization tested included inorganic, organic, and a mix of inorganic and organic nutrient sources. The addition of organic fertilizers increased soil carbon in the top (0-15 cm) horizon in both the arenosol and the two andosols (up to +250% in the arenosol and up to +41% in the andosol), whereas inorganic fertilizers and the control treatment did not always result in a significant in-crease in SOC. After 15 years, no plateau was reached in C stocks even with the highest fertilization rates. Our results suggest that the increase in SOC was mainly caused by direct carbon inputs, while the effect of the in-crease in litter resulting from the increase in yield caused by fertilization, remained uncertain. In the andosol, all the fertilization treatments led to higher concentrations of carbon in the deeper layers. This suggests that SOC inputs lead to downward migration of OC to deep horizons. For C-rich soils like andosols, assessing the variations in carbon in the deep horizon is thus critical in estimating the effects of soil management on carbon sequestration.
30-YEAR RECOVERY RATE OF TIMBER VOLUME AND ABOVEGROUND CARBON DENSITY IN DIFFERENT FELLING INTENSITIES			Defining harvesting regimes for sustainable forest management is important for sustainable timber production and mitigation of climate change. Implementing sustainable forest management strategies that will contribute to these benefits will require an understanding of logging effect on tree growth and forest recovery. In this paper, we analysed the long-term growth of tropical forests logged under the Selective Management System in Peninsular Malaysia to understand how management regimes affected timber yield and carbon sequestration including the actual recovery rates. The management regimes employed were unlogged, moderately logged and intensely logged. This study showed that there was no difference in total timber volume and aboveground carbon density one year post-logging between logging intensities. The recovery rate of timber volume and aboveground carbon density varied significantly between plots with different management regimes. Intensely logged forests had a higher rate of recovery for timber volume (1.85 m3 ha-1 yr-1, CI: 1.65 to 2.02) and aboveground carbon density (1.65 tonnes C ha-1 yr-1, CI: 1.46 to 1.82). However, these long-term recovery rates were lower than the national average which will affect the supply of sustainable timber and carbon sequester from logged-over forests. The cutting cycle of 30 years that is built into the Selective Management System will not be sufficient for the recovery of logged-over forests to pre-logging status. © 2024 Forestry Department of Peninsular Malaysia. All rights reserved.
8th Asia Conference on Environment and Sustainable Development, ACESD 2023			The proceedings contain 35 papers. The special focus in this conference is on Environment and Sustainable Development. The topics include: One-Step Synthesis of Magnetic Biochar from Durian Shell Via K2FeO4 Activation for Lead Removal; profiling Waste Management and Modeling Circular Economy Transition of Dairy Cattle Farmer Groups in Pacitan Indonesia; mapping Wetland Habitat Changes Using Remote Sensing in Mai Po and Inner Deep Bay, Hong Kong from 1986 to 2020; robinson Bayou Basin Improvement Study; characterization and Application of Biochar Derived from Snake Fruit Peel for Lead Adsorption; Assessment of the Impact of COVID-19 Lockdown on the Spatio-Temporal Distribution of PM2.5 in Thailand; hyperspectral Imaging for e-waste Material Identification; Proximity Analysis Using GIS to Understand BTEX Exposure and Its Risk Assessment; life Cycle Assessment of the Production of Concrete Masonry Units in the United Arab Emirates; measuring the Environmental Impact of Maize, Sorghum, and Millets Production in Madhya Pradesh: A Comparative Analysis Using Life Cycle Assessment; disentangling the Interlinkages Between Humans, Biodiversity Loss, and Climate Change in the Tropical Region; soil Carbon Sequestration in Ponds of Gordon Euryale Seed in the Pear River Delta; enhancing the Climate Resilience of Semiarid River Systems and Their Catchments; unraveling YouTube Stances on Global Warming: An In-Depth Analysis of Skeptics and Believers; impact of Electricity Mix on the Eco-Friendliness of Electric Vehicles; design Considerations for Distributed Electrical Energy Storage in Sustainable Urban Environment; study on Carbon Emission Pattern Derived from Electricity Data for Rural Area—A Case Study of Yushan Island.
A 70-year perspective on tropical forest regeneration			Forested areas of the world decreased by 129 million hectare during the past quarter-century, and only 35 % of remainder is primary forest. Secondary forests are therefore relatively more important for biodiversity conservation, catchment protection, climate control, and the ecological services they provide. Many governments expend large resources on afforestation projects, which may not be supported by objective data on rates and pathways of natural succession in secondary forest. This paper describes a 70-year succession of tropical forest in Hong Kong under different management regimes including afforestation programs, frequent fire, and fire protection. From complete destruction of its forest during the Second World War, forest has established rapidly in areas where a shrub cover was able to colonize. The practice of afforestation as a nursery stage on degraded hillsides, for establishment of forest seedlings by natural invasion is not supported by the evidence, as when the native Pinus massoniana plantations were eliminated by disease during the 1970s, no forest or woody species were seen in the areas affected. In fact there was a reversion to grassland, which persisted there for almost three decades, until recent shrub invasion. The fastest period of forest regeneration, at 10.9% annually between 1989 and 2001, occurred when shrubland edge was greatest and forest was able to colonize across interfluves between linear-shaped riparian shrublands in valley bottoms. After 2001, succession to forest was slower, at 7.8% annually, as forest patches consolidated and edge habitats reduced. Effective forest management policies could include seeding of native shrubs extending linearly from established forest, to maximize edge length between woody species and grasslands, and planting of late successional species in areas where forest pioneers are in decline. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
A bioenergy- focused versus a reforestation- focused mitigation pathway yields disparate carbon storage and climate responses			Limiting global warming to 2 degrees C requires urgent action on land - based mitigation. This study evaluates the biogeochemical and biogeophysical implications of two alternative land - based mitigation scenarios that aim to achieve the same radiative forcing. One scenario is primarily driven by bioenergy expansion (SSP226Lu- BIOCROP), while the other involves re/afforestation (SSP126Lu- REFOREST). We find that overall, SSP126Lu- REFOREST is a more efficient strategy for removing CO2 from the atmosphere by 2100, resulting in a net carbon sink of 242 - 483 PgC with smaller uncertainties compared to SSP226Lu- BIOCROP, which exhibits a wider range of -78 - 621 PgC. However, SSP126Lu- REFOREST leads to a relatively warmer planetary climate than SSP226Lu- BIOCROP, and this relative warming can be intensified in certain re/afforested regions where local climates are not favorable for tree growth. Despite the cooling effect on a global scale, SSP226Lu- BIOCROP reshuffles regional warming hotspots, amplifying summer temperatures in vulnerable tropical regions such as Central Africa and Southeast Asia. Our findings highlight the need for strategic land use planning to identify suitable regions for re/afforestation and bioenergy expansion, thereby improving the likelihood of achieving the intended climate mitigation outcomes. Significance Our study compares two land - based mitigation scenarios that limit global warming to 2 degrees C, primarily driven by bioenergy expansion and re/afforestation. While the re/afforestation- focused scenario excels in CO2 removal with lower uncertainties, it could lead to a relatively warmer regional climate than the bioenergy expansion-focused scenario, especially in regions unfavorable for tree growth. Despite the global cooling effect, the bioenergy expansion- focused approach, however, reshuffles regional warming hotspots, potentially amplifying summer temperatures in vulnerable regions such as Central Africa and Southeast Asia. Our study highlights the importance of carefully locating suitable re/afforestation and bioenergy expansion regions for achieving intended climate mitigation outcomes. Our research provides valuable insights for future land use planning and policy decisions to mitigate climate change.
A comparative assessment of the financial costs and carbon benefits of REDD plus strategies in Southeast Asia			REDD+ holds potential for mitigating emissions from tropical forest loss by providing financial incentives for carbon stored in forests, but its economic viability is under scrutiny. The primary narrative raised in the literature is thatREDD+ will be of limited utility for reducing forest carbon loss in Southeast Asia, while the level of finance committed falls short of profits from alternative land-use activities in the region, including large-scale timber and oil palm operations. Here we assess the financial costs and carbon benefits of various REDD+ strategies deployed in the region. We find the cost of reducing emissions ranges from $9 to $75 per tonne of avoided carbon emissions. The strategies focused on reducing forest degradation and promoting forest regrowth are the most cost-effective ways of reducing emissions and used in over 60% ofREDD+ projects. By comparing the financial costs and carbon benefits of a broader range of strategies than previously assessed, we highlight the variation between different strategies and draw attention to opportunities where REDD+ can achieve maximum carbon benefits cost-effectively. These findings have broad policy implications for Southeast Asia. Until carbon finance escalates, emissions reductions can be maximized from reforestation, reduced-impact logging and investing in improved management of protected areas. Targeting cost-efficient opportunities for REDD+ is important to improve the efficiency of national REDD+ policy, which in-turn fosters greater financial and political support for the scheme.
A Critical Comparison of Conventional, Certified, and Community Management of Tropical Forests for Timber in Terms of Environmental, Economic, and Social Variables			Tropical forests are crucial in terms of biodiversity and ecosystem services, but at the same time, they are major sources of revenue and provide livelihoods for forest-dependent people. Hopes for the simultaneous achievement of conservation goals and poverty alleviation are therefore increasingly placed on forests used for timber extraction. Most timber exploitation is carried out unsustainably, which causes forest degradation. Two important mechanisms have emerged to promote sustainable forest management: certification and community-based forest management (CFM). We synthesize the published information about how forest certification and CFM perform in terms of environmental, social, and economic variables. With the caveat that very few published studies meet the standards for formal impact evaluation, we found that certification has substantial environmental benefits, typically achieved at a cost of reduced short-term financial profit, and accompanied by some improvement to the welfare of neighboring communities. We found that the economic and environmental benefits of CFM are understudied, but that the social impacts are controversial, with both positive and negative changes reported. We identify the trade-offs that likely caused these conflicting results and that, if addressed, would help both CFM and certification deliver the hoped-for benefits.
A critical review of exploring the recent trends and technological advancements in forest biomass estimation			Biomass estimation is pivotal in understanding and managing global carbon stocks, offering vital insights into climate change and environmental ecology. It serves as a critical tool for evaluating carbon sequestration potential, a natural mechanism for regulating atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. Accurate estimation of forest biomass not only aids in quantifying carbon stocks but also provides a basis for sustainable forest management, conservation efforts, and policymaking to mitigate climate change impacts. This article provides a comprehensive review of various biomass estimation methods, including ground-based measurements, remote sensing technologies, and hybrid approaches. Each method's strengths, limitations, and practical applications are critically examined, highlighting their suitability for different spatial scales and ecological contexts. Traditional methods, while precise at small scales, are often labour-intensive and limited in coverage. In contrast, remote sensing technologies such as LiDAR, RADAR, and hyperspectral imaging have revolutionized biomass estimation by enabling large-scale and high-resolution assessments. Additionally, recent advancements in machine learning, data fusion, and satellite-based monitoring systems are transforming the field, offering unprecedented accuracy and efficiency. By presenting these trends and innovations, this article provides valuable insights for researchers, practitioners, and policymakers, emphasizing the importance of integrating advanced technologies into biomass estimation for sustainable development and climate resilience.
A dynamic model of patterns of deforestation and their effect on the ability of the Brazilian Amazonia to provide ecosystem services			This paper presents a dynamic systems model that shows how different land use patterns degrade the value of ecosystem services provided by the Brazilian Amazonia. The model consists of four sectors: (1) deforestation drivers; (2) land use/cover; (3) ecosystem services; and (4) ecosystem valuation. The deforestation drivers sector models the economic and social incentives that small farmers and large pasture investors have for clearing the forest. The land use/cover sector shows how these different groups clear land, and further shows how patterns of forest succession and associated biomass differ by primary land use type. Different land use patterns greatly impact the quality and economic value of ecosystem services. These impacts are dealt with in the ecosystem services sector, which models the region's hydrological cycle, the nutrient cycle, carbon sequestration capacity, and species diversity. Calculations are made in the ecosystem valuation sector according to a reference monetary value for these ecosystem services. The model calculates the change in these values according to the land use practices that occur over time. Findings show that over a 100-year simulation, forest area remains about 44% of original area with pasture and abandoned pasture becoming the dominant land cover, The value of ecosystem services declines from $1431 to $658 and $781 ha(-1) year(-1) for agriculture and pasture, respectively. These findings are compared to annual revenue derived from different land use practices for which land was cleared in the Brazilian Amazonia. In the context of these findings, the authors discuss how an explicit monetary valuation of ecosystem services could create positive incentives for land stewardship and conservation. (C) 2001 Elsevier Science BN. All rights reserved.
A framework for application of the landscape approach to forest conservation and restoration in Sierra Leone			Sierra Leone has made some progress in creating protected areas for wildlife and biodiversity conservation. Yet deforestation and habitat loss remain pervasive, driven largely by unregulated exploitation and poor land use practices. With over 50% of the country (similar to 36,000 km(2)) having climate that is favorable for tropical forest vegetation, there is considerable opportunity to advance the landscape approach for forest conservation. We propose a framework to address this need for the globally threatened Upper Guinea rainforest, which has its westernmost extent in Sierra Leone. The framework considers forest and tree cover in the following categories: old growth, disturbed old growth, secondary growth, and managed. We discuss how this typology can foster application of the landscape approach to forest conservation and restoration, including policy options to enhance protection of forests, increase tree cover in production systems, and incentivize innovative land use practices by local communities.
A framework for integrating biodiversity concerns into national REDD+ programmes			The UNFCCC mechanism for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation in developing countries (REDD+) represents an unprecedented opportunity for the conservation of forest biodiversity. Nevertheless, there are widespread concerns surrounding the possibility of negative environmental outcomes if biodiversity is not given adequate consideration throughout the REDD+ process. We propose a general framework for incorporating biodiversity concerns into national REDD+ programmes based on well-established ecological principles and experiences. First, we identify how biodiversity distribution and threat data, together with data on biodiversity responses to forest change and management, can be readily incorporated into the strategic planning process for REDD+ in order to identify priority areas and activities for investment that will deliver returns for both carbon and biodiversity. Second, we propose that assessments of changes in biodiversity following REDD+ implementation could be greatly facilitated by paralleling, where possible, the existing IPCC architecture for assessing carbon emissions. A three-tiered approach is proposed for biodiversity assessment, where lower tiers can provide a realistic starting point for countries with fewer data and lower technical capacities. Planning and assessment of biodiversity safeguards for REDD+ need not overburden an already encumbered UNFCCC process. Immediate progress is already possible for a large number of developing countries, and a gradual, phased approach to implementation would minimise risks and facilitate the protection of additional biodiversity benefits from REDD+ activities. Greater levels of coordination between the UNFCCC and CBD, as well as other agencies and stakeholder groups interested in forest conservation are needed if biodiversity safeguards are to be fully adopted and implemented. © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
A framework for integrating environmental modeling towards enhancing bundled environmental services: An example from an Andean watershed			0
A general integrative framework for modelling woody biomass production and carbon sequestration rates in forests			1. Forests are an important, yet poorly understood, component of the global carbon cycle. We develop a general integrative framework for modelling the influences of stand age, environmental conditions, climate change and disturbance on woody biomass production and carbon sequestration. We use this framework to explore drivers of carbon cycling in New Zealand mountain beech forests, using a 30-year sequence of data from 246 permanent inventory plots.2. A series of disturbance events (wind, snow storms, earthquakes and beetle outbreaks) had major effects on carbon fluxes: by killing large trees, they removed significant quantities of carbon from the woody biomass pool, and by creating canopy gaps, they reduced the crown area index (CAI) of stands (i.e. canopy area per unit ground area) and woody biomass production. A patch-dynamics model, which we parameterized using permanent plot data, predicts that episodic disturbance events can create long-term (c. 100-year) oscillations in carbon stocks at the regional scale.3. Productivity declined with stand age, as shown in many other studies, but the effect was hard to detect because of canopy disturbance. Individual trees can increase productivity by adjusting the positioning, nutrient content and angle of leaves within canopies. We show that such optimization is most effective when trees are large and suggest it reduces the impact of water and nutrient limitation in old stands.4. We found no evidence that forests were responding to changing climatic conditions, although strong altitudinal trends in biomass production indicate that global warming could alter carbon fluxes in future.5. Synthesis. Our study emphasizes the critical role of disturbance in driving forest carbon fluxes. Losses of biomass arising from tree death (particularly in older stands) exceeded gains arising from growth for most of the 30-year study, moving 0.3 Mg C ha(-1)year(-1) from biomass to detritus and atmospheric pools. Large-scale disturbance events are prevalent in many forests world-wide, and these events are likely to be a driving factor in determining forest carbon sequestration patterns over the next century.
A global estimate of carbon stored in the world's mountain grasslands and shrublands, and the implications for climate policy			Carbon market and climate finance schemes (e.g. the CDM, REDD+ and the Green Climate Fund) are being investigated for their ability to achieve enhanced sustainability outcomes in terrestrial forests, lowland grasslands and marine ecosystems, all which store large amounts of carbon (C). To date however climate policy discourse has largely overlooked the conservation of existing C stored in mountain grasslands and shrublands. These ecosystems provide critical ecological goods and services to humanity yet are increasingly at risk from anthropogenic stressors including agricultural intensification, mining and climate change. The absence of a global estimate for these C stocks is likely to be one reason for their exclusion from climate change policy discussions, both on a political and scientific basis. This represents a missed opportunity in two respects: firstly, by conserving and restoring existing C stocks the impacts of climate change can be lessened; and secondly, carbon finance and climate finance might provide the necessary financial support to address the aforementioned stressors. In this paper we use spatial analysis and estimate there to be between 60.5. Pg C and 82.8. Pg of C contained within biomass and soils of the world's mountain grasslands and shrublands. To put this in perspective, globally tropical Savannas and grasslands, temperate forests and tropical peatlands are estimated to contain 326-330. Pg C, 159-292. Pg C and 88.6. Pg C respectively. Our review of existing empirical studies and of United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) national greenhouse accounts suggests that this C is not reliably accounted for in international carbon budgets. Our estimate is the first to provide a global point of reference, useful in developing future research and in climate policy discussions. We conclude by briefly discussing how climate finance might be leveraged to support the sustainable management of these C stocks, and in so doing uphold the other important socioeconomic benefits provided to humanity. © 2014 Elsevier Ltd.
A global evaluation of the effectiveness of voluntary REDD plus projects at reducing deforestation and degradation in the moist tropics			Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) projects aim to contribute to climate change mitigation by protecting and enhancing carbon stocks in tropical forests, but there have been no systematic global evaluations of their impact. We used a new data set for tropical humid forests and a standardized evaluation approach (based on pixel matching) to quantify the performance of a representative sample of 40 voluntary REDD+ projects in 9 countries certified under the Verified Carbon Standard (VCS). In the first 5 years of implementation, deforestation within project areas was reduced by 47% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 24-68) compared with matched counterfactual pixels, and degradation rates were 58% lower (95% CI: 49-63). Reductions were small in absolute terms but greater in sites located in high-deforestation settings and did not appear to be substantially undermined by leakage activities in forested areas within 10 km of project boundaries. At the 26th Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the international community renewed its commitment to tackling tropical deforestation as a nature-based solution to climate change. Our results indicate that incentivizing forest conservation through voluntary site-based projects can slow tropical deforestation and highlight the particular importance of prioritizing financing for areas at greater risk of deforestation.
A global meta-analysis of the biodiversity and ecosystem service benefits of coffee and cacao agroforestry			In tropical regions, the extent of agricultural land is rapidly increasing at the expense of natural forest with associated losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services. Agroforestry has long been proposed as a more sustainable agricultural system, conserving biodiversity and ecosystem services, while providing significant local livelihood. In this context, cacao and coffee agroforestry is often regarded as more compatible with conservation of ecosystem integrity than cacao and coffee plantations. Using meta-analytical techniques and mixed models on data from 74 studies conducted across Africa, Latin America and Asia, a global quantitative synthesis was performed to assess the impact on biodiversity and on ecosystem services of (i) the conversion of natural forest into cacao and coffee agroforestiy and (ii) the further intensification of agroforest into cacao and coffee plantation. Forest species richness and total species richness were significantly lower in the more intensively managed than in the more natural land use categories. Response ratios showed that the decline in total species richness was higher when comparing agroforest with plantation (-46%), than when comparing forest with agroforest (-11%). Biodiversity responses to intensification differed between Asia and Latin America, and between different species groups. Response ratios showed that management intensification decreased provision of ecosystem services with 37% when comparing forest with agroforest and with 27% when comparing agroforest with plantation. Our data suggest that species richness decline follows a concave yield function whereas ecosystem service decline follows a more convex yield function. Finally, we identified knowledge gaps related to a conspicuous lack of studies in Africa, and a general underreporting of ecosystem services and environmental variables related to agricultural intensification. (C) 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights
A global review of past land use, climate, and active vs. passive restoration effects on forest recovery			Global forest restoration targets have been set, yet policy makers and land managers lack guiding principles on how to invest limited resources to achieve them. We conducted a meta-analysis of 166 studies in naturally regenerating and actively restored forests worldwide to answer: (1) To what extent do floral and faunal abundance and diversity and biogeochemical functions recover? (2) Does recovery vary as a function of past land use, time since restoration, forest region, or precipitation? (3) Does active restoration result in more complete or faster recovery than passive restoration? Overall, forests showed a high level of recovery, but the time to recovery depended on the metric type measured, past land use, and region. Abundance recovered quickly and completely, whereas diversity recovered slower in tropical than in temperate forests. Biogeochemical functions recovered more slowly after agriculture than after logging or mining. Formerly logged sites were mostly passively restored and generally recovered quickly. Mined sites were nearly always actively restored using a combination of planting and either soil amendments or recontouring topography, which resulted in rapid recovery of the metrics evaluated. Actively restoring former agricultural land, primarily by planting trees, did not result in consistently faster or more complete recovery than passively restored sites. Our results suggest that simply ending the land use is sufficient for forests to recover in many cases, but more studies are needed that directly compare the value added of active versus passive restoration strategies in the same system. Investments in active restoration should be evaluated relative to the past land use, the natural resilience of the system, and the specific objectives of each project.
A global review of rubber plantations: Impacts on ecosystem functions, mitigations, future directions, and policies for sustainable cultivation			The growing global need for latex is driving rubber plantation (RP) expansion since the last century, with >2 Mha of cultivation area being established in the last decade. Southeast Asia is the hotspot for rubber cultivation at other land-use costs. Although rubber cultivation has improved the economic status of farmers, it has altered the habitat's ecology and ecosystem functions (EF). However, studies on the impacts of RP on EF are limited, and a clear overview is not available. To bridge this gap, we conducted an inclusive review of the EF of RP, includ-ing soil carbon storage, aboveground biomass (AGB) and belowground biomass (BGB), litter production and de-composition, respiration, and biodiversity (plants, animals, soil fauna, and microbes). We compared the EF in RP (monoculture) with those in forests because the conversion of forests to RP is prevalent in the tropics and be-cause most RP studies used forests as reference ecosystems. We found RP generally have lower EF than forests. The impacts of RP on some EF are more severe (e.g., AGB, BGB, and plant diversity), causing decreases of >55%, and the effects are consistently negative irrespective of plantation age. However, including agroforestry or polyculture, integrated pest management, cover cropping, mulching, and composting can improve the EF in RP to some extent. We highlighted research gaps, particularly substantial research gaps concerning the influence of plant diversity treatments (i.e., agroforestry) performed in RP on EF. Additionally, more empirical data on the significance of spatial and temporal levels are required, such as how the impact on EF could vary with climate and RP age, as we showed some examples where EF differs spatially and temporally. More importantly, further research on plantation management to offset EF losses is needed. Finally, we emphasized knowledge gaps and suggested future directions and policies for improving EF in RP. (c) 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
A history of hubris - Cautionary lessons in ecologically sustainable forest management			Logging is one of the most important forms of native-forest exploitation and can have substantial impacts on biodiversity and key ecosystem services. Here we briefly contrast logging operations in temperate and tropical forests and then highlight several challenges for understanding the ecological impacts of logging. We argue that many logging studies are conducted at small spatial scales or over inadequate time periods, and are biased against finding significant negative impacts. This is because of confounding environmental differences between logged and unlogged forests as well as the prolonged nature of forest stand development. Human perceptions of logging also can be biased by the 'shifting baseline' phenomenon, and by an incorrect perception that logging operations approximate natural disturbance regimes. We argue that the ecological impacts of logging can be more challenging to detect than is often appreciated, and that forest managers and decision-makers should be cautious when weighing the arguments of pro-logging lobbies. (C) 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
A landscape approach for cost-effective large-scale forest restoration			1. Achieving global targets for forest restoration will require cost-effective strategies to return agricultural land to forest, while minimizing implementation costs and negative outcomes for agricultural production.2. We present a landscape approach for optimizing the cost-effectiveness of large-scale forest restoration. Across three different landscapes within Brazil's Atlantic Forest biodiversity hotspot, we modelled landscape scenarios based on spatially explicit data on the probability of natural regeneration, restoration costs, land opportunity costs, and forest restoration outcomes for increasing carbon stocking and landscape connectivity. We compare benefits of our cost-reduction approach to the legally mandated riparian restoration and randomly distributed approaches.3. Compared with riparian prioritization and considering both implementation and opportunity costs, our cost-reduction scenario produced the greatest savings (20.9%) in mechanized agricultural landscapes.4. When only considering implementation costs, our cost-reduction scenario led to the highest savings (38.4%) in the landscape with highest forest cover where natural regeneration potential is highest and enables cost-effective carbon stocking and connectivity.5. Synthesis and applications. We present a guide for forest restoration planning that maximizes specific outcomes with minimal costs and reduction of agricultural production. Furthermore, we show how policies could encourage prioritization of low-cost restoration via natural regeneration, increasing cost-effectiveness. While our study focuses on Brazil's Atlantic Forest, the approach can be parameterized for other regions.
A long-term decrease in the persistence of soil carbon caused by ancient Maya land use			The long-term effects of deforestation on tropical forest soil carbon reservoirs are important for estimating the consequences of land use on the global carbon cycle, but are poorly understood. The Maya Lowlands of Mexico and Guatemala provide a unique opportunity to assess this question, given the widespread deforestation by the ancient Maya that began similar to 4,000 years ago. Here, we compare radiocarbon ages of plant waxes and macrofossils in sediment cores from three lakes in the Maya Lowlands to record past changes in the mean soil transit time of plant waxes (MTTwax). MTTwax indicates the average age of plant waxes that are transported from soils to lake sediments, and comparison of radiocarbon data from soils and lake sediments within the same catchment indicates that MTTwax reflects the age of carbon in deep soils. All three sediment cores showed a decrease in MTTwax, ranging from 2,300 to 800 years, over the past 3,500 years. This decrease in MTTwax, indicating shorter storage times for carbon in lake catchment soils, is associated with evidence for ancient Maya deforestation. MTTwax never recovered to pre- deforestation values, despite subsequent reforestation, implying that current tropical deforestation will have long- lasting effects on soil carbon sinks.
A look at Intact Forest Landscapes (IFLs) and their relevance in Central African forest policy			Tropical forests are major providers of natural resources and ecosystem services but their ecological functions are at threat, due to increasing human pressure linked to economic development. The identification of priority areas for conservation is crucial for land use planning to ensure the protection of biodiversity and ecological function. Intact Forest Landscapes (IFLs), as defined by Greenpeace and World Resources Institute (WRI), are areas of the forest ecosystems not subjected to human activities. They have been identified by mapping human disturbances through remote sensing. Contrary to similar global-scale concepts, IFLs have been integrated into the standards of the certification body Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) and therefore have practical implications for forest management policies. The Motion 65, approved in the general assembly of FSC in 2014, mandates the protection of IFLs located in FSC certified logging concessions. Until the implementation of national standards, forestry operations are banished from 80% of the IFL area within each forest management unit. To trace the history and evaluate the suitability of IFLs in the Central African context, we searched for documents related to the IFL method, and related approaches focusing on the identification of areas devoid of human disturbances. The IFL method is simple and cost-effective and allows for a global assessment of the influence of human infrastructures and industrial exploitation on forests. However, the method does not consider the situation below the canopy and those forest components not visible by satellites. For example, hunting, one of the main threats faced by wildlife in Central African forests today, cannot be detected with satellite imagery. On the other hand, other anthropogenic activities which remote sensing may detect may be compatible with forest ecosystem conservation. To better tailor the IFL approach to Central African forests, we recommend (i) the consideration of wildlife communities in the intactness analysis, (ii) a thorough evaluation of the impacts of human activities on forest ecosystems, and (iii) the integration of local stakeholders and governments in the design of land management strategies to respond to social, economic and environmental needs. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
A meta-analytical global comparison of aboveground biomass accumulation between tropical secondary forests and monoculture plantations			Secondary forests and monoculture plantations are widespread in the tropics and are the two most common forms of reforestation. To assess the value of both systems for CO2 mitigation, we performed a systematic analysis of the two systems comparing growth rates and potential to store carbon. The increasing involvement of these forest types in carbon trading makes a pertinent issue. We used a meta-analytical approach to evaluate relative rates of aboveground growth (biomass accumulation) in secondary forests and monoculture plantations, controlling for climate and site characteristics. We find a general tendency for aboveground biomass accumulation (ABA) to be marginally higher in plantations than secondary forests. Three recorded site factors were significantly associated with ABA, but differed between reforestation types. Plantation growth rates were negatively correlated with precipitation seasonality, while growth rates of secondary forest were positively correlated with surrounding tree cover and negatively correlated with duration of prior land use. It is noteworthy that poor reporting of site history such as prior land-use duration, particularly in monoculture plantations, and a strong bias in studies towards measuring young forest plots obfuscates evaluation of some ecological drivers and long-term processes. We conclude that the difference in ABA between tropical secondary forests and monoculture plantations is smaller than previously assumed, emphasising the potential of secondary forests for low-cost carbon storage and biomass production, particularly in landscapes with high existing tree cover or highly seasonal rainfall. (C) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
A Natural Forest of Commercial Timber Species: Logging or Not Logging			Most tropical forests outside protected areas have been or will be selectively logged because the timber industry is a main income-generating resource for many developing countries. Therefore, understanding the composition of commercial timber species and logging types is key for sustainable forest management in countries like Vietnam as they move toward fulfilling Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) agreements. Seven 1-ha plots were surveyed in the Central Highland of Vietnam, and 18 commercial tree species from these plots, whose timber is widely used by local people for housing and furniture making and timber is easily sold at local markets for high prices, were analyzed. In total, 151 tree species with a diameter at breast height (DBH) of ≥ 10 cm were recorded. The 18 commercially valuable species assessed in this study accounted for 33.2% of all stems (total of 524 stems ha−1 for all species), 47.1% of basal area (total of 34.35 m2 ha−1 for all species), and 50.8% of aboveground biomass/AGB (total of 262.68 Mg ha−1 for all species). Practicing diameter-limit harvesting of all commercially valuable species with DBH of ≥ 40 cm, which is widely performed in Vietnam, will reduce the number of stems by 7%, basal area by 31.6%, and AGB by 38.2%. Because such harvesting practices cause severe ecological impacts on the remaining forest, logged forests may require > 40 years to recover the structure status of a pre-logged forest. In addition, the recovery of the 18 commercially valuable species may require a much longer time because they comprised 33.2% of stems. Permission for logging natural forests should be given in Vietnam to sustain lives of local communities, where logging has been prohibited. However, alternative harvesting systems, such as reduced-impact logging systems, should be considered. The systems selected must simultaneously generate economic returns for local people and respect the REDD+ agreements with regard to protecting biodiversity and reducing carbon emissions. © 2018, Steve Harrison, John Herbohn.
A network to understand the changing socio-ecology of the southern African woodlands (SEOSAW): Challenges, benefits, and methods			Societal Impact StatementThe sustainable management of the southern African woodlands is closely linked to the livelihoods of over 150 M people. Findings from the Socio-Ecological Observatory for the Southern African Woodlands (SEOSAW) will underpin the sustainability of two of the largest industries on the continent: woodfuels and timber. SEOSAW will also improve our understanding of how human use shapes the biogeography and functioning of these ecosystems.SummaryHere we describe a new network of researchers and long-term, in situ, measurements that will characterize the changing socio-ecology of the woodlands of southern Africa. These woodlands encompass the largest savanna in the world, but are chronically understudied, with few long-term measurements. A network of permanent sample plots (PSPs) is required to: (a) address management issues, particularly related to sustainable harvesting for energy and timber; (b) understand how the woodlands are responding to a range of global and local drivers, such as climate change, CO2 fertilization, and harvesting; and (c) answer basic questions about biogeography, ecosystem function, and the role humans play in shaping the ecology of the region. We draw on other successful networks of PSPs and adapt their methods to the specific challenges of working in southern African woodlands. In particular we suggest divergences from established forest monitoring protocols that are needed to (a) adapt to a high level of ecosystem structural diversity (from open savanna to dry forest); (b) quantify the chronic disturbances by people, fire, and herbivores; (c) quantify the diversity and function of the understory of grasses, forbs, and shrubs; (d) understand the life histories of resprouting trees; and (e) conduct work in highly utilized, human-dominated landscapes. We conclude by discussing how the SEOSAW network will integrate with remote sensing and modeling approaches. Throughout, we highlight the challenges inherent to integrating work by forest and savanna ecologists, and the wide range of skills needed to fully understand the socio-ecology of the southern African woodlands.
A new initiative to use carbon trading for tropical forest conservation			I describe a new initiative, led by a coalition of developing nations, to devise a viable mechanism for using carbon trading to protect old-growth tropical forests. I highlight some of the practical and political hurdles involved in forest-carbon trading, and explain why this initiative is rapidly gaining broad-based political support.
A new instrument for measurement and collection of quantitative samples of the litter layer in forests			The litter layer plays an important role in the maintenance of tropical forests. The evaluation of parameters such as thickness or water content can reveal forest conditions that are of global relevance (for example carbon stock) or of local importance such as the conservation of nutrients in native forests or plantations. However, there is no specific instrument or protocol for quantitative collection of the litter layer. We developed an instrument composed of two parts that permits measurement and collection of the litter layer, following a simple protocol. The method was tested in two forest types and we verified the greater accuracy and ease of use of the instrument compared to two other commonly used litter collection methods. (C) 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
A Novel Method of Boreal Zone Reforestation/Afforestation Estimation Using PALSAR-1,2 and Landsat-5,8 Data			Nowadays, global remote sensing studies of tropical forest parameters are relevant for assessing carbon sequestration, whereas boreal forests receive little attention. This is due to the current idea that forests with greater aboveground biomass absorb more carbon. However, new research indicates that rapidly growing young forests take up more carbon than mature ones. Therefore, it is necessary to develop universal methods of remote reforestation/afforestation monitoring. The existing reforestation methods rely on the separate analysis of multispectral optical images and radar data. Here, we propose a method for analyzing the joint dynamics of NDVI (or the Normalized Burn Ratio, NBR) and the radar vegetation index (RVI) on a 2D plot for a test reforestation site. NDVI and NBR time series were derived from Landsat-5,8 data, and the RVI was derived from ALOS-1,2 and PALSAR-1,2 for 2007-2020 using the resources of Google Earth Engine. The quantitative parameters to evaluate the degree of reforestation and changes in the species composition of young trees have been suggested. The suggested method enables a more thorough evaluation of reforestation by measuring the coupled dynamics of the projective cover of young trees and aboveground biomass.
A novel monitoring protocol to evaluate large-scale forest restoration projects in the tropics			The purpose of this paper is to present a proposal of forest monitoring and an evaluation system adjusted for tropical forest restoration initiatives in support of decision-making, tracking and management in an offsetting policy context. This study is framed by the case study of the Rio de Janeiro State Environmental Agency (INEA RJ) in Southeastern Brazil. We tested a set of indicators to evaluate restoration projects up to 4 years since planting. After the data were collected, we developed a scorecard and tested it in the field, allowing the evaluation of project development on a scale from 0 to 10. This analysis indicates conformity or a need for adequacy. We measured 7853 individuals on 205 sample plots. The projects had an average age of 32 months in the range of 14-48 months. The average scorecard value was 5.87 points, and we adequately assessed ecosystem structure, composition, function, species composition and organization. We create an evaluation tool to support decision-makers as also the restoration practitioners' decisions. The main innovation was to popularize the forest monitoring among stakeholders independent of the technician's experience background, by offering a simple, accessible, and robust protocol.
A preliminary assessment of water quality in silvopastoral systems of Panama's dry tropical forest			Dry tropical forests are unique, biodiverse ecosystems threatened by human development, especially deforestation for agricultural land use. Deforestation reduces carbon sequestration in landscapes and, in turn, pollutes nearby waterways. Agroforestry practices, like silvopastoralism, can mitigate these impacts by integrating trees into working landscapes, but their effect on stream water quality has not been studied. We assessed the stream condition on five silvopastoral farms in Panama's Azuero Peninsula by utiliz- ing aquatic macroinvertebrates as indicators. We collected aquatic macroinvertebrates and calculated the percent EPT, Diptera, and Odonata. Using ArcGIS, we measured distance to live fence, riparian connectivity, and forest patch size. We also measured tree carbon stored in the riparian area and throughout each farm. We analyzed the rela- tionships between landscape or habitat variables and water quality scores using single linear regressions in R Studio. Percent EPT, Odonata, and diversity were positively predicted by riparian tree carbon, while percent Diptera was negatively predicted by riparian tree carbon. Our results highlight the importance of expanding agroforestry in this region and suggest that increasing tree cover in agricultural landscapes may be beneficial to stream condition, but additional research is needed.
A quantitative systematic review on the scientific knowledge, uses and management of Genipa americana: a key tree crop for tropical agroecosystems			Anthropogenic impacts associated with high land use rates and ecosystem fragmentation processes have negatively affected the biodiversity of tropical forests, as well as the ecosystem services needed by humanity. Genipa americana (Rubiaceae) is a neotropical tree with a wide phytogeographic domain. The species has been considered a priority for biodiversity conservation and silvicultural management. This systematic literature review aimed to identify general patterns, trends and gaps in current knowledge about the species G. americana. Three databases were used (Web of Science, Google Scholar and Scopus). Out of a total of 5333 investigations published between 1993 and 2021, 149 were considered to be relevant. An exponential increase in the number of publications on the species was observed, with the highest number of articles from 2010 onwards. Brazil was the country with the highest number of publications, the largest number of investigations occurred in Atlantic Forest (N = 50), followed by Cerrado (N = 38) and Caatinga (N = 17). With this systematic review, we present an overview of publications focused on G. americana, a neotropical tree with a wide phytogeographic domain. Our study revealed the growing interest and importance of the species, mainly in Brazil, as demonstrated by the increase in publications in recent decades. We identified the need for future research seeking to explore the knowledge gaps about the potential of the species related to the characteristics of the areas of occurrence, as well as its contribution to biodiversity and uses in agroecosystems.
A ranking of net national contributions to climate change mitigation through tropical forest conservation			Deforestation in tropical regions causes 15% of global anthropogenic carbon emissions and reduces the mitigation potential of carbon sequestration services. A global market failure occurs as the value of many ecosystem services provided by forests is not recognised by the markets. Identifying the contribution of individual countries to tropical carbon stocks and sequestration might help identify responsibilities and facilitate debate towards the correction of the market failure through international payments for ecosystem services. We compare and rank tropical countries' contributions by estimating carbon sequestration services vs. emissions disservices. The annual value of tropical carbon sequestration services in 2010 from 88 tropical countries was estimated to range from $2.8 to $30.7 billion, using market and social prices of carbon respectively. Democratic Republic of Congo, India and Sudan contribute the highest net carbon sequestration, whereas Brazil, Nigeria and Indonesia are the highest net emitters. (C) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
A real options framework for reducing emissions from deforestation: Reconciling short-term incentives with long-term benefits from conservation and agricultural intensification			Tropical forests provide enormous ecological and economic value. The potential is rapidly growing for carbon markets to deliver private and public compensation for emissions reductions from forest protection at national and subnational scales. Nevertheless, monetization of forest ecosystem services remains scant, leaving forests vulnerable to conversion to other land uses in the short run. We develop a real options framework for a representative farmer's land-use decisions, identifying a value gap between private short-term incentives versus long-term benefits from carbon market compensation, given uncertainties over future values for emissions reductions from forest protection. A quantitative illustration of this framework for Mato Grosso, Brazil, demonstrates that forest conservation coupled with cattle ranching intensification is competitive with the predominant practice of extensive cattle production, but is hindered by landholders' perceptions of the relative option values to different land uses. We show how bonds, call and put options allow for early monetization of part of potential future carbon revenues, even under uncertainty, changing incentives at the landholder level and jumpstarting conservation and more efficient models of agricultural production. These approaches provide a model for addressing the financial needs of farmers on the ground to accelerate the transition towards low-deforestation rural development at large scales.
A Review of Emission Reduction Potential and Cost Savings through Forest Carbon Sequestration			Rising atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases has been increasing with its negative effects on climatic system. Forests absorb and store a huge amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide (one of the major greenhouse gases) as tree biomass. Because of such capacity of forests which is called carbon sequestration, it has received much attention due to the concerns of global climate change. The research question is whether forest carbon sequestration could potentially reduce emissions in a cost effective way or not. Therefore, this article reviews and summarises emission reduction potential and cost savings through forest carbon sequestration. However, tropical forests have the highest aboveground carbon density and carbon sequestration potential compared to the subtropical, temperate and boreal forests. Instead, carbon sequestration potential found to be higher in Africa followed by North America. Asia, South America, Europe and Australia. The cost for one tonne of forest carbon sink enhancement ranges between 0 to US$ 443 in 2011 prices. Forest carbon sink enhancement cost in tropical region is found cheaper than any other region in the world. Carbon forestry options i.e. forest management, afforestation and reforestation can decrease the equilibrium carbon price up to 80% and reduce the emission reduction costs up to 40% whereas afforestation found to be the most low-cost carbon sequestration option. Hence, forest carbon sequestration plays an important role in reducing emissions which offers an opportunity for cost-effective climate change mitigation.
A review of nitrogen fertilizer and conservation tillage effects on soil organic carbon storage			The effects of nitrogen fertilizer and tillage systems on soil organic carbon (SOC) storage have been tested in many field experiments worldwide. The published results of this research are here compiled for evaluation of the impact of management practices on carbon sequestration. Paired data from 137 sites with varying nitrogen rates and 161 sites with contrasting tillage systems were included. Nitrogen fertilizer increased SOC but only when crop residues were returned to the soil; a multiple regression model accounted for just over half the variance (R-2=0.56, P=0.001). The model included as independent variables: cumulative nitrogen fertilizer rate; rainfall; temperature; soil texture; and a cropping intensity index, calculated as a combination of the number of crops per year and percentage of corn in the rotation. Carbon sequestration increased as more nitrogen was applied to the system, and as rainfall or cropping intensity increased. At sites with higher mean temperatures and also in fine textured soils, carbon sequestration decreased. When the carbon costs of production, transportation and application of fertilizer are subtracted from the carbon sequestration predicted by the model, it appears that nitrogen fertilizer-use in tropical regions results in no additional carbon sequestration, whereas in temperate climates, it appears to promote net carbon sequestration. No differences in SOC were found between reduced till (chisel, disc, and sweep till) and no-till, whereas conventional tillage (mouldboard plough, disc plough) was associated with less SOC. The accumulation of SOC under conservation tillage (reduced and no till) was an S-shape time dependent process, which reached a steady state after 25-30 years, but this relationship only accounted for 26% of the variance. Averaging out SOC differences in all the experiments under conservation tillage, there was an increase of 2.1 t C ha(-1) over ploughing. However, when only those cases that had apparently reached equilibrium were included (all no till vs. conventional tillage comparisons from temperate regions), mean SOC increased by approximately 12 t C ha(-1). This estimate is larger than others previously reported. Carbon sequestration under conservation tillage was not significantly related to climate, soil texture or rotation.
A review of soil carbon dynamics resulting from agricultural practices			Literature related to the carbon cycle and climate contains contradictory results with regard to whether agricultural practices increase or mitigate emission of greenhouse gases (GHGs). One opinion is that anthropogenic activities have distinct carbon footprints – measured as total emissions of GHGs resulting from an activity, in this case, “agricultural operations”. In contrast, it is argued that agriculture potentially serves to mitigate GHGs emissions when the best management practices are implemented. We review the literature on agricultural carbon footprints in the context of agricultural practices including soil, water and nutrient management. It has been reported that the management practices that enhance soil organic carbon (SOC) in arid and semi-arid areas include conversion of conventional tillage practices to conservation tillage approaches. We found that agricultural management in arid and semi-arid regions, which have specific characteristics related to high temperatures and low rainfall conditions, requires different practices for maintenance and restoration of SOC and for control of soil erosion compared to those used in Mediterranean, tropical regions. We recommend that in order to meet the global climate targets, quantification of net global warming potential of agricultural practices requires precise estimates of local, regional and global carbon budgets. We have conducted and present a case study for observing the development of deep soil carbon profile resulting from a 10-year wheat-cotton and wheat-maize rotation on semi-arid lands. Results showed that no tillage with mulch application had 14% (37.2 vs 43.3 Mg ha−1) higher SOC stocks in comparison to conventional tillage with mulch application. By implementing no tillage in conjunction with mulch application, lower carbon losses from soil can mitigate the risks associated with global warming. Therefore, it is necessary to reconsider agricultural practices and soil erosion after a land-use change when calculating global carbon footprints. © 2020 Elsevier Ltd
A review of the ecosystem functions in oil palm plantations, using forests as a reference system			Oil palm plantations have expanded rapidly in recent decades. This large-scale land-use change has had great ecological, economic, and social impacts on both the areas converted to oil palm and their surroundings. However, research on the impacts of oil palm cultivation is scattered and patchy, and no clear overview exists. We address this gap through a systematic and comprehensive literature review of all ecosystem functions in oil palm plantations, including several (genetic, medicinal and ornamental resources, information functions) not included in previous systematic reviews. We compare ecosystem functions in oil palm plantations to those in forests, as the conversion of forest to oil palm is prevalent in the tropics. We find that oil palm plantations generally have reduced ecosystem functioning compared to forests: 11 out of 14 ecosystem functions show a net decrease in level of function. Some functions show decreases with potentially irreversible global impacts (e.g. reductions in gas and climate regulation, habitat and nursery functions, genetic resources, medicinal resources, and information functions). The most serious impacts occur when forest is cleared to establish new plantations, and immediately afterwards, especially on peat soils. To variable degrees, specific plantation management measures can prevent or reduce losses of some ecosystem functions (e.g. avoid illegal land clearing via fire, avoid draining of peat, use of integrated pest management, use of cover crops, mulch, and compost) and we highlight synergistic mitigation measures that can improve multiple ecosystem functions simultaneously. The only ecosystem function which increases in oil palm plantations is, unsurprisingly, the production of marketable goods. Our review highlights numerous research gaps. In particular, there are significant gaps with respect to socio-cultural information functions. Further, there is a need for more empirical data on the importance of spatial and temporal scales, such as differences among plantations in different environments, of different sizes, and of different ages, as our review has identified examples where ecosystem functions vary spatially and temporally. Finally, more research is needed on developing management practices that can offset the losses of ecosystem functions. Our findings should stimulate research to address the identified gaps, and provide a foundation for more systematic research and discussion on ways to minimize the negative impacts and maximize the positive impacts of oil palm cultivation.
A Small-Scale Forestry Perspective on Constraints to Including REDD in International Carbon Markets			In this article the authors contend that the constraints to including reduced emissions from avoided tropical forest deforestation and degradation in international carbon markets stem from problems associated with: (1) correctly measuring emissions savings from avoided tropical forest deforestation and degradation; (2) the permanence and 'leakage' of tropical forest conservation regimes; (3) ensuring economic incentives for the avoidance of tropical forest deforestation and degradation are sufficiently effective; (4) the exclusion of reduced emissions from avoided tropical forest deforestation and degradation from critical international climate change policy agreements; and (5) the behaviour of investors in carbon markets. Case analysis of the 'Emissions Biodiversity Exchange Project for the 21st Century' (EBEX21) program of Landcare Research New Zealand is used to examine how a government-supported market-based forest conservation initiative can be used to address these constraints, particularly in the context of small-scale forestry conservation.
A small-scale land-sparing approach to conserving biological diversity in tropical agricultural landscapes			Two contrasting strategies have been proposed for conserving biological diversity while meeting the increasing demand for agricultural products: land sparing and land sharing production systems. Land sparing involves increasing yield to reduce the amount of land needed for agriculture, whereas land-sharing agricultural practices incorporate elements of native ecosystems into the production system itself. Although the conservation value of these systems has been extensively debated, empirical studies are lacking. We compared bird communities in shade coffee, a widely practiced land-sharing system in which shade trees are maintained within the coffee plantation, with bird communities in a novel, small-scale, land-sparing coffee-production system (integrated open canopy or IOC coffee) in which farmers obtain higher yields under little or no shade while conserving an area of forest equal to the area under cultivation. Species richness and diversity of forest-dependent birds were higher in the IOC coffee farms than in the shade coffee farms, and community composition was more similar between IOC coffee and primary forest than between shade coffee and primary forest. Our study represents the first empirical comparison of well-defined land sparing and land sharing production systems. Because IOC coffee farms can be established by allowing forest to regenerate on degraded land, widespread adoption of this system could lead to substantial increases in forest cover and carbon sequestration without compromising agricultural yield or threatening the livelihoods of traditional small farmers. However, we studied small farms (<5 ha); thus, our results may not generalize to large-scale land-sharing systems. Furthermore, rather than concluding that land sparing is generally superior to land sharing, we suggest that the optimal approach depends on the crop, local climate, and existing land-use patterns. © 2013 Society for Conservation Biology.
A Synthesis of the Available Evidence to Guide the Design of Mixed-Species Forest Plantings for Smallholder and Community Forestry			There is growing interest in using multi-species plantation systems when undertaking reforestation for timber production. Such plantations can have ecological and socio-economic advantages over those of traditional monocultures. Despite increasing evidence about the functional advantages of increasing species richness in reforestation, there are few silvicultural guidelines to assist in the design and management of multi-species plantings. This paper presents the results of a systematic assessment of previous studies of mixed-species plantings with a particular focus on their advantages and disadvantages for meeting the needs of rural smallholders and communities in tropical regions. Research on mixed-species plantations has increased in recent years. Many earlier studies were concerned with the capacity of mixed-species plantings to improve productivity or the nutritional impacts of mixtures. Many of these studies emphasised young plantations and mixtures of a few relatively fast-growing Acacia, Eucalyptus and Pinus species. More recent studies have explored a wider range of outcomes arising from using mixtures including on the supply of ecosystem services. Issues deserving further study concern the economic advantages or disadvantages of mixed-species plantations, how these plantations might be designed to suit various environmental and socio-economic situations, and how to manage older mixed-species plantations where the interactions between species may be different to those in younger plantations. There is also a need to explore how increased species richness may affect the capacity of new plantations to withstand damage from insect pests or disturbances such as storms or wildfire.
A systematic analysis and review of the impacts of afforestation on soil quality indicators as modified by climate zone, forest type and age			This global systematic analysis and review investigate the impacts of previous land use system, climate zone, forest type and forest age on soil organic carbon (SOC), total nitrogen (TN), total phosphorus (TP) stock, soil bulk density (BD) and pH at soil layers 0-20, 20-60 and 60-100 cm, following afforestation. Data came from 91 publications on SOC. TN and TP stock changes, covering different countries and climate zones. Overall, afforestation significantly increased SOC by 46%, 52% and 20% at 0-20, 20-60 and 60-100 cm depths, respectively. It also significantly increased shallower TN stocks by 28% and 22% at 0-20 and 20-60 cm depths, respectively, but had no overall impacts on TP. Previous land use system had the largest influence on SOC, TN and TP stock changes, with greater accumulations on barren land compared to cropland and grassland. Climate zone influenced SOC, TN and TP stock changes, with greater accumulations for moist cool than other dimate zones. Broadleaf forests were better than coniferous forests for increasing SOC, TN and TP stocks of the investigated soil profile (0-100 cm). Afforestation for <20 years accumulated SOC and TN stocks only at the soil surface (0-20 cm), whilst afforestation for >20 years accumulated SOC and TN stocks to 100 an soil depth. Changes to SOC and TN were positively correlated at depths down to 100 cm under all age groups, demonstrating that an increase TN could offset progressive N limitation, and maintains SOC accumulation as forests age. TP stock deceased significantly in topsoil (0-20 cm) for <20-year-old forest and did not change for >20-year-old forest, suggesting that it may become a limiting factor for carbon sequestration as forests age. Following afforestation, soil BD decreased alongside significant increases in SOC and TN stocks to 100 cm depth, but had no relationship with TP. (C) 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
A systematic map of within-plantation oil palm management practices reveals a rapidly growing but patchy evidence base			Although oil palm expansion has had severe environmental impacts, oil palm also has the highest yield per hectare of any vegetable oil crop. Compared to many other crops, it has the potential to support high complexity habitats, with minimal chemical input, and relatively high levels of biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. However, there has been little synthesis of available research on oil palm management strategies to support delivery of more sustainable cultivation. In this paper, we provide a systematic map compiling all available evidence assessing within-plantation oil palm management practices at the cultivation stage, with a focus on practices that affect biodiversity and environmental processes. Using approaches adapted from systematic review protocols, we catalogued oil palm management publications to provide details of geographic location, year, interventions tested (i.e. agricultural practices), targeted outcomes of interventions, co-occurrences between different interventions and outcomes (including multiple outcomes), and study design. Most studies were conducted in Southeast Asia, with fewer studies conducted in South America or Africa. Twenty-six interventions were observed in the literature, across six categories: soil, understory, within-crop, landscape-level, replanting, and mixed/multiple interventions. The most common interventions tested were landscape-scale interventions, such as maintaining forest fragments/buffer zones, whereas interventions involved in replanting were the least researched. Eight outcomes were considered: soil fertility, soil erosion, water quality and availability, pest control, replanting, maintenance of biodiversity and areas of high conservation value, and reducing air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. Studies researching biodiversity were the most common, whereas comparatively few studies considered replanting and reducing emissions. Most primary studies were observational, with experimental studies being rarer, especially in biodiversity research. We match our findings to the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil's environmental sustainability criteria to illustrate how policy- makers and producers may use our map to access evidence supporting cultivation-stage oil palm sustainability management. This study provides valuable information to inform best management practices and direction for necessary future research.
A systematic review on the aboveground biomass and carbon stocks of Indian forest ecosystems			Background: Tropical forests play a crucial role as source and sink in global carbon cycle. Development and other anthropogenic activities have led to degradation of forest land, and ultimately, it results in loss of biodiversity and increases concentration of CO2 in atmospheres. Therefore, there is urgent need to estimate regional and national level carbon stock for making forest-based policies and strategies for mitigation of CO2. Patchy and sporadic information is available on biomass and carbon stock of Indian forests. The paper presents a systematic review and comprehensive account of studies conducted in different forest types in India.Result: There are six major forest types found in India consisting of 15 groups and other subgroups with peculiar characteristics. Methodologies used by researchers for biomass/carbon stock estimation are destructive, nondestructive, tree inventories data, species-specific biomass estimation, and remote sensing. Majority of estimates are based on nondestructive allometric equation approach. Studies showed positive correlation between tree species, diameter at breast height, and biomass/carbon stock. Small-and medium-sized growing trees, invasive species, mixed forest, Agroforestry, and Agrosilviculture also play an important role in atmospheric carbon assimilation. The results of diverse forest carbon stock studies are broadly categorized in North, Central, and Southern India. Present review will be helpful for developing conservation policies and decision to increase carbon stock and also REDD+ program for particular forest ecosystem.Conclusion: The systematic literature review was carried out to gather and summarize information from different studies conducted on forest ecosystems and quantification methods used for biomass estimation and carbon stock in different forests types and states of India. In general, great variability occurs in aboveground biomass and carbon stock on account of climatic and geographic differences. To obtain good and accurate estimations, following nondestructive approach, species-specific density-based equations are required from different habitats and also in relation to degradation status of forests. As such regional volume equations would increase error of estimations. The comprehensive account of data would be helpful to formulate strategies based on carbon sequestration in Indian forests for CO2 mitigation.
A Systems Analysis of Factors Affecting Leakage in Reduced Emissions From Deforestation and Degradation Projects in Tropical Forests in Developing Nations			This paper uses systems analysis to examine the factors that influence leakage in Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD) projects in tropical forest areas in developing countries. A causal loop diagram is used to identify some key intervention points for stakeholders to reduce the negative impacts of leakage. One of the most important intervention points identified is to provide livelihood alternatives to supplement the resources and the income that neighbouring small-scale landholders and communities must forego for the REDD initiative to be successful. The question remains, however, of how best to organise and distribute these resource allocations and payments to support the REDD project objectives. It is concluded that in many cases, developing countries with tropical forest coverage are unlikely to benefit from REDD in the foreseeable future, because of constraints related to economies of scale, but also because of political instability and lack of institutional capacity in many of these nations. Moreover, the risk remains that many of these developing countries will suffer from cross-border market leakage due to REDD projects conducted elsewhere, and that this will lead to negative local forest conservation and livelihood outcomes.
A Trait-Based Multi-Function Approach to Select Tropical Forest Tree Species for Conservation and Economic Reforestation Goals			0
A trait-based plant economic framework can help increase the value of reforestation for conservation			While reforestation is gaining momentum to moderate climate change via carbon sequestration, there is also an opportunity to use tree planting to confront declining global biodiversity. Where tree species vary in support of diversity, selecting appropriate species for planting could increase conservation effectiveness. We used a common garden experiment in Borneo using 24 native tree species to examine how variation among tree species in their support of beetle diversity is predicted by plant traits associated with "acquisitive" and "conservative" resource acquisition strategies. We evaluate three hypotheses: (1) beetle communities show fidelity to host identity as indicated by variation in abundance and diversity among tree species, (2) the leaf economic spectrum partially explains this variation as shown by beetle preferences for plant species that are predicted by plant traits, and (3) a small number of selected tree species can capture higher beetle species richness than a random tree species community. We found high variation among tree species in supporting three highly intercorrelated metrics of beetle communities: abundance, richness, and Shannon diversity. Variation in support of beetle communities was predicted by plant traits and varied by plant functional groups; within the dipterocarp family, high beetle diversity was predicted by conservative traits such as high wood density and slow growth, and in non-dipterocarps by the acquisitive traits of high foliar K and rapid growth. Using species accumulation curves and extrapolation to twice the original sample size, we show that 48 tree species were not enough to reach asymptote levels of beetle richness. Nevertheless, species accumulation curves of the six tree species with the highest richness had steeper slopes and supported 33% higher richness than a random community of tree species. Reforestation projects concerned about conservation can benefit by identifying tree species with a disproportional capacity to support biodiversity based on plant traits.
A tree-based approach to biomass estimation from remote sensing data in a tropical agricultural landscape			Agricultural land now exceeds forests as the dominant global biome. Because of their global dominance, and potential expansion or loss, methods to estimate biomass and carbon in agricultural areas are necessary for monitoring global terrestrial carbon stocks and predicting carbon dynamics. Agricultural areas in the tropics have substantial tree cover and associated above ground biomass (AGB) and carbon. Active remote sensing data, such as airborne LiDAR (light detection and ranging), can provide accurate estimates of biomass stocks, but common plot-based methods may not be suitable for agricultural areas with dispersed and heterogeneous tree cover. The objectives of this research are to quantify AGB of a tropical agricultural landscape using a tree-based method that directly incorporates the size of individual trees, and to understand how landscape estimates of AGB from a tree-based method compare to estimates from a plot-based method. We use high-resolution (1.12 m) airborne LiDAR data collected on a 9280-ha region of the Azuero Peninsula of Panama. We model individual tree AGB with canopy dimensions from the LiDAR data. We apply the model to individual tree crown polygons and aggregate AGB estimates to compare with previously developed plot-based estimates. We find that agricultural trees are a distinct and dominant part of our study site. The tree-based approach estimates greater AGB in pixels with low forest cover than the plot-based approach, resulting a 2-fold difference in landscape AGB estimates between the methods for non-forested areas. Additionally, one third of the total landscape AGB exists in areas having <10% cover, based on a global tree cover product. Our study supports the continued use and development of allometric models to predict individual tree biomass from LiDAR-derived canopy dimensions and demonstrates the potential for spatial information from high-resolution data, such as relative isolation of canopies, to improve allometric models. © 2018
A universal airborne LiDAR approach for tropical forest carbon mapping			Airborne light detection and ranging (LiDAR) is fast turning the corner from demonstration technology to a key tool for assessing carbon stocks in tropical forests. With its ability to penetrate tropical forest canopies and detect three-dimensional forest structure, LiDAR may prove to be a major component of international strategies to measure and account for carbon emissions from and uptake by tropical forests. To date, however, basic ecological information such as height-diameter allometry and stand-level wood density have not been mechanistically incorporated into methods for mapping forest carbon at regional and global scales. A better incorporation of these structural patterns in forests may reduce the considerable time needed to calibrate airborne data with ground-based forest inventory plots, which presently necessitate exhaustive measurements of tree diameters and heights, as well as tree identifications for wood density estimation. Here, we develop a new approach that can facilitate rapid LiDAR calibration with minimal field data. Throughout four tropical regions (Panama, Peru, Madagascar, and Hawaii), we were able to predict aboveground carbon density estimated in field inventory plots using a single universal LiDAR model (r (2) = 0.80, RMSE = 27.6 Mg C ha(-1)). This model is comparable in predictive power to locally calibrated models, but relies on limited inputs of basal area and wood density information for a given region, rather than on traditional plot inventories. With this approach, we propose to radically decrease the time required to calibrate airborne LiDAR data and thus increase the output of high-resolution carbon maps, supporting tropical forest conservation and climate mitigation policy.
A view from above: Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) provide a new tool for assessing liana infestation in tropical forest canopies			Tropical forests store and sequester large quantities of carbon, mitigating climate change. Lianas (woody vines) are important tropical forest components, most conspicuous in the canopy. Lianas reduce forest carbon uptake and their recent increase may, therefore, limit forest carbon storage with global consequences for climate change. Liana infestation of tree crowns is traditionally assessed from the ground, which is labour intensive and difficult, particularly for upper canopy layers. We used a lightweight unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) to assess liana infestation of tree canopies from above. It was a commercially available quadcopter UAV with an integrated, standard three-waveband camera to collect aerial image data for 150ha of tropical forest canopy. By visually interpreting the images, we assessed the degree of liana infestation for 14.15ha of forest for which ground-based estimates were collected simultaneously. We compared the UAV liana infestation estimates with those from the ground to determine the validity, strengths, and weaknesses of using UAVs as a new method for assessing liana infestation of tree canopies. Estimates of liana infestation from the UAV correlated strongly with ground-based surveys at individual tree and plot level, and across multiple forest types and spatial resolutions, improving liana infestation assessment for upper canopy layers. Importantly, UAV-based surveys, including the image collection, processing, and visual interpretation, were considerably faster and more cost-efficient than ground-based surveys.Synthesis and applications. Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) image data of tree canopies can be easily captured and used to assess liana infestation at least as accurately as traditional ground data. This novel method promotes reproducibility of results and quality control, and enables additional variables to be derived from the image data. It is more cost-effective, time-efficient and covers larger geographical extents than traditional ground surveys, enabling more comprehensive monitoring of changes in liana infestation over space and time. This is important for assessing liana impacts on the global carbon balance, and particularly useful for forest management where knowledge of the location and change in liana infestation can be used for tailored, targeted, and effective management of tropical forests for enhanced carbon sequestration (e.g., REDD+ projects), timber concessions, and forest restoration.Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) image data of tree canopies can be easily captured and used to assess liana infestation at least as accurately as traditional ground data. This novel method promotes reproducibility of results and quality control, and enables additional variables to be derived from the image data. It is more cost-effective, time-efficient and covers larger geographical extents than traditional ground surveys, enabling more comprehensive monitoring of changes in liana infestation over space and time. This is important for assessing liana impacts on the global carbon balance, and particularly useful for forest management where knowledge of the location and change in liana infestation can be used for tailored, targeted, and effective management of tropical forests for enhanced carbon sequestration (e.g., REDD+ projects), timber concessions, and forest restoration.
A Voluntary Carbon Standard methodology to accurately quantify carbon offsets from avoided deforestation projects in tropical regions			Carbon offsets from REDD projects are complex to quantify. Terra Global Capital has developed a methodology to calculate emission reductions, discounted for uncertainties, while remaining flexible. The methodology supports community-based REDD projects that are holistic in nature and integrate energy requirements and alternative livelihood options. The methodology is combined with a web-based data entry system to manage the on-going monitoring data required.
Abiotic Factors as Drivers of Net Primary Productivity of Woody Species in The Subtropical Forest Patches of Manipur, North East India			Mass ratio of resources, soil nutrients and other abiotic factors like temperature and moisture influenced to a great extent on the existed variability in carbon accumulation and sequestration potential among species. In the present investigation, AGNPP was limited by multiple nutrients and environmental factors like temperature and moisture. The importance of the small patchy area in carbon sequestration and their role in regional carbon balance under the influence of abiotic factors including soil resources was undertaken. Considering the importance of resources and abiotic factors in the carbon sequestration potential of forest ecosystem in low latitudinal belt, while framing the mitigation mechanism of climate change, emphasis should be given on the enhancement of soil fertility to improve resource capture prioritized in such region and further study on traits related with aboveground components should be emphasized in the study of carbon sequestration in the forest ecosystem of such region.
Above- and belowground biomass, nutrient and carbon stocks contrasting an open-grown and a shaded coffee plantation			Coffee (Coffea canephora var robusta) is grown in Southwestern Togo under shade of native Albizia adianthifolia as a low input cropping system. However, there is no information on carbon and nutrient cycling in these shaded coffee systems. Hence, a study was conducted in a mature coffee plantation in Southwestern Togo to determine carbon and nutrient stocks in shaded versus open-grown coffee systems. Biomass of Albizia trees was predicted by allometry, whereas biomass of coffee bushes was estimated through destructive sampling. Above- and belowground biomass estimates were respectively, 140 Mg ha(-1) and 32 Mg ha(-1) in the coffee-Albizia association, and 29.7 Mg ha(-1) and 18.7 Mg ha(-1) in the open-grown system. Albizia trees contributed 87% of total aboveground biomass and 55% of total root biomass in the shaded coffee system. Individual coffee bushes consistently had higher biomass in the open-grown than in the shaded coffee system. Total C stock was 81 Mg ha(-1) in the shaded coffee system and only 22.9 Mg ha(-1) for coffee grown in the open. Apart from P and Mg, considerable amounts of major nutrients were stored in the shade tree biomass in non-easily recyclable fractions. Plant tissues in the shaded coffee system had higher N concentration, suggesting possible N fixation. Given the potential for competition between the shade trees and coffee for nutrients, particularly in low soil fertility conditions, it is suggested that the shade trees be periodically pruned in order to increase organic matter addition and nutrient return to the soil.
Above- and belowground carbon stocks are decoupled in secondary tropical forests and are positively related to forest age and soil nutrients respectively			Reducing atmospheric CO2 is an international priority. One way to assist stabilising and reducing CO2 is to promote secondary tropical forest regrowth on abandoned agricultural land. However, relationships between above- and belowground carbon stocks with secondary forest age and specific soil nutrients remain unclear. Current global estimates for CO2 uptake and sequestration in secondary tropical forests focus on aboveground biomass and are parameterised using relatively coarse metrics of soil fertility. Here, we estimate total carbon stocks across a chronosequence of regenerating secondary forest stands (40-120 years old) in Panama, and assess the relationships between both above- and belowground carbon stocks with stand age and specific soil nutrients. We estimated carbon stocks in aboveground biomass, necromass, root biomass, and soil. We found that the two largest carbon pools - aboveground biomass and soil - have distinct relationships with stand age and soil fertility. Aboveground biomass contained similar to 61-97 Mg C ha(-1) (24-39% total carbon stocks) and significantly increased with stand age, but showed no relationship with soil nutrients. Soil carbon stocks contained similar to 128-206 Mg C ha(-1) (52-70% total stocks) and were unrelated to stand age, but were positively related to soil nitrogen. Root biomass carbon stocks tracked patterns exhibited by aboveground biomass. Necromass carbon stocks did not increase with stand age, but stocks were held in larger pieces of deadwood in older stands. Comparing our estimates to published data from younger and older secondary forests in the surrounding landscape, weshowthat soil carbon recovers within 40 years of forest regeneration, but aboveground biomass carbon stocks continue to increase past 100 years. Above- and belowground carbon stocks appear to be decoupled in secondary tropical forests. Paired measures of above- and belowground carbon stocks are necessary to reduce uncertainty in large-scale models of atmospheric CO2 uptake and storage by secondary forests. (C) 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Above Ground Biomass-carbon Partitioning, Storage and Sequestration in a Rehabilitated Forest, Bintulu, Sarawak, Malaysia			Forest degradation and deforestation are some of the major global concerns as it can reduce forest carbon storage and sequestration capacity. Forest rehabilitation on degraded forest areas has the potential to improve carbon stock, hence mitigate greenhouse gases emission. However, the carbon storage and sequestration potential in a rehabilitated tropical forest remains unclear due to the lack of information. This paper reports an initiative to estimate biomass-carbon partitioning, storage and sequestration in a rehabilitated forest. The study site was at the UPM-Mitsubishi Corporation Forest Rehabilitation Project, UPM Bintulu Sarawak Campus, Bintulu, Sarawak. A plot of 20 x 20 m(2) was established each in site 1991 (Plot 1991), 1999 (Plot 1999) and 2008 (Plot 2008). An adjacent natural regenerating secondary forest plot (Plot NF) was also established for comparison purposes. The results showed that the contribution of tree component biomass/carbon to total biomass/carbon was in the order of main stem > branch > leaf. As most of the trees were concentrated in diameter size class <= 10 cm for younger rehabilitated forests, the total above ground biomass/carbon was from this class. These observations suggest that the forests are in the early successional stage. The total above ground biomass obtained for the rehabilitated forest ranged from 4.3 to 4,192.3 kg compared to natural regenerating secondary forest of 3,942.3 kg while total above ground carbon ranged from 1.9 to 1,927.9 kg and 1,820.4 kg, respectively. The mean total above ground biomass accumulated ranged from 1.3 x 10(-2) to 20.5 kg/0.04 ha and mean total carbon storage ranged from 5.9 x 10(-3) to 9.4 kg/0.04 ha. The total CO2 sequestrated in rehabilitated forest ranged from 6.9 to 7,069.1 kg CO2/0.04 ha. After 19 years, the rehabilitated forest had total above ground biomass and carbon storage comparable to the natural regeneration secondary forest. The rehabilitated forest activities have the potential to increase carbon stock through tree planting. Therefore, forest rehabilitation has shown the potential role as a carbon sink that helps to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases and mitigate climate change.
Aboveground biomass and carbon stock estimation of Melocalamus compactiflorus (Kurz) Benth.: a climbing bamboo of Northeast India			Tropical forests play important role in global carbon cycle and mitigating of global warming through carbon sequestration. Data on carbon stock and sequestration of bamboo species are relatively less focused than other many woody plants. We aimed to study aboveground biomass and carbon stock of three age class (1, 2 and ≥ 3 year) of Melocalamus compactiflorus (Kurz) Benth. using harvest method. Carbon stock was determined from the culm density drawn from requisite number of sample quadrates. Significant variations with respect to culm age were observed in bamboo forests. The ≥ 3 year age class exhibited highest contribution to total culm density. The average culm density was 11,457 culms ha−1 and average DBH and thickness of the culms were 2.14 cm and 4.5 mm respectively. The branch component contributed maximally (48.6%) to total aboveground biomass than the culm component (32.4%) leading to a reduced role of DBH in aboveground biomass. The aboveground biomass carbon stock of M. compactiflorus in the present study ranged from 17.18 to 44.63 Mg C ha−1 with a sequestration rate as high as 27.59 Mg C ha−1 year−1 demonstrating this species as an excellent carbon capture species for forest restoration and climate change mitigation initiatives. © 2022, The Author(s) under exclusive licence to Society for Plant Research.
ABOVEGROUND BIOMASS ESTIMATION OF TROPICAL PEAT SWAMP FORESTS USING SAR AND OPTICAL DATA			Climate change mitigation mechanisms, such as REDD+, which aim at avoiding deforestation and forest degradation, require an accurate aboveground biomass (AGB) monitoring. In the present study, multi-temporal X-(TerraSAR-X) and L-band (ALOS PALSAR) SAR data and a multispectral RapidEye image were analyzed for their ability to estimate AGB in a tropical forested peatland area in Central Kalimantan on Borneo, Indonesia. Field inventory AGB data was used to calibrate regression models based on SAR backscatter values and spectral unmixed fractions of the RapidEye image. The independent validation indicated that the estimated AGB using optical data is more accurate (RMSE=44%) than the SAR estimated AGB (RMSE=82%). AGB derived from RapidEye data overestimates AGB on burned areas, but these estimations depict degradation through low impact selective logging. The SAR model estimated AGB accurately in lower biomass ranges and on burned scars.
Aboveground biomass in mature and secondary seasonally dry tropical forests: A literature review and global synthesis			Seasonally dry tropical forests (SDTFs) are globally extensive but understudied, especially from a biogeochemical perspective. Historically, much of the land covered by SDTF has been cleared for agriculture or other land uses, but forests are now regenerating in some areas. Quantifying biomass stocks in mature and regenerating SDTF is important for constructing global carbon budgets and for designing local policy and management tools designed to sequester and store carbon. We reviewed 44 published and unpublished studies that estimate aboveground biomass in SDTF around the world and examined patterns of biomass across successional stages and the climatic range in which SDTF occur. Aboveground biomass in mature SDTF ranged from 39 to 334Mgha-1. A single climatic variable, mean annual precipitation (MAP), explained over 50% of the variation in aboveground biomass. Regenerating SDTFs at the wetter end of the precipitation spectrum (1500-2000mm MAP) attained a greater biomass but did not appear to reach maximum biomass faster than SDTFs at drier sites. We used spatially explicit biomass, climate, and biome range data along with the derived precipitation-biomass relationship to estimate current and potential global SDTF biomass C stocks of 8.7 and 22.1Pg respectively. © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
Aboveground biomass in secondary montane forests in Peru: Slow carbon recovery in agroforestry legacies			Andean tropical montane forests (TMF) are hotspots of biodiversity that provide fundamental hydrological services as well as carbon sequestration and storage. Agroforestry systems occupy large areas in the Andes but climatic pressures, market volatility and diseases may result inagroforest abandonment, promoting secondary succession. Secondary forests are well-adapted and efficient carbon sinks whose conservation is vital to mitigate and adapt to climate change and to support biodiversity. Little is known, however, about how secondary TMF recover their aboveground biomass (AGB) and composition after abandonment. We established a 1.5 ha plot at 1780 masl on a 30-year old abandoned agroforest and compared it against two control forest plots at similar elevations. Agroforestry legacies influenced AGB leading to far lower stocks (42.3 +/- 5.4-59.6 +/- 7.9 Mg ha(-1) using allometric equations) than those expected after 30 years (106 +/- 33 Mg ha(-1)) based on IPCC standard growth rates for secondary montane forests. This suggests a regional overestimation of mitigation potentials when using IPCC standards. Satellite-derived AGB largely overestimated our plot values (179 +/- 27.3 Mg ha(-1)). Secondary growth rates (1.41-2.0 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1) for DBH >= 10 cm) indicate recovery times of ca. 69 to 97 years to reach average control AGB values (137 +/- 12.3 Mg ha(-1)). This is 26 years above the average residence time of montane forests at our elevation (71 +/- 1.91 years) suggesting a non-recovery or far slower recovery to control AGB values. Three variables appear to define this outcome compared to the control plots: lower DBH (15.8 +/- 5.9 cm vs 19.8 +/- 11.0 cm), lower basal area (12.67 +/- 0.7 vs 28.03 +/- 1.5 m(2) ha(-1)) and higher abundance of lighter-wood tree genera (0.46 +/- 0.10 vs 0.57 +/- 0.11 gr cm(3)) such as Inga, a common shade-tree in Andean agroforests. With 3.2 million hectares committed to restoration, Peru needs to target currently neglected TMF recovery schemes to support biodiversity, water and carbon storage and fulfill its international commitments.
Aboveground biomass mapping of La Trinidad forests in Benguet, Philippines, using Landsat Thematic Mapper data and k-nearest neighbor method			This study was conducted to estimate the aboveground biomass (AGB) of the La Trinidad forests in Benguet, Philippines, using the following data: Landsat Thematic Mapper, forest map, and field data, utilizing the k-nearest neighbor method. A total of 35 plots were established in the Pinus kesiya forests of La Trinidad, Benguet. The root mean square error and bias of the different k values ranging from 1 to 20 and horizontal reference area (HRA) ranging from 4 km to 7 km were determined. Results of the evaluation showed that the optimum k value and HRA were 4 and 7 km, respectively. These values were used for AGB estimation, and results showed that the mean AGB of the La Trinidad forests was 240.46Mg/ha, which is higher than the previous studies that estimated the AGB of Pinus kesiya forests in other areas in the Philippines. Overall accuracy was also determined using the confusion matrix and results showed that the overall accuracy was 56%. It is suggested that the AGB map for Pinus kesiya could provide baseline information for considering the carbon-sink potential of this forest, which is essential for sustainable forest management of tropical forests.
Above-ground biomass storage potential in primary rain forests managed for timber production in Costa Rica			Tropical forests play a fundamental role in mitigating climate change through storage of carbon in above-and below-ground biomass. Their mitigation potential is, however, affected by significant greenhouse gas emissions through tropical deforestation or forest degradation. Mitigating degradation caused by conventional logging is therefore an important challenge for silvicultural management, and various reduced impact logging techniques seek to reduce biomass loss and other logging impacts during forest logging activities. Little knowledge exists about the potential of sustainable management for maintaining and restoring the climate change mitigation capacity of tropical forests. Our research contributes to knowledge about this potential, as our aim is to evaluate the above-ground biomass (AGB) stock of tropical forests managed for sustainable timber production and compare it with that of intact primary forests. We also determine the environmental and spatial factors that influence AGB. We estimated the AGB of 141 permanent sampling plots in Costa Rican tropical forests (71 plots set up in areas managed for timber production forests and 70 plots set up in areas with intact primary forests) using data for the 2000-2015 period. We compared the AGB of timber production forests with that of primary forest using linear mixed models and examined the relationship between forest AGB and climate, soil fertility and spatial variables (PCNM eigenvalues) using variation partitioning (VARPART) and multiple linear regression in the mixed model framework. Mean AGB was higher in forest plots set up in areas managed for timber production than in plots set up in areas with intact primary forests. In VARPART, spatial variables had the strongest effect on AGB with a small but significant effect of soil fertility. Regression showed potassium levels in the soil to be positively related to AGB. There was no significant effect of climate, probably because of the short temperature and precipitation gradients. Sustainable forest management in these Costa Rican forests managed for timber production has enabled them to store as much carbon in biomass as primary forests, due to the low intensity logging and sustainability criteria stipulated by the country's forestry legislation. As a result, sustainable forest management, in addition to providing a sustainable timber ecosystem service, is also a natural climate solution, maintaining the mitigation potential of Costa Rica's tropical forests in the current climate context.
Aboveground carbon loss in natural and managed tropical forests from 2000 to 2012			Tropical forests provide global climate regulation ecosystem services and their clearing is a significant source of anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and resultant radiative forcing of climate change. However, consensus on pan-tropical forest carbon dynamics is lacking. We present a new estimate that employs recommended good practices to quantify gross tropical forest aboveground carbon (AGC) loss from 2000 to 2012 through the integration of Landsat-derived tree canopy cover, height, intactness and forest cover loss and GLAS-lidar derived forest biomass. An unbiased estimate of forest loss area is produced using a stratified random sample with strata derived from a wall-to-wall 30 m forest cover loss map. Our sample-based results separate the gross loss of forest AGC into losses from natural forests (0.59 PgC yr(-1)) and losses from managed forests (0.43 PgC yr(-1)) including plantations, agroforestry systems and subsistence agriculture. Latin America accounts for 43% of gross AGC loss and 54% of natural forest AGC loss, with Brazil experiencing the highest AGC loss for both categories at national scales. We estimate gross tropical forest AGC loss and natural forest loss to account for 11% and6% of global year 2012 CO2 emissions, respectively. Given recent trends, natural forests will likely constitute an increasingly smaller proportion of tropical forest GHG emissions and of global emissions as fossil fuel consumption increases, with implications for the valuation of co-benefits in tropical forest conservation.
Aboveground Carbon Stocks and Sinks in Recovering Tropical Forests			0
Above-ground carbon stocks and timber value of old timber plantations, secondary and primary forests in southern Ghana			High deforestation rates, especially in the tropics, currently result in the annual emission of large amounts of carbon, contributing to global climate change. There is therefore an urgent need to take actions to mitigate climate change both by slowing down deforestation and by initiating new sinks. Tropical forest plantations are generally thought to sequester carbon rapidly during the initial years but there is limited knowledge on their long-term potential. In this study, we assessed the carbon sequestration in old (42-47 years) timber plantations of Aucoumea klaineana, Cedrela odorata, Tarrietia utilis, and Terminalia ivorensis, and secondary forests of similar ages, by comparing their basal areas and above-ground carbon stocks (AGC) to that of nearby primary forests. Additionally, we estimated and compared timber volume and stumpage value in the three forest types.Systematic random sampling of ninety-three 20 m x 20 m plots in eleven forest sites (2 secondary forests, 2 primary forests, and 7 timber plantations) was undertaken to determine the effect of forest type on AGC, basal area, timber volume, and stumpage value.After 42 years of growth, mean AGC of the timber plantations (159.7 +/- 14.3 Mg ha(-1)) was similar to that of primary forests (173.0 +/- 25.1 Mg ha(-1)) and both were significantly higher than the mean AGC of the secondary forests (103.6 +/- 12.3 Mg ha(-1)). Mean basal area and timber volume of the timber plantations and secondary forests were similar to that of the primary forests, though in each case the timber plantations had significantly higher values compared to the secondary forests. Mean timber value of the plantations ($8577 ha(-1)) was significantly higher than both secondary ($1870 ha(-1)) and primary forests ($3112 ha(-1)). Contrary to our expectations, naturally regenerated trees (woody recruits) within the timber plantations had similar AGC levels, basal area, timber volume, and value compared to the secondary forests.Long-rotation tropical forest plantations under low-intensity management could achieve higher AGC levels and thus have higher climate change mitigation potential and timber values compared to naturally regenerated secondary forests, and are able to reach values similar to primary forests. Monoculture timber plantations could facilitate the successful colonization of their understoreys by native woody recruits that contribute considerably to stand AGC and timber values. Long-rotation forest plantations in the tropics therefore have a critical role to play in forest rehabilitation and climate change mitigation while having the potential to provide modest financial returns to landowners through selective harvesting of timber and/or payments for carbon sequestration.
Aboveground Carbon Storage and Its Links to Stand Structure, Tree Diversity and Floristic Composition in South-Eastern Tanzania			African savannas and dry forests represent a large, but poorly quantified store of biomass carbon and biodiversity. Improving this information is hindered by a lack of recent forest inventories, which are necessary for calibrating earth observation data and for evaluating the relationship between carbon stocks and tree diversity in the context of forest conservation (for example, REDD+). Here, we present new inventory data from south-eastern Tanzania, comprising more than 15,000 trees at 25 locations located across a gradient of aboveground woody carbon (AGC) stocks. We find that larger trees disproportionately contribute to AGC, with the largest 3.7% of individuals containing half the carbon. Tree species diversity and carbon stocks were positively related, implying a potential functional relationship between the two, and a 'win-win' scenario for conservation; however, lower biomass areas also contain diverse species assemblages meaning that carbon-oriented conservation may miss important areas of biodiversity. Despite these variations, we find that total tree abundance and biomass is skewed towards a few locally dominant species, with eight and nine species (5.7% of the total) accounting for over half the total measured trees and carbon, respectively. This finding implies that carbon production in these areas is channelled through a small number of relatively abundant species. Our results provide key insights into the structure and functioning of these heterogeneous ecosystems and indicate the need for novel strategies for future measurement and monitoring of carbon stocks and biodiversity, including the use for larger plots to capture spatial variations in large tree density and AGC stocks, and to allow the calibration of earth observation data.
Aboveground carbon storage in tropical dry forest plots in Oaxaca, Mexico			Tropical forests are subject to increasing pressures due to global change. Globally, tropical dry forests (TDFs) have been heavily impacted and these impacts have been poorly quantified. Despite its large coverage in tropical regions, and its important influence on the global C cycle, little is known of spatial variations in aboveground biomass (AGB) distribution of TDFs. The understanding of TDF aboveground biomass has been biased towards the secondary forests, with few studies of mature forests. The aim of this study is to quantify, allocate and understand the natural factors responsible for driving the AGB distribution and, consequently, on C stocks, in natural TDFs in Mexico. The study region represents ∼14% of the total TDF area in Oaxaca. Remote sensing time series across field sites were used to identify suitable sampling locations for mature forests in Oaxaca. Aboveground biomass was normally distributed with a mean of 117 ± 5 Mg ha−1 (±1 SE). Large trees (diameter at breast height, DBH ≥ 30 cm) were found at similar frequencies in small (300–400 m2) and large (4 ha) plots. Depending on the selected allometric equation, at least 60% of the AGB is held in trees with DBH < 28.7 cm. At local scale, large trees (DBH ≥ 30 cm) did not show spatial autocorrelation and, in the landscape, AGB showed a spatial correlation in distances < 250 m. Because of low densities of very large trees (DBH ≥ 75 cm), the mean AGB estimates across different allometric equations only resulted in differences of ∼10%. State factors including climate (mean annual precipitation, temperature and solar radiation) and topography (altitude and distance to streams) modulate the TDF structure and its potential for aboveground storage C across the landscape. Soil texture and pH were the most important soil properties in explaining variations in AGB, with stronger effects than soil nutrients. Across different scales of analysis, higher biomass estimates were related to water availability. This information can support spatial estimates of biomass storage capacity for Mexican TDF, crucial for land and C management. © 2017 Elsevier B.V.
Aboveground forest biomass varies across continents, ecological zones and successional stages: Refined IPCC default values for tropical and subtropical forests			For monitoring and reporting forest carbon stocks and fluxes, many countries in the tropics and subtropics rely on default values of forest aboveground biomass (AGB) from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Inventories. Default IPCC forest AGB values originated from 2006, and are relatively crude estimates of average values per continent and ecological zone. The 2006 default values were based on limited plot data available at the time, methods for their derivation were not fully clear, and no distinction between successional stages was made. As part of the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for GHG Inventories, we updated the default AGB values for tropical and subtropical forests based on AGB data from >25 000 plots in natural forests and a global AGB map where no plot data were available. We calculated refined AGB default values per continent, ecological zone, and successional stage, and provided a measure of uncertainty. AGB in tropical and subtropical forests varies by an order of magnitude across continents, ecological zones, and successional stage. Our refined default values generally reflect the climatic gradients in the tropics, with more AGB in wetter areas. AGB is generally higher in old-growth than in secondary forests, and higher in older secondary (regrowth >20 years old and degraded/logged forests) than in young secondary forests (20 years old). While refined default values for tropical old-growth forest are largely similar to the previous 2006 default values, the new default values are 4.0-7.7-fold lower for young secondary forests. Thus, the refined values will strongly alter estimated carbon stocks and fluxes, and emphasize the critical importance of old-growth forest conservation. We provide a reproducible approach to facilitate future refinements and encourage targeted efforts to establish permanent plots in areas with data gaps. © 2022 The Author(s). Published by IOP Publishing Ltd.
Aboveground Forest Carbon Dynamics in Papua New Guinea: Isolating the Influence of Selective-Harvesting and El Nino			Assessment of forest carbon (C) stock and sequestration and the influence of forest harvesting and climatic variations are important issues in global forest ecology. Quantitative studies of the C balance of tropical forests, such as those in Papua New Guinea (PNG), are also required for forest-based climate change mitigation initiatives. We develop a hierarchical Bayesian model (HBM) of aboveground forest C stock and sequestration in primary, selectively harvested, and El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO)-effected lowland tropical forest from 15 years of Permanent Sample Plot (PSP) census data for PNG consisting of 121 plots in selectively harvested forest, and 35 plots in primary forest. Model parameters indicated: C stock in aboveground live biomass (AGLB) of 137 +/- 9 (95% confidence interval (CI)) MgC ha(-1) in primary forest, compared with 62 +/- 18 MgC ha(-1) for selectively harvested forest (55% difference); C sequestration in primary forest of 0.23 +/- 1.70 MgC ha(-1) y(-1), which was lower than in selectively harvested forest, 1.12 +/- 3.41 MgC ha(-1) y(-1); ENSO-induced fire resulted in significant C emissions (-6.87 +/- 3.94 MgC ha(-1) y(-1)). High variability between PSPs in C stock and C sequestration rates necessitated random plot effects for both stock and sequestration. The HBM approach allowed inclusion of hierarchical autocorrelation, providing valid CIs on model parameters and efficient estimation. The HBM model has provided quantitative insights on the C balance of PNG's forests that can be used as inputs for climate change mitigation initiatives.
Aboveground tree biomass prediction options for the Dry Afromontane forests in south-central Ethiopia			Biomass of trees may be predicted either directly applying allometric models or indirectly from volume and biomass expansion factors (BEFs). For the Dry Afromontane forests, the second largest biomass pool in Ethiopia, such methods are not devised and properly documented. The main objective of this study was to explore different aboveground tree biomass prediction options based on destructively sampled tree biomass data. We explored the direct method by means of 1) new mixed-species general biomass models developed in the present study, and 2) some previously developed models including the pan-tropical models, and the indirect method by means of 3) volume and BEFs. From two sites in south-central Ethiopia, based on information from systematic sample plot inventories, 63 trees from 30 different species that contributed about 87% to the total forest basal area, were destructively sampled. Weighted nonlinear regression was applied to fit new models and their performance was assessed using root mean squared error (RMSE, %), mean prediction error (MPE, %) and pseudo-R2 based on leave-one-out-cross-validation. Previously developed models and the indirect method were also evaluated by means of RMSE and MPE. The new general total biomass models performed well with pseudo-R2 ranging between 0.87 and 0.96 and are presented along with covariance matrices for the parameter estimates enabling error propagation in biomass estimation. Most previously developed models resulted in significant MPEs up to 78%, while the best pan-tropical model performed much better with an MPE of about 7%. The indirect method also showed poor performance with MPEs ranging between 5% and 30%. Generally, the new models are accurate and flexible, thus, preferred over all previously developed models and the indirect method for application. However, their application to Dry Afromontane forests outside the study sites should be made only after thoroughly evaluating growing conditions and species composition. The results are step forward to enhance decisions made towards sustainable forest management including the REDD+ implementation for Dry Afromontane forests in Ethiopia. © 2020 Elsevier B.V.
Above-ground woody biomass distribution in Amazonian floodplain forests: Effects of hydroperiod and substrate properties			The importance of tropical forests in regulating global carbon stocks is well known. However, the role of abiotic variables related to climate conditions and edaphic parameters for patterns of above-ground woody biomass (AGWB) are still under debate. For Amazonian forests subjected to periodic floods, these patterns are even more uncertain. This study aimed to evaluate AGWB stocks in Amazonian floodplain forest, and investigate the importance of forest structure, hydroperiod and edaphic parameters for AGWB. Results are based on floristic inventories conducted in twelve hectares of forest distributed across four floodplains. All trees >= 10 cm DBH were tagged, identified, and had their DBH and height measured. Allometric equations were applied for calculating AGWB. Hydroperiod was estimated for each sample plot, and soil samples were collected and chemical and physical components analyzed. Hierarchical partitioning was applied to determine importance of forest structure variables for AGWB, and GLMMs to evaluate the individual role of several edaphic parameters and hydroperiod for AGWB stocks. AGWB estimates varied substantially both between and within sites, as did the proportional contribution of forest structure variables to AGWB. Fabaceae contributed most to AGWB overall, and hydro period was more important than soil fertility in explaining variation in AGWB values. Amongst the edaphic variables, Iron (Fe) was the component that influenced AGWB the most, followed by Aluminium (Al) and Phosphorus (P). Overall, our results indicate that, on the investigated Amazonian floodplains, AGWB is mainly driven by hydroperiod rather than edaphic properties. This occurs despite a constant input of nutrients caused by flooding events. In addition, this is the first study to suggest that P appears to be of some importance in Amazonian varzea and paleo-varzea floodplains, where soil fertility is generally higher than in non-flooded terra firme forests.
Accounting for local temperature effect substantially alters afforestation patterns			Human intervention in forested ecosystems is hoped to perform a fundamental shift within the next decade by reverting current forest loss-a major source of CO2 emissions-to net forest gain taking up carbon and thus aiding climate change mitigation. The demanded extensive establishment of forests will change the local surface energy fluxes, and with it the local climate, in addition to competing with food and fiber production for land and water. Scenario building models encompass this competition for resources but have turned a blind eye to the biogeophysical (BGP) local surface energy flux disturbance so far. We combine the benefit of CO2 sequestration of afforestation/reforestation (A/R) with the additional incentive or penalty of local BGP induced cooling or warming by translating the local BGP induced temperature change to a CO2 equivalent. We then include this new aspect in the land-use model Model for Agricultural Production and their Impact on the Environment (MAgPIE) via modifying the application of the price on greenhouse gases (GHGs). This enables us to use MAgPIE to produce A/R scenarios that are optimized for both their potential CO2 sequestration and the CO2 equivalent local BGP effect, as well as the socio-economic trade-offs of A/R. Here we show that optimal A/R patterns are substantially altered by taking the local BGP effects into account. Considering local cooling benefits of establishing forests triples (+203.4%) the viable global A/R area in 2100 from 116 to 351 Mha under the conditions of the shared socioeconomic pathway 2 (SSP2) scenario driven by the same GHG price. Three quarters (76.0%, +179 Mha) of the additionally forested area is established in tropical climates alone. Therefore, a further neglect of BGP effects in scenario building models undervalues the benefit of tropical forests while simultaneously running the risk of proposing counterproductive measures at high latitudes. However, the induced focus on tropical forestation intensifies the competition with food production where forests contribute most to mitigation. A/R related trade-offs need to be considered alongside their climate benefit to inhibit unintentional harm of mitigation efforts.
Achieving sustainable development goals through participatory forest management: Examples from South-Eastern Bangladesh			Forests managed through peoples' participation can help to achieve a number of sustainable development goals (SDGs). This paper, drawing data from four participatory forest management (PFM) projects in south-eastern Bangladesh, explored: (a) the factors that influenced the outcomes of PFM; and (b) contribution of PFM towards achieving selected SDGs. The research used observation, semi-structured household interviews, group discussions, vegetation survey and Ostrom & apos;s design principles for data collection, Divergent forest conditions and factors in four PFM sites have had differential contribution to SDGs. Heterogeneity of user groups, insufficient coordination, absence of motivation, and land tenure conflicts had affected the attainment of SDGs. The PFM helped to achieve 9-11 SDGs comprising poverty reduction (Goal 1), improving food security (Goal 2), maintaining health and well-being (Goal 3), enhancing childrens & apos; education (Goal 4), fair access to jobs and committees (Goals 5 and 10), sources of clean drinking water (Goal 6), affordable energy for cooking (Goal 7), increased household economy (Goal 8), climate change through carbon sequestration (Goal 13), forest conservation (Goal 15), and partnerships with relevant institutions (Goal 16). In order to achieve SDGs, PFM could be viewed as an integral part of government development strategies, which needs sectoral coordination and integration of relevant policies.
Active fires show an increasing elevation trend in the tropical highlands			As an inherent element of the Earth's ecosystem, forest, and vegetation fires are one of the key contributors to and direct consequences of climate change. Given that topography is one of the key drivers of forest landscapes and fire behavior, it is important to clarify what the topographical characteristics and trends of global fire events are, particularly in the tropics. Here, we have investigated the variations in elevation of active fires at the continental to a global scale, including the tropics, the extra-tropics, the lowlands, and the highlands (greater than 200 m above sea level [asl]), using the available MODIS Collection 6 active fire products (2001–2019). The main conclusions are: (1) the annual totality (average of 4.5 million) of global active fire events decreased and over 97% of them occurred frequently below 1500 m asl. (2) The tropics and the highlands accounted for ~74% (±3%) and 71% (±2%) of global active fires, respectively, and 77% (±2%) were observed in the tropical highlands. (3) From the beginning of the 21st century, active fires in the highlands displayed an upward elevational trend, particularly in the tropics, while the opposite trend was observed for the lowlands. More importantly, the rate of the increasing elevation in the highlands had a greater magnitude than that of decreasing elevation in the lowlands. (4) Finally, the United Nations collaborative program on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (UN-REDD) in Developing Countries seemed to slow down or even result in a reversal of the upward elevational trend of fire occurrences in the tropics for the partner countries, especially in the lowlands. In the context of global climate change and rampant fires, the trend of rising elevation for active fire occurrences, particularly in the tropical highlands, indicates that more vegetation burning events occur or will occur in hilly to mountainous areas, thus posing further threats to tropical forests and some important biodiversity refuges. More sustained efforts should be made by governments and the scientific community to instigate enhanced fire management practices and to conduct in-depth research programs. © 2022 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Active restoration increases tree species richness and recruitment of large-seeded taxa after 16-18 years			Tropical forest restoration presents a potential lifeline to mitigate climate change and biodiversity crises in the Anthropocene. Yet, the extent to which human interventions, such as tree planting, accelerate the recovery of mature functioning ecosystems or redirect successional trajectories toward novel states remains uncertain due to a lack of long-term experiments. In 2004-2006, we established three 0.25-ha plots at 10 sites in southern Costa Rica to test three forest restoration approaches: natural regeneration (no planting), applied nucleation (planting in patches), and plantation (full planting). In a comprehensive survey after 16-18 years of recovery, we censused >80,000 seedlings, saplings, and trees from at least 255 species across 26 restoration plots (nine natural regeneration, nine applied nucleation, eight plantation) and six adjacent reference forests to evaluate treatment effects on recruitment patterns and community composition. Both applied nucleation and plantation treatments resulted in significantly elevated seedling and sapling establishment and more predictable community composition compared with natural regeneration. Similarity of vegetation composition to reference forest tended to scale positively with treatment planting intensity. Later-successional species with seeds >= 5 mm had significantly greater seedling and sapling abundance in the two planted treatments, and plantation showed similar recruitment densities of large-seeded (>= 10 mm) species to reference forest. Plantation tended toward a lower abundance of early-successional recruits than applied nucleation. Trees (>= 5 cm dbh) in all restoration treatments continued to be dominated by a few early-successional species and originally transplanted individuals. Seedling recruits of planted taxa were more abundant in applied nucleation than the other treatments though few transitioned into the sapling layer. Overall, our findings show that active tree planting accelerates the establishment of later-successional trees compared with natural regeneration after nearly two decades. While the apparent advantages of higher density tree planting on dispersal and understory establishment of larger seeded, later-successional species recruitment is notable, more time is needed to assess whether these differences will persist and transition to the more rapid development of a mature later-successional canopy. Our results underscore the need for ecological restoration planning and monitoring that targets biodiversity recovery over multiple decades.
Actively restoring resilience in selectively logged tropical forests			Huge tracts of tropical forest are selectively logged. Meanwhile, emerging global agendas are providing unprecedented incentives for large-scale restoration within human-impacted tropical forest landscapes. Whilst logged forests have high conservation value, their adoption within these agendas remains controversial. We review the value of restoring logged tropical forests for boosting economic and environmental resilience. Targeted interventions can recover depleted timber stocks, increase saleable carbon stores, and deliver employment and non-timber forest products (NTFPs) to local communities. Restoration has mixed outcomes for biodiversity but if it improves relogging practices and protects forests from conversion to agricultural plantations may have major positive impacts. We also examine socio-economic and political pathways for upscaling logged forest restoration and their incorporation into sustainable forestry, given political and commercial malaise on post-logging interventions. Spurring these transitions will require strong institutions, executed by policies that enable long-term concession licences and community land tenure, that leverage commercial involvement and payments for ecosystem services, and that optimise existing interventions. Research frontiers include: (a) validating the economic and technical feasibility of different interventions; (b) understanding how these interventions impact on synergies and trade-offs between ecosystem services, NTFPs, and biodiversity; and (c) identifying when to restore a logged forest. This requires establishing long-term experimental trials that jointly track environmental and socioeconomic outcomes. Synthesis and applications. Post-logging interventions can deliver various timber, carbon, socioeconomic and potentially biodiversity benefits but are underemployed and undervalued pantropically. Opportunities exist to optimise interventions by tailoring incentives, policies, and management to ecological and social circumstances. Governments, conservation bodies and the private sector must underscore restoration of production forests as a major future objective, including via greater adoption in global initiatives, including forest and landscape restoration under the Bonn Challenge and the Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) agenda.
Adapting forests and their management to climate change: An overview			The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has arrived with the conclusion that the warming of the climate system is mainly due to the increase in anthropogenic greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere. It has also been observed that the average global temperatures have increased as well as with the frequency, duration and intensities of heat waves, droughts and floods, wind and storm patterns, frost, snow and ice cover, and global sea levels. In addition, the IPCC has identified the forest ecosystems that are likely affected by climate change and these are the boreal, mountain, Mediterranean, mangrove and tropical moist forests. On the other hand, climate change is also being influenced by forests in that they are sources of greenhouse gases when they are destroyed and as sinks for carbon when they grow or expand. But it is being proposed that forest can be considered as a prime tool for climate change mitigation in developing countries as it reduces emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries (REDD) while sustainable forest management has the ability to conserve and enhance such carbon stocks.
Addressing knowledge gaps on the role of anaerobic microbial communities in mangrove ecosystems: Implications for contaminant biodegradation and ecosystem conservation			Mangrove forests, located at the intersection of land and sea in tropical and sub-tropical regions, are vital carbon sinks and provide essential ecosystem services. However, these environments face increasing threats from climate change and human activities, leading to greenhouse gas emissions and contamination with pollutants such as hydrocarbons and metals. Anaerobic microbes in mangrove soils play crucial roles in biogeochemical processes like nutrient cycling and organic matter decomposition. Despite their importance, the functions and dynamics of these microbial communities remain underexplored, especially regarding their role in contaminant biodegradation. Recent advancements in molecular technologies, including next-generation sequencing, metagenomics and metatranscriptomics, offer insights into these anaerobic microbial communities, although challenges persist in managing and interpreting large datasets. Understanding how these microbes interact with soil nutrients, plants, and pollutants is critical for enhancing mangrove conservation and remediation efforts. AI-based tools could further aid in processing complex data, potentially revolutionizing our understanding of mangrove microbiomes. Focused studies on the effects of pollutants and the mechanisms of anaerobic biodegradation are essential for developing effective bioremediation strategies to protect these critical ecosystems from ongoing environmental threats. © 2025 Institute of Physics Publishing. All rights reserved.
Addressing the unintended consequences of tropical forest restoration for people and biodiversity.			Earlier this year, the media reported on a major new report (endorsed by most governments) that drew attention to the decline in natural ecosystems on our planet, and why this matters for human wellbeing. There are now growing calls for governments and society to address environmental issues - for example, the support for Greta Thunberg's climate strikes. Some governments are now working towards this: for example, by committing to restore natural ecosystems and reforest degraded lands. This is based on evidence suggesting that dangerous global warming could be stopped if greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation (and fossil fuel use) are halted, and if forest restoration locked up carbon. The growing interest in restoration sounds like a good thing, but it could have unintended consequences if not carefully planned. Natural ecosystems, agriculture, the world economy, and patterns of consumption and trade are connected in a global system. So, for example, taking pasture land out of production to plant forests might indirectly drive deforestation somewhere else, if the demand for pasture is not addressed. This makes designing successful policies about the environment very difficult. It is now a huge and urgent challenge to incorporate our understanding of how social, economic and ecological systems interact, and to develop tools that integrate our understanding and allow us to make informed decisions.  I am applying for this fellowship to learn from experts in systems analysis at The International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), and UK scientists who study how the interactions between people and forests can best be understood and modelled. Systems analysis is a research approach generally defined as: the science of objectively formulating and solving complex problems, typically with many feedbacks. Understanding land use change is a typical example where system analysis is helpful, as there are many drivers of change (agriculture, energy, infrastructure, conservation), many linked policies, and complex feedbacks between them all. During the fellowship I will do three things. Firstly, I will bring together two approaches for modelling future land use change (e.g. forest conversion to agriculture). This will enable a much better understanding of how different policies could affect future land use change. Thanks to my prior experience and training, and the expertise of experienced scientists at IIASA and in the UK who will help me develop the relevant skills, this is achievable. I will test whether these models are a real improvement over what was available before by comparing model results to observations of real land use change in the past. Secondly, I will apply my model to the real case study of Colombia, a leader in forest restoration (with a national restoration plan) which has exceptional unique wildlife and ecosystems. I will use the model to predict what might happen by 2040 if forest restoration occurs as planned. I will ask if restoring forests changes other patterns of land use relative to no restoration. In particular, does this actually cause increased deforestation elsewhere? I will then assess the expected effect of future land use on biodiversity (especially endemic species that only live in Colombia) and ecosystem services (carbon draw down and storage, water quality and quantity). I will also ask if different government policies would have different outcomes, and assess the relative importance of global trade. It is my goal that the outputs of this research are used to directly inform policies that result in better outcomes for nature and people. Finally, I will build collaborations between experts at IIASA and scientists here in the UK, who are all interested in these complex, interconnected questions of great global importance. The aim is for this fellowship to kick start a range of collaborations which will outlast my three years of funding, and help me build my future research career.
Advance methodological approaches for carbon stock estimation in forest ecosystems			The forests are a key player in maintaining ecological balance on the earth. They not only conserve biodiversity, reduce soil erosion, and protect watersheds but also promote the above and below-ground ecosystem services. Forests are known as air cleaners on the planet and play a significant role in mitigating greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions into the atmosphere. As per programs launched in the Conference of Parties (COP) 26, there is a need to promote policies and programs to reduce the atmospheric carbon (C) through the forest ecosystem; it is because forests can capture the atmospheric CO2 for a long time and help to achieve the goals of net-zero emission CO2 on the earth. Therefore, there is an urgent need to know the advanced technological approaches for estimating C stock in forest ecosystems. Hence, the present article is aimed at providing a comprehensive protocol for the four C stock estimation approaches. An effort has also been made to compare these methods. This review suggests that tree allometry is the most common method used for the quantification of C stock, but this method has certain limitations. However, the review shows that accurate results can be produced by a combination of two or more methods. We have also analyzed the results of 42 research studies conducted for C stock assessment along with the factors determining the amount of C in different types of forests. The C stock in vegetation is affected by temporal and spatial variation, plantation age, land use, cropping pattern, management practices and elevation, etc. Nevertheless, the available results have a large degree of uncertainty mainly due to the limitations of the methods used. The review supports the conclusion that the uncertainty in C stock measurements can be addressed by the integration of the above-mentioned methods. © 2023, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
Advances in pollination ecology from tropical plantation crops			Although ecologists traditionally focus on natural ecosystems, there is growing awareness that mixed landscapes of managed and unmanaged systems provide a research environment for understanding basic ecological relationships on a large scale. Here, we show how tropical agroforestry systems can be used to develop ideas about the mechanisms that influence species diversity and subsequent biotic interactions at different spatial scales. Our focus is on tropical plantation crops, mainly coffee and cacao, and their pollinators, which are of basic ecological interest as partners in an important mutualistic interaction. We review how insect-mediated pollination services depend on local agroforest and natural habitats in surrounding landscapes. Further, we evaluate the functional significance of pollinator diversity and the explanatory value of species traits, and we provide an intercontinental comparison of pollinator assemblages. We found that optimal pollination success might be best understood as a consequence of niche complementarities among pollinators in landscapes harboring various species. We further show that small cavity-nesting bees and small generalist beetles were especially affected by isolation from forest and that larger-bodied insects in the same landscapes were not similarly affected. We suggest that mixed tropical landscapes with agroforestry systems have great potential for future research on the interactions between plants and pollinators.
Advancing Knowledge in Forest Water Use Efficiency Under Global Climate Change Through Scientometric Analysis			Forests are critical in regulation of carbon and water cycles and mitigation of climate change. Forest water-use efficiency (WUE) refers to the ratio of biomass produced (or assimilated carbon) to the amount of water used by forests, which indicates how effectively a forest utilizes water to achieve productivity. Climate change and its impact on forest WUE are important research directions that explore the complex relationship between global environmental change and the forest ecosystem dynamics. The global intensification of climate change underscores the need for an inclusive understanding of forest water use and makes it crucial to know how forests balance carbon and water resources, which is essential for effective forest management and predicting ecosystem responses to climate change. This study aims to comprehensively and objectively analyze current research trends and future directions related to the response of forest WUE to climate change. Our database included 1755 research papers from the Web of Science Core Collection, spanning from 2000 to 2023. Our analysis included cooperative networks of countries, authors, and institutions, as well as the most frequently cited journals and articles, keyword co-occurrence analysis, and a keyword burst analysis. The results showed that the top cooperative country, author, and institution is PR China, Prof. Dr. Jes & uacute;s Julio Camarero from the Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient & iacute;ficas (CSIC), and the Chinese Academy of Sciences, respectively. The leading journal in this field is "Global Change Biology". Critical research hot topics include gas exchange, modeling, altitudinal gradients, tree growth dynamics, net carbon exchange, global change drivers, tropical forests, nitrogen stoichiometry, Northern China plains, and extreme drought conditions. Frontier topics that have emerged in recent years include studies on China's Loess Plateau, stable isotopes, radial growth, gross primary productivity, and Scots pine. The insights from this analysis are vital for researchers, decision-makers, and forestry professionals aiming to mitigate the impacts of climate change on forest WUE and overall ecosystem health and resilience. This study emphasizes the importance of sustained research efforts and global research collaboration in addressing the intricate challenges posed by climate change to forest ecosystems.
Advancing the Science and Practice of Conserving Hihiwai: Using Ecology and Traditional Ecological Knowledge to Identify and Overcome Threats to an Endemic Hawaiian Gastropod			0
Afforestation and avoided deforestation in a multi-regional integrated assessment model			A model is developed to estimate the potential role, and spatial allocation, of afforestation and avoided deforestation in climate policy. The model extends the RICE-2010 model, a multi-regional integrated assessment model of the climate and the economy. Incorporating these forest strategies in global climate policy is important, especially under stringent temperature targets. Under a 2 degrees C temperature target, emission reductions from avoided deforestation quickly achieve their full potential, whereas afforestation is capable of substantially reducing emissions in both the medium and long run. The analysis shows that the most significant reductions in emissions from avoided deforestation and afforestation can be achieved by focusing policy efforts on tropical forests.
Afforestation to mitigate climate change: impacts on food prices under consideration of albedo effects			Ambitious climate targets, such as the 2 degrees C target, are likely to require the removal of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Afforestation is one such mitigation option but could, through the competition for land, also lead to food prices hikes. In addition, afforestation often decreases land-surface albedo and the amount of short-wave radiation reflected back to space, which results in a warming effect. In particular in the boreal zone, such biophysical warming effects following from afforestation are estimated to offset the cooling effect from carbon sequestration. We assessed the food price response of afforestation, and considered the albedo effect with scenarios in which afforestation was restricted to certain latitudinal zones. In our study, afforestation was incentivized by a globally uniform reward for carbon uptake in the terrestrial biosphere. This resulted in large-scale afforestation (2580 Mha globally) and substantial carbon sequestration (860 GtCO(2)) up to the end of the century. However, it was also associated with an increase in food prices of about 80% by 2050 and a more than fourfold increase by 2100. When afforestation was restricted to the tropics the food price response was substantially reduced, while still almost 60% cumulative carbon sequestration was achieved. In the medium term, the increase in prices was then lower than the increase in income underlying our scenario projections. Moreover, our results indicate that more liberalised trade in agricultural commodities could buffer the food price increases following from afforestation in tropical regions.
After the rubber boom: good news and bad news for biodiversity in Xishuangbanna, Yunnan, China			The expansion of rubber plantations in northern Southeast Asia over the last 20years displaced shifting cultivation and tropical forests. In Xishuangbanna, SW China, rubber occupied 22% of the area by 2010, reducing lowland forest to scattered fragments, with severe impacts on plants, animals, and ecosystem services. The rubber price has declined steeply since 2011, but consequences for forest biodiversity have not previously been explored. We use a new approach for vegetation mapping, combining phenological information with object-based classification, to produce land-use maps for 2002, 2010, 2014, and 2018. During 2002-2018, forest cover declined continuously, from 71 to 52% of the land area, while rubber increased from 11 to 24% by 2014, before declining to 21% by 2018. Other farmlands also declined while tea plantations increased. Forest patch number increased 8-fold during 2001-2014, while patch size decreased 10-fold, but these trends were partly reversed after 2014, with the loss of numerous small (<1ha) patches. Most larger (>10ha) patches in 2018 were forest throughout the study period, but many smaller patches are secondary. Currently, 20% of Xishuangbanna is in protected areas. Unprotected forest is disproportionately on steep slopes at high altitudes, while biodiversity is highest in valleys and at low altitudes, where only smaller patches remain, creating challenges for conservation planning. We recommend that all the largest patches are preserved, plus smaller patches selected for their biota, and that forest restoration is used to restore connectivity and buffer small patches of high conservation value.
Age, extent and carbon storage of the central Congo Basin peatland complex			Peatlands are carbon-rich ecosystems that cover just three per cent of Earth's land surface(1), but store one-third of soil carbon(2). Peat soils are formed by the build-up of partially decomposed organic matter under waterlogged anoxic conditions. Most peat is found in cool climatic regions where unimpeded decomposition is slower, but deposits are also found under some tropical swamp forests(2,3). Here we present field measurements from one of the world's most extensive regions of swamp forest, the Cuvette Centrale depression in the central Congo Basin(4). We find extensive peat deposits beneath the swamp forest vegetation (peat defined as material with an organic matter content of at least 65 per cent to a depth of at least 0.3 metres). Radiocarbon dates indicate that peat began accumulating from about 10,600 years ago, coincident with the onset of more humid conditions in central Africa at the beginning of the Holocene(5). The peatlands occupy large interfluvial basins, and seem to be largely rain-fed and ombrotrophic-like (of low nutrient status) systems. Although the peat layer is relatively shallow (with a maximum depth of 5.9 metres and a median depth of 2.0 metres), by combining in situ and remotely sensed data, we estimate the area of peat to be approximately 145,500 square kilometres (95 per cent confidence interval of 131,900-156,400 square kilometres), making the Cuvette Centrale the most extensive peatland complex in the tropics. This area is more than five times the maximum possible area reported for the Congo Basin in a recent synthesis of pantropical peat extent(2). We estimate that the peatlands store approximately 30.6 petagrams (30.6 x 10(15) grams) of carbon belowground (95 per cent confidence interval of 6.3-46.8 petagrams of carbon)-a quantity that is similar to the above-ground carbon stocks of the tropical forests of the entire Congo Basin(6). Our result for the Cuvette Centrale increases the best estimate of global tropical peatland carbon stocks by 36 per cent, to 104.7 petagrams of carbon (minimum estimate of 69.6 petagrams of carbon; maximum estimate of 129.8 petagrams of carbon(2)). This stored carbon is vulnerable to land-use change and any future reduction in precipitation(7,8).
Age-specific and species-specific tree response to seasonal drought in tropical dry forests			Millions of people depend on ecosystem services provided by Tropical Dry Forests (TDFs), yet their proximity to population centers, seasonally dry climate, and the ease at which they are converted to agriculture has left only 10 % of their original extent globally. As more TDFs become protected, basic information relating TDF age to subsurface water resources will help guide forest recovery. Severe deforestation and recent reforestation around Bahia de Caraquez, Ecuador produced a mosaic of different successional stages ideal for exploring relationships between TDF age, subsurface water availability and species-specific responses to seasonal drought. Over one year, we measured gravimetric water content, predawn and midday leaf water potential, and the stable isotope composition of xylem and source waters in two regenerating and one primary forest. Over the transition from wet to dry season, we discovered a sharper decrease in predawn water potential in younger successional forests than in the primary forest. Growing in degraded subsurface environments under increased competition, successional forest trees accessed deeper sources of moisture from unsaturated weathered bedrock and groundwater through the dry season; however, different species employed distinct water use strategies. Ceiba trichistandra maintained midday water potentials above -1.27 MPa through a drought avoidance strategy dependent on groundwater. Sideroxylon celastrinum tolerated drought by lowering predawn and midday water potential through the early dry season but took up greater proportions of saprolite moisture and groundwater as the dry season progressed. Contrastingly, Handroanthus chrysanthus maintained access to shallow soil and saprolite moisture by dropping midday water potential to -4.30 MPa, reflecting drought tolerance. Our results show that limited subsurface water resources in regenerating TDF's lead to species-specific adaptations re-liant on deeper sources of moisture. The recovery of soil and saprolite hydrologic properties following disturbances is likely to exceed 100 years, highlighting the importance of forest conservation.
Aggregate C depletion by plowing and its restoration by diverse biomass-C inputs under no-till in sub-tropical and tropical regions of Brazil			Encapsulation of soil organic carbon (SOC) within aggregates is one of the principal mechanisms for long-term C sequestration, macroaggregate formation and stabilization. Our objectives were to quantify the changes in aggregate size distribution, aggregate-C concentrations and stocks upon conversion of native vegetation (NV) to conventional plow-based tillage (CT), and to assess the rate of aggregation and SOC recovery with no-till (NT) under diverse biomass-C inputs. The study was conducted at both sub-tropical (Ponta Grossa - PG, State of Parana) and tropical (Lucas do Rio Verde - LRV, State of Mato Grosso) sites in Brazil. The SOC content under NV was used as a baseline to evaluate the depletion rate under CT and the restoration rate under NT. A specific emphasis was given to the largest macroaggregate size class (8-19 mm) because of its importance to protecting the recently deposited labile SOC. A discriminant analysis of principal components (DAPC) indicated that NV soil is modified by conversion to an arable land use and that, mechanical tillage, biomass input, and their interactions drastically influence the distribution of aggregate-size classes, aggregation indices, and SOC distribution within aggregates. At both sites, soil aggregation indices were positively impacted by NT and associated with SOC concentration in the labile fractions (e.g., total polysaccharides (TPS), hot water extractable organic C (HWEOC), particulate organic C (POC)). At the PG site, the 8-19 mm aggregate size fraction was significantly affected by land use and tillage treatments and represented 54%, 43%, and 72%, under NV, CT, and NT in 0-20 cm depth, respectively. Furthermore, the 8-19 mm size fraction stored 55%, 45%, and 71% of the total SOC stock under NV (53.8 Mg C ha(-1)), CT (28.5 Mg C ha(-1)) and NT (51.2 Mg C ha(-1)), respectively. At the LRV site, the 8-19 mm aggregate size fraction decreased from 50% under Cerrado NV to 35% under CT, and ranged from 33% to 51% under diverse biomass-C input under NT in 0-20 cm depth. The 8-19 mm size fraction stored 52%, 37%, and 41% of the total SOC stock across all aggregate sizes under NV (25.4 Mg C ha(-1)), CT (11.7 Mg C ha(-1)), and NT (9.9-18.1 Mg C ha(-1)), respectively. The difference in SOC stock among land uses is largely attributed to storage in the 8-19 mm aggregate size class, indicating that NT cropping systems rebuilt the largest macroaggregates, which are crucial for stabilization of SOC. (C) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Agricultural land-use diversity and forest regeneration potential in human- modified tropical landscapes			A major challenge in tropical human-modified landscapes (HMLs) is meeting the ever-growing demand for agricultural products while conserving biodiversity and ecosystem services provided by forest ecosystems. Within this challenge, a major issue is the understanding of the forest potential to naturally regenerate in abandoned agricultural fields. To assess such potential, it is necessary to know the diversity of agricultural land uses in the landscape, quantify the ecological disturbance inflicted by such uses, and evaluate forest regeneration as a function of disturbance both at the field and landscape levels. Our previous work has shown that in abandoned fields the abundance and species diversity of regenerating rain forest trees decline as disturbance level increases. Here we aimed to achieve the following: 1) to quantify the diversity of agricultural land uses in HMLs; 2) to assess ecological disturbance regimes caused by different agricultural land uses, at the field and landscape scales; and 3) to identify groups of agricultural land uses with contrasting effects for forest regeneration at the landscape level. We approach these issues by using a case study of HMLs in a southeastern region of Mexico, which are representative of landscapes in the agricultural frontier in the Neotropics. We interviewed 68 landowners to gather information on agricultural land uses and management of 156 fields. Based on this information, we quantified an ecological disturbance regime associated with each field considering the following: field size (in hectares), duration of agricultural use (in years), and land-use disturbance severity (i.e. frequency or magnitude of fire, agrochemicals, machinery, grazing or removal of tree cover). By integrating disturbance inflicted by different land uses and the proportion of the landscape covered by each land use, we constructed a landscape ecological disturbance index. Finally, by using this index and data gathered from nine landscapes (3 × 3 km each), we tested the hypothesis that structural attributes (abundance, biomass, and species diversity of trees) of regenerating forests decrease as agriculture disturbances increase in the landscape. There was a high inequality in the proportion of land allocated to the 13 recorded agricultural land uses, with cattle pastures representing ca. 90% of total agricultural land. There was a wide disturbance gradient, ranging from land uses with high (e.g. cattle pastures) to low disturbance (e.g. coffee and cocoa plantations). Three major groups of land uses with contrasting disturbance regimes were detected: 1) agroforestry systems, characterized by small size, low to intermediate duration, and low disturbance severity; 2) monocultures, typically small size, long duration, and medium to high disturbance severity; and 3) extensive farming, large size, short to intermediate duration, and high disturbance severity. Biomass and species diversity of regenerating forests consistently reduced with increasing levels of agriculture disturbance in the landscape. We conclude that positive balances between biodiversity conservation and agricultural production in HMLs will depend on establishing agricultural land uses that inflict low disturbance regimes (such as agroforestry systems) embedded in a matrix of old-growth forest and long-lasting second-growth forests. Our results may inform farmers, policy makers and land managers about HMLs where agricultural production and conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services can be conciliated. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Agricultural management impacts on soil organic carbon storage under moist and dry climatic conditions of temperate and tropical regions			We conducted a meta-analysis to quantify the impact of changing agricultural land use and management on soil organic carbon (SOC) storage under moist and dry climatic conditions of temperate and tropical regions. We derived estimates of management impacts for a carbon accounting approach developed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, addressing the impact of long-term cultivation, setting-aside land from crop production, changing tillage management, and modifying C input to the soil by varying cropping practices. We found 126 articles that met our criteria and analyzed the data in linear mixed-effect models. In general, management impacts were sensitive to climate in the following order from largest to smallest changes in SOC: tropical moist> tropical dry> temperate moist> temperate dry. For example, long-term cultivation caused the greatest loss of SOC in tropical moist climates, with cultivated soils having 0.58 +/- 0.12, or 58% of the amount found under native vegetation, followed by tropical dry climates with 0.69 +/- 0.13, temperate moist with 0.71 +/- 0.04, and temperate dry with 0.82 +/- 0.04. Similarly, converting from conventional tillage to no-till increased SOC storage over 20 years by a factor of 1.23 +/- 0.05 in tropical moist climates, which is a 23% increase in SOC, while the corresponding change in tropical dry climates was 1.17 +/- 0.05, temperate moist was 1.16 +/- 0.02, and temperate dry was 1.10 +/- 0.03. These results demonstrate that agricultural management impacts on SOC storage will vary depending on climatic conditions that influence the plant and soil processes driving soil organic matter dynamics.
Agricultural trade and tropical deforestation: interactions and related policy options			The extensive clearing of tropical forests throughout past decades has been partly assigned to increased trade in agricultural goods. Since further trade liberalisation can be expected, remaining rainforests are likely to face additional threats with negative implications for climate mitigation and the local environment. We apply a spatially explicit economic land-use model coupled to a biophysical vegetation model to examine linkages and associated policies between trade and tropical deforestation in the future. Results indicate that further trade liberalisation leads to an expansion of deforestation in Amazonia due to comparative advantages of agriculture in South America. Globally, between 30 and 60 million ha (5-10 %) of tropical rainforests would be cleared additionally, leading to 20-40 Gt additional emissions by 2050. By applying different forest protection policies, those values could be reduced substantially. Most effective would be the inclusion of avoided deforestation into a global emissions trading scheme. Carbon prices corresponding to the concentration target of 550 ppm would prevent deforestation after 2020. Investing in agricultural productivity reduces pressure on tropical forests without the necessity of direct protection. In general, additional trade-induced demand from developed and emerging countries should be compensated by international efforts to protect natural resources in tropical regions.
Agroforestry a model for ecological sustainability			The success stories of agroforestry systems (AFS) are prevalent in the tropical regions due to its multifarious ecosystem services that resulted into climate and food security along with socioeconomic development of poor farmers. The existence and progressive development of AFS is quite linked with scientific-based practices and management of different models in the varying regions and localities that tells a story about tree crop interaction and makes synergies among soil nutrients loads, perennial trees, herbaceous crops, and livestocks. Overall, a healthy relationship among various components of agroforestry models will be helpful for farmers both in terms of economic benefits along with better ecosystem structure and its services. No doubt, agroforestry practices (AFP) is socially acceptable, economically viable and ecologically sound but their scientific-based management practices are still required for making the consistency of models for long term basis in future that is directly linked with farmers rejoice. However, the scope and potential of AFS are inevitable due to its wide adoptability and spreading capacity in various regions of the tropics such as Asia, Africa, and European countries. Carbon (C) storage and sequestration by tree in agroforestry are the greatest phenomenon that helps in mitigating changing climate and global warming that promotes environmental security and ecological sustainability along with enhancing wood biomass for satisfying people’s basic need and national demand. World Agroforestry (ICRAF) mentioned that tropical AFS has a capacity to sequestered between 12 and 228 Mg/ha of C and according to this approximate 1.1-2.2 Pg C could be stored in terrestrial ecosystems up to coming 50 years by the AFS in areas of 585-1215 × 106 ha of the total earth surface. Thus, sustainable practices of agroforestry model not only help in enhancing the forest cover in the current era of ongoing forest degradation but also promote better ecosystem by enhancing soil fertility, efficient nutrient cycling, balancing C between environment and different models, and promoting biodiversity along with food and environmental security. In this context, this chapter presents the potential of agroforestry and its ecosystem services that help in maintaining ecological sustainability at global level. © 2022 Elsevier Inc.
Agroforestry as a strategy for the recovery and conservation of carbon stocks in Amazon forests			Continuous changes in land use in the Amazon in recent years, mainly due to the conversion of forests through agricultural and extractive practices, have resulted in serious alterations in the structure and functioning of ecosystems with impacts at regional and global scales. The replacement of tropical forests by itinerant agricultural systems is one of the main reasons contributing to carbon emissions into the atmosphere and becoming one of the most important environmental impacts. However, there are documented mechanisms for reducing carbon emissions from deforestation and degradation (REDD+), i) controlling the emission reduction sources through conservation and sustainable management of the forest, and ii) recovering and increasing plant biomass as important sinks through forest restoration strategies. In order to increase efficiency in the recovery and conservation of carbon in vulnerable deforested and degraded forest areas of the Amazon, our objective was to develop an analysis of the potential environmental impacts of agroforestry as a REDD+ alternative, through i) rehabilitation of degraded areas subjected to successive fire and crop cycles, ii) passive restoration of secondary forests, and iii) implementation of improved fallows managing agroforestry species. Agroforestry is an important alternative to recover and conserve carbon stocks through REDD+ activities against the shifting cultivation in the Amazon.
Agroforestry boosts soil health in the humid and sub-humid tropics: A meta-analysis			Agroforestry has been increasingly recognized as a key example of agroecological praxis contributing to the sustainable intensification of food production while providing a number of additional benefits to society. However, a quantitative synthesis of the impact of agroforestry on soil health and associated ecosystem services in the humid and sub-humid tropics is still lacking. The objective of this study was to quantify the contribution of agroforestry practices to soil-mediated ecosystem services, specifically, regulation of soil erosion, storage of soil organic carbon (SOC) and nitrogen (N), availability of soil N and phosphorus (P) to crops, and alleviation of soil acidity across the humid and sub-humid tropics. The analysis demonstrated that agroforestry can reduce soil erosion rates by 50 % compared to crop monocultures. This finding is supported by higher infiltration rates, lower runoff, higher proportion of soil macroggregates, and greater stability of soil structure under agroforestry. SOC increased by 21 %, N storage increased by 13 %, available N by 46 % and available P by 11 % while soil pH increased by 2% under agroforestry compared to crop monocultures. We conclude that agroforestry can make significant contributions to provision of soil-mediated ecosystem services in the humid and sub-humid tropics. © 2020 Elsevier B.V.
Agroforestry coffee production increased by native shade trees, irrigation, and liming			Agroforestry systems usually include a high density and diversity of shade trees. Such systems often have a large diversity of fauna and flora and provide local and regional ecosystem services. Shade trees are, however, being removed to increase crop production in many tropical regions. There is little knowledge on the effect of shade trees on crop production in the context of trade-offs with other management practices. We therefore compared the benefits of exotic versus native shade trees on coffee production. We evaluated the importance of shade tree management for crop production in the context of management practices. Management practices included fertilization, liming, coffee pruning, weeding, and irrigation in 113 coffee agroforests in Kodagu, India, over a wide range of shade tree density, tree species diversity, and shade cover. We studied, in particular, Grevillea and non-Grevillea shade trees, the latter including mostly native tree species. Results show that a rise of 100 non-Grevillea shade tree per hectare increased production of berries by 5.6 % and larger beans by 6.25 %. Irrigation and liming increased berry production respectively by 16 and 20 %. These management interventions are likely to offset the relatively small negative effect of reducing shade density of non-Grevillea trees on coffee production. Recommendations based on an understanding of shade tree management alone can be misleading with regard to crop production.
Agroforestry for carbon sequestration in tropical India			Our atmosphere naturally contains CO2, CH4, N2O, water vapor, and other gases creating a natural greenhouse effect. But increased concentrations of these gases in the atmosphere have created an imbalance and have enhanced the greenhouse effect causing warming of the globe. Global warming will adversely affect hundreds of millions of people and will pose serious threats to the global food system and to rural livelihoods. Global warming is mainly the result of rising CO2 levels in the Earth’s atmosphere. CO2 concentration in the atmosphere is increasing at greater pace from decade to decade. To assure food security, adaptation, and mitigation to climate change is unavoidable. Many organizations worldwide are working for lowering CO2 concentration through various strategies like reduction in energy use, developing low- or no-carbon fuel, and CO2 sequestration by forestry/agroforestry and engineering techniques. Agroforestry has been recognized as a means to reduce CO2 emissions and enhance carbon sinks. Agroforestry systems (AFS) offer important opportunities of creating synergies between both adaptation and mitigation actions. Recent studies under various AFS in diverse ecological conditions showed that these systems increase and conserve aboveground and soil carbon stocks and also have an important role in increasing livelihood security and reducing vulnerability to climate change. The potential of agroforestry systems to accumulate C is estimated to 0.29-15.21 Mg ha-1 year-1. The carbon sequestration potential of AFS can be enhanced by stabilizing soil organic carbon through possible mechanisms including biochemical recalcitrance and physical protection and also reducing C losses. Furthermore, effectiveness of AFS to carbon sequestration depends on structure and functions of different component, environmental, and socio-economic factors. Carbon sequestration can be quantified by destructive or nondestructive methods. Implementing agroforestry on farmers’ fields for carbon sequestration will have major challenges which deserve to be addressed in an effective manner. © Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020.
Agroforestry for conserving and enhancing biodiversity			The intricate relationship between biodiversity loss and human well-being is increasingly being understood in ecological and economic terms. Despite the knowledge of the multiple dimensions of this relationship and its importance, species and ecosystems are still disappearing at an alarming rate. Anthropogenic pressures are the prime reason for this trend, yet attempts to reduce such pressures and conserve species in protected areas have only achieved limited success. This has led to the realization that sustainable consumptive use approaches that can combine production and conservation functions are also important in conserving biodiversity in human-dominated landscapes. Agroforestry, as part of a multifunctional working landscape, can play a major role in conserving and even enhancing biodiversity from farms to the landscape level in both tropical and temperate regions of the world. This special issue is an attempt to bring together a collection of articles that not only explore and demonstrate the biodiversity benefits of agroforestry, but also the mechanisms by which agroforestry systems sustain such high floristic and faunal diversity. While it is important to conserve biodiversity in protected areas, the articles in the special issue reiterate the importance of agroforestry as a critical tool in conserving biodiversity in human-dominated landscapes.
Agroforestry for crop diversification and carbon sequestration			The shrinking agricultural land in the world due to expansion of urban areas, exponential population growth, stagnating crop growth, changes in food habits and degradation of natural resources has led the farmers to grow additional crops and diversify the cropping patterns. Crop diversification (shift) is an effective strategy to produce more from shrinking resources and to increase output by increase in productivity than increase in cultivated area. It means change from traditionally grown one or two crops to other economically viable high value crops such as cereals, oilseeds, pulses, fibers, fodder, vegetables, fruits or forest trees. Green revolution has made India self-sufficient in food grain production and this self-sufficiency was achieved mainly due to cereal crops in various agro-ecological conditions. But, this has led to several new challenges like decline in productivity, degradation of land and water resources, and diminishing biodiversity. Agroforestry is an important land use system for diversification around the world that has solution to many of such challenges. Almost half of all farmed land in the world has more than 10% tree cover and in some areas (Southeast Asia and Central America) it exceeds 30%. Tree plantations and agroforestry on farms have already started showing positive results. Tree cover is expected to grow further on farmland in temperate countries with their efforts to reduce carbon emissions and demand for biofuel production from lignocellulosic wood sources. In various continents of the world, different agroforestry practices have played a key role in crop diversification. In North America, the farmers preferred agroforestry over agriculture in 1980s to reduce surplus production and improve economic gain and natural resource conservation. Different agroforestry practices are being followed in five distinct regions based on climate, soils, landforms and natural resource management systems in Canada. Current agroforestry practices in Europe are dominated by oaks and conifers such as pines, junipers and firs. Australian farmers considered agroforestry as a potential system to improve sustainability and profitability of farms due to increase in production cost and decline in price of wheat and wool. Pinus radiata is the dominant softwood and Eucalyptus globulus is being grown for production of wood chips in Australia. In African continent, the smallholder farmers depend on tree crops such as coffee, cocoa, coconut, oil palm and rubber for their livelihoods. Crop diversification has taken place in many Asian countries. With commercialization in agriculture and subsequent environmental degradation, China has adopted Paulownia crop intercropping and shelter belts. In Japan, the woodlands in eastern uplands are dominated by pine and those in western uplands by broad leaved species like Japanese cedar and Japanese cypress. In Malaysia, oil palm, rubber, cocoa and rice continue to be the major crops grown by the private and public sectors. In India, with the advent of irrigation and new farm technologies, the yield level of most crops especially cereals increased making it possible to obtain a given level of output with reduced area. The major agroforestry practices in India include multifunctional improved fallows, home gardens, plantation crop-based mixed species production systems, alley cropping, woodlots, windbreaks, protein banks, shifting cultivation and taungya in different regions. Agri-silviculture, agri-horticulture, agri-horti-silviculture and silvopastoral systems have not only helped diversification but enhanced productivity of land per unit area in Himalayan zone. Trees have been an integral part of the farming system in humid and sub-humid zone. In the arid and semiarid regions, the hardy tree species such as Prosopis cineraria, Ailanthus excelsa, Dalbergia sissoo and Hardwickia binata have been adopted. In the tropical region, the homegardens provide food, fodder, timber, firewood, vegetables and protect the environment. Rice and wheat account for more than 80% of the to al cereal production in Indo Gangetic plains. But the continuity of this system during the last many years has led to many problems. Farmers have adopted poplar and eucalyptus based agroforestry systems in different regions of Indo Gangetic zone depending on climatic and edaphic conditions. The agroforestry technologies developed by Punjab Agricultural University (PAU) Ludhiana Centre of AICRP on Agroforestry have been adopted by the farmers; such as poplar and eucalyptus clones, crop cultivation with these tree species, planting and irrigation method, nutrient requirement and their deficiencies and management of insects and diseases of these tree species. Agroforestry has a significant potential to sequester atmospheric carbon in plant biomass and in soils. Carbon sequestration is a dynamic process and carbon storage is more in the boles, stems, roots of trees and in the soil during maturation period of trees. Research has reported higher soil C stock under deeper soil profiles in agroforestry systems compared to treeless agricultural or pasture land systems under similar ecological settings. Improvement in resistant pools of soil organic carbon with increasing rotations of agroforestry systems has been reported. Conversion of unproductive croplands and grasslands to agroforestry could improve the carbon sequestration potential of the terrestrial systems. The carbon sequestration of agroforestry systems in the global context and under Indian conditions has been discussed. Estimates of net annual carbon sequestration in agroforestry crops indicate that components with the highest rates in India are poplar, eucalypt, and bamboo. Carbon sequestration in tree biomass and the underneath soil in various agroforestry systems viz. agrisilvicultural systems, silvopastoral systems, silvi-horti-based systems, alley cropping and homegardens in India has been discussed. © 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc.
Agroforestry in Shade Coffee Plantations as an Emission Reduction Strategy for Tropical Regions: Public Acceptance and the Role of Tree Banking			Support for the adoption of climate change mitigation measures in low-income regions depends on how such activities contribute to generating household income and gaining confidence from the local community. The planning of mitigation measures or pro-environmental activities need to consider the cost of deployment, customization of activities according to local conditions, and socio-cultural background and perceptions of people. This paper analyses the incentive induced "agroforestry" or "planting trees in farmland" as part of the Carbon Neutral Programme supported by the Government of Kerala in Meenangadi Grama Panchayath, Wayanad district. An increase in tree cover is proposed as a strategy for increasing carbon sequestration. Planting more trees in farmland (except grain cultivated areas) along with crops, according to farmers, may reduce crop yield and discourage farmers' participation. The Government of Kerala put forward the concept of a tree banking/tree incentive program to attract farmers to expand tree cover. A survey was conducted among 100 individuals from the Meenangadi Grama Panchayath to assess the perceptions and concerns of farmers about the proposed "Agroforestry"/Tree Banking program. The sample size was chosen from the population assuming a 9.98% error tolerance. Tree Banking Programme designed to encourage farmers to plant trees has gained public interest, and the study also documented the factors influencing the willingness of farmers for planting trees. The study revealed that the majority of the individuals (93% of the survey participants) residing in the region are interested in supporting the activities for climate change mitigation. Financial incentives announced under tree banking generated interest among farmers. 89% of the survey participants consider the incentive scheme to be an attractive option, as it can compensate for the short-term loss in crop productivity. However, farmers were very selective in choosing the tree species to be planted on their farms. Incentivization helps to make sure that a large proportion of the planted saplings will grow into mature trees. Overall, it can be concluded that afforestation in the form of agroforestry could be potentially attractive to the farmers and contribute towards achieving carbon neutrality for tropical agricultural areas.
Agroforestry Practices Promote Biodiversity and Natural Resource Diversity in Atlantic Nicaragua			Tropical forest conversion to pasture, which drives greenhouse gas emissions, soil degradation, and biodiversity loss, remains a pressing socio-ecological challenge. This problem has spurred increased interest in the potential of small-scale agroforestry systems to couple sustainable agriculture with biodiversity conservation, particularly in rapidly developing areas of the tropics. In addition to providing natural resources (i.e. food, medicine, lumber), agroforestry systems have the potential to maintain higher levels of biodiversity and greater biomass than lower diversity crop or pasture systems. Greater plant diversity may also enhance soil quality, further supporting agricultural productivity in nutrient-limited tropical systems. Yet, the nature of these relationships remains equivocal. To better understand how different land use strategies impact ecosystem services, we characterized the relationships between plant diversity (including species richness, phylogenetic diversity, and natural resource diversity), and soil quality within pasture, agroforests, and secondary forests, three common land use types maintained by small-scale farmers in the Pearl Lagoon Basin, Nicaragua. The area is undergoing accelerated globalization following the 2007 completion of the regions first major road; a change which is expected to increase forest conversion for agriculture. However, farmer agrobiodiversity maintenance in the Basin was previously found to be positively correlated with affiliation to local agricultural NGOs through the maintenance of agroforestry systems, despite these farmers residing in the communities closest to the new road, highlighting the potential for maintaining diverse agroforestry agricultural strategies despite heightened globalization pressures. We found that agroforestry sites tended to have higher surface soil %C, %N, and pH relative to neighboring to secondary forest, while maintaining comparable plant diversity. In contrast, pasture reduced species richness, phylogenetic diversity, and natural resource diversity. No significant relationships were found between plant diversity and the soil properties assessed; however higher species richness and phylodiversity was positively correlated with natural resource diversity. These finding suggest that small, diversified agroforestry systems may be a viable strategy for promoting both social and ecological functions in eastern Nicaragua and other rapidly developing areas of the tropics. Copyright: CC BY
Agroforestry stand age influence physical and chemical soil parameters			The role of agroforestry in improving soil parameters is well known. However, there is debate as to how age of agroforestry practice affects physical and chemical parameters especially in the tropical region of Sub-Saharan Africa where adoption of the practice is fairly recent. To understand those effects, a study was conducted using soil samples taken in farms adopting/non adopting agroforestry practises, selected using a stratified, random sampling strategy. Soil was sampled from adopters and non-adopters using soil auger. At least five subsamples were collected from each location and the soil mixed to get an integrated soil sample for analysis. The physical (sand, clay, silt and bulk density), chemical properties (pH, total nitrogen [TN], total phosphorus [TP], total organic carbon [TOC], carbon nitrogen ratio [C/N] and carbon to phosphorus ratio [C/P]) were analyzed in the soil. The exchangeable bases (K, Ca, Mg and Na) as well as micronutrients (Mn, Cu, Fe and Zn) were also analyzed. The results indicated that sand was significantly (P < 0.05) higher among non-adopters compared to adopters while silt and bulk density was significantly (P < 0.05) higher among the adopters compared to the nonadopters. Sand levels decreased while silt and bulk density significantly increased with increasing agroforestry stand age. The TN, TOC and C/P ratio were significantly (P < 0.05) higher among adopters and increased consistently with age of adoption, while C/N was higher among non-adopters and decreased with increasing age of agroforestry stand. The trend in exchangeable bases and micro-nutrients in the soil were similar, where higher concentrations occurred among adopters and displayed an increase with regard to age of agroforestry stand. Our results support the hypothesis that age of agroforestry practice affects soil in parameter-specific patterns.
Agroforestry Systems: An Effective Toolfor Carbon Sequestration			The consequences of global warming on climate change (CC) are now evident to all. The escalating level of greenhouse gases is the root cause of global warming is the increase in greenhouse gases (GHGs). As per reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) the levels of current GHG, especially CO2 have increased drastically about 30% in the atmosphere as compared to the pre-industrial levels. Such drastic increase of CO2 has occurred due to anthropogenic activities like vehicular emission due to combustion of fossil fuels, emission from industries and replacement of tropical forests by agricultural lands. In order to mitigate this hazard C-sequestration has emerged as an effective way wherein the atmospheric carbon is being converted and stored in a form that is unavailable. In terms of sequestration, plant and soil organic carbon (SOC) act as an excellent carbon sink (25% of global carbon (GC) stocks, i.e., 2,000 ± 500 Pg) and their benefits can be maximized if they are managed and manipulated in various biomes. One such option is agroforestry systems which judiciously combine the woody perennials or trees with crops, livestock, and pastures for deriving maximum ecological benefit from their interaction. The tree component in such systems serve as a long-term sink for carbon. Moreover, agroforestry systems have the ability to sequester carbon both in the aboveground andbelowground biomass portions as well as soil. It is estimated that the agroforestry systems can potentially store approximately up to 30–300 Mg C ha–1 in one meter soil depth. Thus, the chapter encapsulates brief definitions, extent, and types of agroforestry systems present across world, mechanism C-sequestration by agroforestry systems and ancillary benefits associated with them. In addition, some lights have been thrown on international policies for promoting agroforestry all of the world, their execution, loopholes, and recommendations. © 2025 by Apple Academic Press, Inc.
Airborne remote sensing of spatiotemporal change (1955-2004) in indigenous and exotic forest cover in the Taita Hills, Kenya			We studied changes in area and species composition of six indigenous forest fragments in the Taita Hills, Kenya using 1955 and 1995 aerial photography with 2004 airborne digital camera mosaics. The study area is part of Eastern Arc Mountains, a global biodiversity hot spot that boasts an outstanding diversity of flora and fauna and a high level of endemism. While a total of 260 ha (50%) of indigenous tropical cloud forest was lost to agriculture and bushland between 1955 and 2004, large-scale planting of exotic pines, eucalyptus, grevillea, black wattle and cypress on barren land during the same period resulted in a balanced total forest area. In the Taita Hills, like in other Afrotropical forests, indigenous forest loss may adversely affect ecosystem services. (C) 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Aligning climate and health: assessing zoonotic arboviral risks in agroforestry as a climate mitigation strategy			Recent outbreaks of arboviral diseases such as Zika and West Nile have their roots in tropical forests.Their spread coincides with significant land conversion for agriculture, impacting arthropod vectors andreservoirs of zoonotic diseases. Our decade-long epidemiological studies in Panama's Darien region indicatehigh incidence of zoonotic alphaviruses in humans, wildlife and more recently, in livestock. In Darien, openpasture ranching and crop farming coexist with agroforestry, an important climate change mitigation strategy thatintegrates crops, livestock and forest. Despite the rising global adoption of agroforestry, its impact on infectiousdisease risk is understudied. Our research aims to fill this knowledge gap by investigating zoonotic arboviraltransmission in Darien in relation to its agricultural practices, including agroforestry. Various factors, frombiodiversity shifts to land tenure benefits and irrigation schemes, likely influence disease transmission. Wehypothesize that landscapes that merge forest, agriculture and human dwellings potentially enhance the spreadof zoonotic arboviruses due to increased overlap of vectors, vertebrate reservoirs including livestock, andhumans. Our first aim in this study is to assess agroforestry's impact on zoonotic arboviral risk among the agrarianpopulation and livestock in Darien, Panama, by conducting serosurveys and acute febrile studies to informhabitat suitability modeling. Interviews with participants will provide data on health and social determinantsinfluencing agriculture and zoonoses interactions. Our second aim is to characterize vector ecology, infectionrates, and host use across an agricultural gradient. We will study immature vector breeding preferences andwater quality, and employ a variety of vector trapping methods to assess viral transmission rates and blood mealorigins to shed light on shifts is host usage within agroforestry environments. Our third aim is to map zoonoticarboviral risk using geospatial and field data. We will also analyze natural selection and gene flow of thepredominant zoonotic arbovirus in the region, Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, across the agriculturalgradient. We will use genomes derived from field isolates (mosquito, animal and human), along with regionalhistorical isolates, to test the hypothesis that increased host diversity at the forest/agriculture ecotone fostersgreater VEEV genetic diversification, leading to the emergence of new variants capable of causing epizootics. The research outcomes will be instrumental in defining transmission dynamics and health burden ofsignificant zoonotic arboviruses and informing preventive measures. This understanding will guide land use andhealth policies in Darien, serve as a blueprint for interventions, and help ensure alignment of climate and healthobjectives within the context of agroforestry. Our methodologies and findings will have broad applicability acrossregions with similar ecologies.
Allelopathy: a tool for weed management in forest restoration			Forest restoration uses active management to re-establish natural forest habitat after disturbance. However, competition from early successional species, often aggressively invasive exotic plant species, can inhibit tree establishment and forest regeneration. Ideally, restoration ecologists can plant native tree species that not only establish and grow rapidly, but also suppress exotic competitors. Allelopathy may be a key mechanism by which some native trees could reduce the abundance and impact of exotic species. Allelopathy is a recognized tool for weed management in agriculture and agroforestry, but few studies have considered how allelopathic interactions may aid restoration. Here we introduce the "Homeland Security" hypothesis, which posits that some na < ve exotic species may be particularly sensitive to allelochemicals produced by native species, providing a tool to reduce the growth and impacts of invasive exotic species on reforestation. This article explores how exploiting allelopathy in native species could improve restoration success and the re-establishment of natural successional dynamics. We review the evidence for allelopathy in agroforestry systems, and consider its relevance for reforestation. We then illustrate the potential for this approach with a case study of tropical forest restoration in Panama. C-4 grasses heavily invade deforested areas in the Panama Canal watershed, especially Saccharum spontaneum L. We measured the effect of leaf litter from 17 potential restoration tree species on the growth of invasive C-4 grasses. We found that leaf litter from legume trees had a greater inhibitory effect on performance of S. spontaneum than did litter from non-legume trees. However, allelopathic effects varied greatly among species within tree functional groups. Further evaluation of intra- and inter-specific interactions will help to improve our selection of restoration species.
Alley Cropping: An Alternative to Slash and Burn in the Slopelands of the Mizo Hills			Population pressure in the Mizo Hills, a small mountainous region in northeast India, has shortened fallow periods of slash-and-burn (S&B) plots substantially, making its practice unsustainable. Conventional farming and modern technology cannot be applied in this remote tropical region due to its topography; hence, most farmers continue practicing S&B on a scale that degrades the environment and reduces biodiversity. Alley cropping is increasingly being used in other similar tropical regions as an alternative to S&B due to benefits such as positive influence on soil properties, its ability to keep nutrients in equilibrium and carbon sequestration. Such grounds make alley cropping a viable alternative to S&B in the Mizo Hills and a ray of hope for a sustainable and sedentary means of farming for Mizo farmers.
Allometric equations for estimating above- and belowground biomass in Tea (Camellia sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze) agroforestry system of Barak Valley, Assam, northeast India			Tea (Camellia sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze) agroforestry has widespread implications for the earnings and food security for a large fraction of population in NorthEast India. It also has immense potentiality to act as a considerable reservoir of biomass carbon providing climate change mitigation options. In the present study an attempt was made to develop allometric equations for above-and belowground biomass estimation specific to Tea [C. sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze] in Barak Valley of northeast India. Relationships were developed through destructive sampling and regressing diameter alone and along height, wood density, crown area, branch count with biomass. Allometric power function equation and linear equivalents have been developed. Diameter singly could predict significantly aboveground biomass (AGB) root biomass (BGB) and total Tea biomass (TB) with over 95% accuracy. Whereas incorporation of height, crown area, wood density, branch count with diameter influenced the model in terms of modified coefficient of determination and minimized estimation errors. Branches, stem and leaves accounted 50, 21 and 6% of AGB respectively. Root biomass (BGB) contributed 23% of the total Tea bush biomass. The samples exhibited overall BGB/AGB ratio of 0.30 +/- 0.08 and biomass expansion factor (BEF) by 4.23 +/- 1.6. Biomass of different components significantly differs in varied diameter sizes. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Allometric equations for estimating aboveground biomass of Coffea arabica L. grown in the Rift Valley escarpment of Ethiopia			Coffee, Coffea arabica L., which is native to Ethiopia, is the world's most widely traded tropical agricultural commodity. While much is known about the productivity and management of coffee for coffee beans little attention has been given to the plants overall biomass production and carbon sequestration. The objective of this study was to develop and evaluate allometric equations for estimating the aboveground biomass of C. arabica plants growing in indigenous agroforestry system in the Rift Valley escarpment of south-eastern Ethiopia. Coffee plays an important role in providing income and in sustaining these productive systems. Biomass harvesting of 31 plants with 54 stems was carried out in a 40 km2 area varying in elevation from 1,500 to 1,900 m. The stem accounted for most (56 %) of plant biomass, followed by branches (39 %) and twigs plus foliage (5 %). Plant mean biomass was 22.9 ± 15.8 kg. Power equations using stem diameter measured at either 40 cm (d 40) or at breast height (d, 1.3 m) with and without stem height (h) were evaluated. The square power equation, Y = b1d240, was found to be the best (highest ranked using goodness-of-fit statistics) for predicting total and component biomass. The reliability of the prediction decreased in the order: stem > branches > twigs plus foliage. A cross-validation procedure showed that equation parameterization was stable and coefficients reliable. Our parameterized square power equation for total aboveground biomass was also found to be better than the equations parameterized by Hairiah et al. (Carbon stocks of tropical land use systems as part of the global C balance: effects of forest conversion and options for clean development activities, International Centre for Research in Agroforestry, Bogor, 2001) and Segura et al. (Agroforest Syst 68:143-150, 2006) for C. arabica grown in agroforestry systems, confirming the importance of parameterization of allometric equations with site specific data when possible. © 2013 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht.
Allometric equations for estimating tree biomass in restored mixed-species Atlantic Forest stands			Restoration of Atlantic Forests is receiving increasing attention because of its role in both biodiversity conservation and carbon sequestration for global climate change mitigation. This study was carried out in an Atlantic Forest restoration project in the south-central region of Sao Paulo State - Brazil to develop allometric equations to estimate tree biomass of indigenous tree species in mixed plantations. Above and below-ground biomass (AGB and BGB, respectively), stem diameter (DBH: diameter at 1.3 m height), tree height (H: total height) and specific wood density (WD) were measured for 60 trees of 19 species. Different biomass equations (linear and nonlinear-transformed) were adjusted to estimate AGB and BGB as a function of DBH, H and WD. For estimating AGB and BGB, the linear biomass equation models were the least accurate. The transformed nonlinear biomass equation that used log DBH2, log H and log WD as predictor variables were the most accurate for AGB and the transformed nonlinear biomass equations that used log DBH2*WD as predictor variables were the most accurate for BGB. It is concluded that these adjusted equations can be used to estimate the AGB and BGB in areas of the studied project. The adjusted equations can be recommended for use elsewhere in the region for forest stands of similar age, tree size ranges, species composition and site characteristics.
Alternative Tree Species for Sustainable Forest Management in the Brazilian Amazon			The scarcity of hardwoods from tropical forests makes the search for alternative species necessary for commercialization. This study aimed to establish groups of timber species from the Amazon Forest with potential for logging purposes through the assessment of their physical-mechanical properties, aiming to identify alternative species that can meet the market demands. We utilized data from the Forest Products Laboratory (LPF) (containing information on basic density and other wood mechanical properties) and the Timberflow platform, as well. We applied a multivariate cluster analysis technique with the aim of grouping species based on the technological characteristics of their wood and evaluating similarity among them to obtain homogeneous groups in terms of economic potential and utilization. The results indicated four homogeneous groups: Cluster 1 (40.72% of species, basic density-db: 690 kg m-3), Cluster 2 (13.92%, db: 260 and 520 kg m-3), Cluster 3 (27.32%, db: 550 and 830 kg m-3), and Cluster 4 (18.04%, db: 830 kg m-3). Most of the 20 listed species are classified as more commercially viable (70%), with high wood density. Species identified as alternatives include Dialium guianense and Zollernia paraensis for Dipteryx odorata, Terminalia argentea for Dinizia excelsa, Terminalia amazonia and Buchenavia grandis for Goupia glabra, and Protium altissimum and Maclura tinctoria for Hymenaea courbaril. The analysis highlighted the overexploitation of a restricted group of species and the need to find alternatives to ensure the sustainability of forest management. This study contributed to identifying species that can serve as alternatives to commercial ones, promoting a more balanced and sustainable forest management.
Altitude and species identity drive leaf litter decomposition rates of ten species on a 2950 m altitudinal gradient in Neotropical rain forests			Identifying the environmental factors controlling litter decomposition is key to understanding the magnitude and rates of nutrient cycling in tropical forests, and how they may be influenced by climate variability and environmental change. We carried out a leaf litter translocation experiment in mature rain forest over a 2,520 m altitudinal gradient in Costa Rica. Leaf litter decomposition rates (k) of ten tree species, two dominant species from each ecosystem, plus two standard species, were calculated over 540 days in four life zones. k was lowest in montane with 0.83 per year and lower montane forests with 2.21 per year. k did not differ between lowland and premontane forests at 3.12 per year, in spite of the 3celcius difference of mean annual temperature between these life zones. k varied fourfold among species. Species decomposition rates ranked as follows, and were predictably related to leaf economic spectrum traits of the species: Acalypha communis (standard, fast decomposer)>> Hyeronima oblonga > Alchornea latifolia, Quercus bumelioides, Jarava ichu (standard, slow decomposer)> Minquartia guianensis > Magnolia sororum > Vochysia allenii > Pourouma bicolor, Carapa guianensis. These two slowest-decomposing species were native premontane and lowland forest dominants, respectively, with tough, low-nutrient leaves. The ranking of species by k varied very little among life zones suggesting that decomposer organisms in very different ecosystems and environments react in similar ways to the litter quality in general. We conclude that while k decreases with temperature in rain forests on tropical mountains, bioclimatic zones defined as premontane may be "functionally lowland." The effects of species identity on decomposition rates on tropical mountains are consistent and independent of environment for both standard and native species. Under climate change on these mountains, if moisture regimes do not change, decomposition rates will increase due to rising temperatures. Soil carbon storage may therefore decrease. Changes in the altitudinal distributions of currently dominant species will also affect this critically important biogeochemical process.
Amazon deforestation in Brazil: effects, drivers and challenges			Jean Pierre Ometto(dagger 1), Ana Paula Dutra Aguiar(1) & Luiz Antonio Martinelli(2) The concept of global ecosystem services has become a powerful paradigm for understanding the link between ecosystem processes and related human activities, which is expressed by the economic and ecological quantification of the services in regards to sustainable development. The role of tropical forests in the global climate system and the uncertainty of the exact magnitude of this complex interaction has become a major concern to the scientific community. In this paper we review and synthesize the global effects of Amazon deforestation in Brazil, as well as drivers and challenges related to this process. To this end, we provide data on carbon emissions from combined annual maps of clear cutting of primary forests and spatial information on biomass distribution for different vegetation types and secondary vegetation growth, as well as the temporal dynamic related to the deforestation process and its interregional heterogeneity, the social and institutional drivers. In 2009, during the Conference of Parties, of the United Nation Framework Convention on Climate Change (Copenhagen, Denmark), Brazil announced a voluntary commitment to reduce the national GHG emissions by 2020 and, to this end, such commitment requires reducing Amazon rainforest deforestation by 80% over a decade. To achieve this target, a set of consolidated remote sensing techniques have served to monitor and calculate the extent of deforestation, which became indispensable auditing tools for conservation, forest restoration and implementing climate change mitigation schemes.
Amphibian Community Responses to Different Logging Techniques in Bornean Production Forests			0
Amphibian species and functional diversity as indicators of restoration success in tropical montane forest			Tropical forest restoration is increasingly seen as an activity that may counteract or reduce biodiversity loss. However, few studies monitor fauna or consider measures of functional diversity to assess restoration success. We assessed the effect of a tropical montane forest restoration program on species and functional diversity, using amphibians as the target group. We compared amphibian assemblages in three types of land use: restoration areas, tropical montane cloud forest (TMCF; reference ecosystem) and cattle pastures (degraded ecosystem) in southern Mexico. We also described microclimate, microhabitat heterogeneity, woody vegetation structure and diversity for each type of land use, and their relationship to amphibian species and functional diversity. Compared to TMCF, restoration areas had similar environmental conditions. However, amphibian species richness was similar in the three types of land use and abundance was lower in the restoration areas. In TMCF, the amphibian assemblage was dominated by forest-specialist species, the pastures by generalist species, and the restoration areas by a combination of both species types. Interestingly, functional richness, functional evenness and functional divergence did not vary with land use, though the number of functional groups in restoration areas and TMCF was slightly higher. Overall, the results suggest that after seven years, active restoration provided habitat heterogeneity and recovered woody vegetation capable of maintaining amphibian species and functional groups similar to those inhabiting TMCF. Forest fragments adjacent to restoration areas seem to facilitate fauna recolonization and this emphasizes the importance of the conservation of the reference ecosystems to achieving restoration success.
An alternative approach for mapping burn scars using Landsat imagery, Google Earth Engine, and Deep Learning in the Brazilian Savanna			The Cerrado biome in Brazil is characterized by a mosaic of vegetation types similar to African savanna and has one of the highest levels of biodiversity in the world. Wildfires have historically contributed to shaping the natural vegetation and are now being used in the establishment and management of agricultural systems and pastures. Consequently, the fire regime has been changing over the last few decades and increasingly affecting native vegetation, natural habitats, and ecosystem services in tropical regions. Mapping fire dynamics and spatial distribution are crucial to assess impacts on ecosystems and to define and enforce strategies and measures of fire control and prevention. In this study, we developed an alternative approach for mapping burned areas in the Cerrado biome in Brazil, using Landsat imagery and Deep Learning algorithm, implemented on the Google Earth Engine and on Google Cloud Storage platform. We compared our mapping results with two Burned Area products developed by INPE (30 m resolution) and MODIS MCD64A1 Burned Area Product (500 m resolution). Additionally, we assessed the accuracies of these three mapping products using 2,200 validation points within the study area. By comparing our mapping result with MCD64A1 and INPE burn scar products, we estimated an average agreement of 34% for both. We observed that most mapping disagreements were mainly because of the effects of clouds/shadow conditions that affected the ability for spectral observations, differences in methodologies, and spatial resolution of each remotely sensed datasets used for mapping burned areas. Our validation results indicated an overall accuracy of 97% of our methodological approach for mapping burned areas and, therefore, it can be successfully applied across savanna regions. Our results showed that 202,230 km(2) was affected by fires within the Cerrado biome in 2017, in which 31% overlapped cropping lands (agricultural fields and pastures) and 67% overlapped various types of native vegetation (forest, savanna and grassland). Our proposed methodological approach and its results can be useful to enforce environmental command and control policies and to estimate carbon emissions, analyses interactions between climate and ecological drivers of fire, develop predictive models of fire risk dynamics, and providing spatial information that can help public policies and fire management/prevention actions for the Cerrado conservation.
An amazon perspective on the forest-climate connection: Opportunity for climate mitigation, conservation and development?			Amazonia contains more carbon (C) than a decade of global, human-induced CO2 emissions (60-80 billion tons). This C is gradually being released to the atmosphere through deforestation. Projected increases in Amazon deforestation associated with investments in road paving and other types of infrastructure may increase these C emissions. An increase of 25-40% in Amazon deforestation due to projected road paving could counterbalance nearly half of the reductions in C emissions that would be achieved if the Kyoto Protocol were implemented. Forecasted emission increases could be curtailed if development strategies aimed at controlling frontier expansion and creating economic alternatives were implemented. Given ancillary benefits and relative low costs, reducing deforestation in Amazonia and other tropical areas could be an attractive option for climate mitigation. Projects that help contain deforestation and reduce frontier expansion can play an important role in climate change mitigation but currently are not allowed as an abatement strategy under the climate regime. Creating incentives for forest conservation and decreased deforestation can be a unique opportunity for both forest conservation and climate mitigation.
An Amazonian rainforest and its fragments as a laboratory of global change			We synthesize findings from one of the world's largest and longest-running experimental investigations, the Biological Dynamics of Forest Fragments Project (BDFFP). Spanning an area of similar to 1000 km(2) in central Amazonia, the BDFFP was initially designed to evaluate the effects of fragment area on rainforest biodiversity and ecological processes. However, over its 38-year history to date the project has far transcended its original mission, and now focuses more broadly on landscape dynamics, forest regeneration, regional- and global-change phenomena, and their potential interactions and implications for Amazonian forest conservation. The project has yielded a wealth of insights into the ecological and environmental changes in fragmented forests. For instance, many rainforest species are naturally rare and hence are either missing entirely from many fragments or so sparsely represented as to have little chance of long-term survival. Additionally, edge effects are a prominent driver of fragment dynamics, strongly affecting forest microclimate, tree mortality, carbon storage and a diversity of fauna.Even within our controlled study area, the landscape has been highly dynamic: for example, the matrix of vegetation surrounding fragments has changed markedly over time, succeeding from large cattle pastures or forest clearcuts to secondary regrowth forest. This, in turn, has influenced the dynamics of plant and animal communities and their trajectories of change over time. In general, fauna and flora have responded differently to fragmentation: the most locally extinction-prone animal species are those that have both large area requirements and low tolerance of the modified habitats surrounding fragments, whereas the most vulnerable plants are those that respond poorly to edge effects or chronic forest disturbances, and that rely on vulnerable animals for seed dispersal or pollination.Relative to intact forests, most fragments are hyperdynamic, with unstable or fluctuating populations of species in response to a variety of external vicissitudes. Rare weather events such as droughts, windstorms and floods have had strong impacts on fragments and left lasting legacies of change. Both forest fragments and the intact forests in our study area appear to be influenced by larger-scale environmental drivers operating at regional or global scales. These drivers are apparently increasing forest productivity and have led to concerted, widespread increases in forest dynamics and plant growth, shifts in tree-community composition, and increases in liana (woody vine) abundance. Such large-scale drivers are likely to interact synergistically with habitat fragmentation, exacerbating its effects for some species and ecological phenomena. Hence, the impacts of fragmentation on Amazonian biodiversity and ecosystem processes appear to be a consequence not only of local site features but also of broader changes occurring at landscape, regional and even global scales.
An analysis of global terrestrial carbon, water and energy dynamics using the carbon-nitrogen coupled CLASS-CTEMN+ model			A carbon-nitrogen (C-N) coupled terrestrial ecosystem model, CLASS-CTEMN+, was used to simulate global terrestrial carbon, water, and energy cycles at 0.5-degree spatial resolution from 1901 to 2010. Forcing and initializing data sets from the North American Carbon Program (NACP)-Multi-Scale Synthesis and Terrestrial Model Intercomparison Project (MsTMIP) were used. Two versions of the model (the C-N coupled and the C-only version) were compared. The C-N (C) version of the model simulated global annual total gross ecosystem productivity (GEP) of 122.7 (128.2) Pg Cyr(-1), ecosystem respiration (Re) of 119.1(122.4) Pg Cyr(-1), net ecosystem productivity (NEP) of 3.64 (5.82) Pg Cyr(-1), net primary productivity (NPP) of 62.7 (67.4) Pg Cyr(-1), latent heat (LE) of 146.2 (167.4) ZJ yr(-1), sensible heat (H) of 194.0 (162) ZJ yr(-1), soil organic carbon (SOC) of 1230 (1328) Pg C, and total vegetation biomass (Tvg) of 608 (629) PgC, over the 1980-2010 period were comparable to scaled observations and modelling studies in the literature. Our results suggest that altough inclusion of N cycling has not had a large effect on the simulated total global terrestrial ecosystem C budget over this period; however the temporal evolution and spatial distribution of the simulated C budget revealed important influences of the N cycle. Analysis of long-term annual variations in response to evolving climate, CO2 concentration levels, and N deposition over the 1901-2010 period showed largely similar increasing trends in global GEP, Re, NEP and NPP until about 1970, after which the rate of increase was suppressed in the C-N coupled version of the model relative to the C-only version. Spatial plots showed that GEP and Re were reduced in the C-N coupled version of the model over the temperate and boreal regions and in high latitudes, where N limitation is well documented. The strongest response in NEP was in the boreal forests of North America, Northern Europe and Northwestern Asia, which showed decreases in response to the inclusion of a N cycle. Commensurate with the reductions in GEP and NEP, leaf area index (LAI) and total vegetation biomass (Tvg) also showed decreases in the boreal region, while SOC showed wider decreases in temperate, boreal and northern regions.This study helps to identify and diagnose the impact of N controls on the simulated spatiotemporal patterns of terrestrial C sinks and sources, and to evaluate and quantify the variability of simulated N cycle effects on different plant functional types (PFTs). These results have important implications for future climate change scenarios because the response to increasing CO2, N deposition, and climate patterns shows diverging model behavior as compared with the C-only version, when a N cycle is incorporated in the model. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
An assessment of carbon stock for various land use system in Aravally mountains, Western India			Reducing carbon emissions from deforestation and degradation in developing countries is of the central importance in efforts to combat climate change. A study was conducted to measure carbon stocks in various land-use systems including forms and reliably estimates the impact of land use on carbon (C) stocks in the forest of Rajasthan, western India (23 degrees 3'-30 degrees 12'N longitude and 69 degrees 30'-78 degrees 17'E). 22.8% of India is forested and 0.04% is the deforestation rate of India. In Indian forest sector of western India of Aravally mountain range covered large area of deciduous forest and it's very helpful in carbon sequestration at global level. The carbon stocks of forest, plantation (reforestation) and agricultural land in aboveground, soil organic and fine root within forest were estimated through field data collection. Results revealed that the amount of total carbon stock of forests (533.64 +/- 37.54 Mg.ha(-1), simplified expression of Mg (carbon) .ha(-1)) was significantly greater (P<0.05) than the plantation (324.37 +/- 15.0 Mg.ha(-1)) and the agricultural land (120.50 +/- 2.17 Mg.ha(-1)). Soil organic carbon in the forests (172.84 +/- 3.78 Mg.ha(-1)) was also significantly greater (P<0.05) than the plantation (153.20 +/- 7.48 Mg.ha(-1)) and the agricultural land (108.71 +/- 1.68 Mg.ha(-1)). The differences in carbon stocks across land-use types are the primary consequence of variations in the vegetation biomass and the soil organic matter. Fine root carbon was a small fraction of carbon stocks in all land-use types. Most of the soil organic carbon and fine root carbon content was found in the upper 30-cm layer and decreased with soil depth. The aboveground carbon (ABGC): soil organic carbon (SOC): fine root carbon ratios (FRC), was 8:4:1, 4:5:1, and 3:37:1 for the forest, plantation and agricultural land, respectively. These results indicate that a relatively large proportion of the C loss is due to forest conversion to agricultural land.
An Australian Landscape-Based Approach: AFOLU mitigation for smallholders			It is not possible to avoid dangerous climate change without taking into account the natural and agricultural ecosystems of the planet (Trumper et al. 2009), a sector second only to the energy sector in its potential to mitigate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Each year, tropical forests draw down 15% of global emissions (Trumper et al. 2009), while deforestation and agricultural emissions are responsible for over 20% of global emissions (McKinsey & Company 2009). In Australia, the Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) sector provides the largest abatement opportunity available, accounting for 25% of the country’s total emissions (Australian Government 2010). A recent assessment of GHG abatement potential through change in rural land-use demonstrates for the state of Queensland, the second largest state in Australia, that the overall attainable GHG abatement was 140 Mt CO2e/ yr, or 77% of that state’s emissions (Eady et al. 2009). By 2020 rural land use is projected to offer about 40% of the low-cost emissions reductions opportunity (ClimateWorks Australia 2010). Given the high contribution to total emissions, the AFOLU sector could potentially transform Australia’s mitigation effort and influence global mitigation effort (Garnaut 2008). At the same time, the right landscape actions, including improved farming practice, wetland restoration, and forest, grazing and cropland management, could also support landscape adaptation to the impacts of climate change (Verchot et al. 2007). © 2012 ICRAF and CIAT, for the CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security.
An Ecologically Based System for Sustainable Agroforestry in Sub-Tropical and Tropical Forests			Forests in tropical and sub-tropical countries face severe pressures due to a combination of poverty and environment degradation. To be effective, measures to protect these forests must therefore consider both economic and ecological dimensions synergistically. The purpose of this paper was to synthesize our long-term work (1994-2015) on a Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba L.) agroforestry system and demonstrate its potential for achieving both goals, and discuss its wider application in tropical and sub-tropical countries. The performance of various ecological, economic, and social indicators was compared among five Ginkgo agroforestry systems. Two additional indicators, Harmony Degree (HD) and Development Degree (DD), were also used to show the integrated performance of these indicators. Ginkgo-Wheat-Peanut (G+W+P) and Ginkgo-Rapeseed-Peanut (G+R+P) are the best systems when compared to pure and mixed Ginkgo plantations, or pure agricultural crops. Results demonstrate that it is possible to achieve both economic development and environmental protection through implementation of sustainable agroforestry systems in sub-tropical regions.
An ecosystem approach to biodiversity effects: Carbon pools in a tropical tree plantation			This paper presents a synthesis of experiments conducted in a tropical tree plantation established in 2001 and consisting of 22 plots of 45m×45m with either one, three or six native tree species. We examined the changes in carbon (C) pools (trees, herbaceous vegetation, litter, coarse woody debris (CWD), and mineral topsoil at 0-10cm depth) and fluxes (decomposition of CWD and litter, as well as soil respiration) both through time and among diversity levels. Between 2001 and 2009 the aboveground C pools increased, driven by trees. Across diversity levels, the mean observed aboveground C pool was 7.9±2.5Mgha-1 in 2006 and 20.4±7.4Mgha-1 in 2009, a 158% increase. There was no significant diversity effect on the observed aboveground C pool, but we found a significant decrease in the topsoil C pool, with a mean value of 34.5±2.4Mgha-1 in 2001 and of 25.7±5.7Mgha-1 in 2009 (F1,36=52.12, p<0.001). Assuming that the biomass C pool in 2001 was negligible (<1Mgha-1), then the plantation gained in C, on average, ∼20 and lost ∼9Mgha-1 in biomass and soil respectively, for an overall gain of ∼11Mgha-1 over 8 years. Across the entire data set, we uncovered significant effects of diversity on CWD decomposition (diversity: F2,393=15.93, p<0.001) and soil respiration (monocultures vs mixtures: t=15.35, df=11, p<0.05) and a marginally significant time×diversity interaction on the loss of total C from the mineral topsoil pool (see above). Monthly CWD decomposition was significantly faster in monocultures (35.0±24.1%) compared with triplets (31.3±21.0%) and six-species mixtures (31.9±26.8%), while soil respiration was higher in monocultures than in mixtures (t=15.35, df=11, p<0.001). Path analyses showed that, as diversity increases, the links among the C pools and fluxes strengthen significantly. Our results demonstrate that tree diversity influences the processes governing the changes in C pools and fluxes following establishment of a tree plantation on a former pasture. We conclude that the choice of tree mixtures for afforestation in the tropics can have a marked influence on C pools and dynamics. © 2010 Elsevier B.V.
An ecosystem risk assessment of temperate and tropical forests of the Americas with an outlook on future conservation strategies			Forests of the Americas and the Caribbean are undergoing rapid change as human populations increase and land use intensifies. We applied the IUCN Red List of Ecosystems (RLE) criteria and simple cost-efficiency analyses to provide the first regional perspective on patterns of relative risk integrated across multiple threats. Based on six indicators of ecosystem distribution and function, we find that 80% of the forest types and 85% of the current forest area is potentially threatened based on RLE criteria. Twelve forest types are Critically Endangered due to past or projected future deforestation, and Tropical Dry Forests and Woodland have highest threat scores. To efficiently reduce risks to forest ecosystems at national levels, scenario analyses show that countries would need to combine large forest protection measures with focused actions, tailored to their sociopolitical context, to help restore ecological functions in a selection of threatened forest types.
An expert system model for mapping tropical wetlands and peatlands reveals South America as the largest contributor			Wetlands are important providers of ecosystem services and key regulators of climate change. They positively contribute to global warming through their greenhouse gas emissions, and negatively through the accumulation of organic material in histosols, particularly in peatlands. Our understanding of wetlands’ services is currently constrained by limited knowledge on their distribution, extent, volume, interannual flood variability and disturbance levels. We present an expert system approach to estimate wetland and peatland areas, depths and volumes, which relies on three biophysical indices related to wetland and peat formation: (1) long-term water supply exceeding atmospheric water demand; (2) annually or seasonally water-logged soils; and (3) a geomorphological position where water is supplied and retained. Tropical and subtropical wetlands estimates reach 4.7 million km2 (Mkm2). In line with current understanding, the American continent is the major contributor (45%), and Brazil, with its Amazonian interfluvial region, contains the largest tropical wetland area (800,720 km2). Our model suggests, however, unprecedented extents and volumes of peatland in the tropics (1.7 Mkm2 and 7,268 (6,076–7,368) km3), which more than threefold current estimates. Unlike current understanding, our estimates suggest that South America and not Asia contributes the most to tropical peatland area and volume (ca. 44% for both) partly related to some yet unaccounted extended deep deposits but mainly to extended but shallow peat in the Amazon Basin. Brazil leads the peatland area and volume contribution. Asia hosts 38% of both tropical peat area and volume with Indonesia as the main regional contributor and still the holder of the deepest and most extended peat areas in the tropics. Africa hosts more peat than previously reported but climatic and topographic contexts leave it as the least peat-forming continent. Our results suggest large biases in our current understanding of the distribution, area and volumes of tropical peat and their continental contributions. © 2017 The Authors. Global Change Biology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
An isoline separating relatively warm from relatively cool wintertime forest surface temperatures for the southeastern United States			Forest-oriented climate mitigation policies promote forestation as a means to increase uptake of atmospheric carbon to counteract global warming. Some have pointed out that a carbon-centric forest policy may be overstated because it discounts biophysical aspects of the influence of forests on climate. In extra-tropical regions, many climate models have shown that forests tend to be warmer than grasslands and croplands because forest albedos tend to be lower than non-forest albedos. A lower forest albedo results in higher absorption of solar radiation and increased sensible warming that is not offset by the cooling effects of carbon uptake in extra-tropical regions. However, comparison of forest warming potential in the context of climate models is based on a coarse classification system of tropical, temperate, and boreal. There is considerable variation in climate within the broad latitudinal zonation of tropical, temperate, and boreal, and the relationship between biophysical (albedo) and biogeochemical (carbon uptake) mechanisms may not be constant within these broad zones. We compared wintertime forest and non-forest surface temperatures for the southeastern United States and found that forest surface temperatures shifted from being warmer than non-forest surface temperatures north of approximately 36 degrees N to cooler south of 36 degrees N. Our results suggest that the biophysical aspects of forests' influence on climate reinforce the biogeochemical aspects of forests' influence on climate south of 36 degrees N. South of 36 degrees N, both biophysical and biogeochemical properties of forests appear to support forestation as a climate mitigation policy. We also provide some quantitative evidence that evergreen forests tend to have cooler wintertime surface temperatures than deciduous forests that may be attributable to greater evapotranspiration rates. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Analysis of the Structure and Ecological Function of an Extreme Landscape in a Tropical Region of West Java, Indonesia			An extreme landscape is a spatially heterogeneous area with unusual topography that is prone to natural disasters but still exhibits interrelated structures and functions. One of the important functions of an extreme landscape is its ecological function. This study aimed to determine the structure and reveal the ecological functions of an extreme landscape in a tropical region of West Java, with special reference to Rongga Sub-district. The method used was a combination of remote sensing techniques and geographic information systems, which were required to process, analyze, and interpret Landsat 8 OLI/TIRS data. The landscape structure was quantified by landscape metrics, after which an analysis of ecological functions was carried out based on the constituent elements of the landscape. The results showed that the landscape structure of Rongga Sub-district consists of various elements of agroforestry land, open fields, settlements, shrubs, plantations, and rainfed and irrigated rice fields. Additionally, secondary forest land acted as a landscape matrix where rivers crossed as natural corridors. The amount of each element varied; agroforestry land had the highest value, indicating that this element showed a high degree of human intervention. Each patch was adjacent to other patch types, and the landscape diversity was quite high. The extreme topography of Rongga Sub-district supports the landscape connectivity and consequently the presence of wild animals in this area. Therefore, Rongga Sub-district has an essential ecological function as a refuge for protected animals living in non-conservation areas.
Annual CO2 budget of spruce model ecosystems in the third year of exposure to elevated CO2			Clones of 4-year-old spruce trees (Picea abies) were grown in competition in model ecosystems with nutrient-poor natural forest soil and natural understory vegetation and were exposed to three CO, concentrations (280, 420 and 560 mu mol mol(-1)) for three years. Diurnal net ecosystem CO2 uptake (NECd), nocturnal net ecosystem CO2 loss (NECn) and soil CO2 efflux were measured repeatedly in the third year of CO2 exposure and were used to estimate an annual ecosystem CO2 budget. The CO2 induced stimulation of NECd varied over the year with no measurable stimulation in spring and fall but a high mid-season CO2 stimulation. Respiratory losses of whole ecosystems and soil CO2 efflux alone were both progressively increased with increasing CO2, thus counteracting the CO2 stimulation of photosynthesis per unit ground area. Consequently, the annual net ecosystem CO2 uptake was only moderately and non-linearly stimulated by CO2 (+8% = 84 g C m(-2) a(-1) at 420 and +9% = 90 g C m(-2) a(-1) at 560 compared to 280 mu mol CO2 mol(-1)). We conclude that the rising atmospheric CO2 concentration may lead to an increase in annual net ecosystem carbon gain of rather nutrient-poor spruce communities. Our results further suggest that CO2 fertilization effects may be greatest under current CO2 concentration and that relative increases of net ecosystem CO2 uptake will become relatively smaller as atmospheric CO2 will continue to rise.
Anthropogenic activities dominated tropical forest carbon balance in two contrary ways over the Greater Mekong Subregion in the 21st century			The tropical forest carbon (C) balance threatened by extensive socio-economic development in the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) in Asia is a notable data gap and remains contentious. Here we generated a long-term spatially quantified assessment of changes in forests and C stocks from 1999 to 2019 at a spatial resolution of 30 m, based on multiple streams of state-of-the-art high-resolution satellite imagery and in situ observations. Our results show that (i) about 0.54 million square kilometers (21.0% of the region) experienced forest cover transitions with a net increase in forest cover by 4.3% (0.11 million square kilometers, equivalent to 0.31 petagram of C [Pg C] stocks); (ii) forest losses mainly in Cambodia, Thailand, and in the south of Vietnam, were also counteracted by forest gains in China due mainly to afforestation; and (iii) at the national level during the study period an increase in both C stocks and C sequestration (net C gain of 0.087 Pg C) in China from new plantation, offset anthropogenetic emissions (net C loss of 0.074 Pg C) mainly in Cambodia and Thailand from deforestation. Political, social, and economic factors significantly influenced forest cover change and C sequestration in the GMS, positively in China while negatively in other countries, especially in Cambodia and Thailand. These findings have implications on national strategies for climate change mitigation and adaptation in other hotspots of tropical forests.
Anthropogenic and biophysical predictors of deforestation in the Amazon: towards integrating REDD plus activities			The Amazon is one of the most important tropical forests in the world, providing important goods and services to society. However, these forests are threatened by land use change. Deforestation and forest degradation are the two drivers that significantly contribute to both carbon emissions to the atmosphere and loss of biodiversity. Although there are alternatives to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, there is still little research on methods for assessing and monitoring the relationship between these processes and biodiversity (REDD+), as well as the impacts generated by the socioecological system on the stability and recovery of ecosystem services. With this review, we aimed at (i) describing the relationship between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning; (ii) analyzing the possible synergistic impacts of biophysical and anthropogenic predictors of deforestation; and, consequently, (iii) proposing the integrated implementation of REDD+ strategies in the Amazon basin. To increase REDD+ efficiency in the Amazon, it is essential to simultaneously evaluate the socioecological and biophysical predictors that directly affect the current and future demands for ecosystem goods and services. Accordingly, it is important to estimate the magnitude of multifactorial effects of deforestation predictors for the integration of REDD+ actions. Such estimations should be made through the rehabilitation of degraded lands with successional and permanent agroforestry systems, as well as with the application of different restoration methods.
Anthropogenic disturbance of tropical forests threatens pollination services to acai palm in the Amazon river delta			1. The acai palm Euterpe oleracea Mart. in the Amazon river delta has seen rapid expansion to meet increased demand for its fruit. This has been achieved by transforming lowland forest habitats (floodplains) into simplified agroforests and intensive plantation in upland areas. As acai palm makes an important contribution to the economy and food security of local communities, identifying management approaches that support biodiversity and ecosystem processes that underpin fruit production on acai farms is essential.2. We compared flower-visitor communities and acai fruit production in floodplain forests and upland plantations, across gradients of local management intensity (i.e. acai density per ha) and surrounding forest cover. The relative contribution of biotic pollination and degree of pollen limitation were assessed using insect exclusion and hand-pollination experiments.3. We found that acai flower visitors are highly diverse (c. 200 distinct taxa) and had variable responses to disturbance. Bee visitation was higher in floodplains and positively related to surrounding forest cover, but other flower visitors, including specialised curculionid beetles, were unresponsive to changes in surrounding forest cover. However, intensive management practices (i.e. high acai palm densities) in floodplains and uplands had contrasting effects on flower-visitor communities, with flower-visitor richness being lower on intensively managed floodplain farms and ant densities being higher on intensive upland farms.4. Pollination experiments revealed acai palm to be highly dependent on biotic pollination. Fruit set in open-pollinated inflorescences was positively related to flower-visitor richness and specialised curculionid beetle visitation, whereas the presence of ants on inflorescences had a negative effect.5. Synthesis and applications. Our study shows that pollinators are essential for acai fruit production, but that intensive farming practices have eroded the relationship between surrounding forest cover and ecosystem function in floodplains (i.e. conversion of native forest into simplified agroforests) and increased the frequency of antagonistic interactions in uplands (e.g. high ant densities). These findings underline the value of extensive management practices, such as the maintenance of other tree species within farms and adjacent unmanaged forest patches, to ensure the long-term sustainability of acai fruit production in the Amazon river delta.
Application of land-use/land cover changes in monitoring and projecting forest biomass carbon loss in Pakistan			Located at the foothills of the Himalayan Mountains, subtropical and moist temperate forests of Pakistan are very rich in flora and fauna. However, due to increased illegal and uncontrolled harvesting of wood, agricultural activities, and urbanization, these forests are fast disappearing. The recent expansion of human activities resulting illegal and uncontrolled harvesting, agricultural activities, and urbanization is a cause for concern. Using Landsat imagery, Markov Chain and Cellular Automata, this study focused on the quantitative assessment of spatiotemporal land use and land cover changes during 1998, 2008, 2018 and a simulation of 2028. In addition, a forest inventory survey of biomass and carbon sink were respectively calculated for these subtropical broad-leaved evergreen, subtropical chirpine and moist temperate forests. Results showed biomass was 560.56 +/- 104.33 Mg ha(-1), 350.95 +/- 104.33 Mg ha(-1) and 153.63 +/- 104.33 Mg ha(-1) in moist temperate, subtropical chirpine and subtropical broad-leaved forests respectively. Meanwhile, carbon was 313.94 +/- 44.78 Mg C ha(-1), 221.34 +/- 44.78 Mg C ha(-1) and 131.77 +/- 44.78 Mg C ha(-1) in moist temperate, subtropical chirpine and subtropical broad-leaved forests respectively. During the study period, land-use and land cover changes showed forest land changed from 40936.77 ha to 36709.23 ha, agricultural land from 4220.46 to 10374.64 ha, and built-up area from 1497.60 to 5395.12 ha. The average annual biomass and carbon loss were respectively 50.34 Gg ha(-1) yr(-1) and 31.33 Gg C ha(-1) yr(-1). The information derived from this study could assist in the development of appropriate sustainable forest management policies in Pakistan. (C) 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Are primary forests irreplaceable for sustaining Neotropical landscapes' biodiversity and functioning? Contributions for restoration using ecological indicators			Changes in biodiversity and ecosystem services are usually evaluated using taxonomic indicators or, to a lesser extent, functional indicators. The present work adds new insights on the links between taxonomic indicators and functional indicators within a disturbance gradient in the Brazilian Amazon. Ground dwelling beetles' functional groups were used to complement taxonomic diversity in indicating disturbance and/or ecosystem restoration. Significant correlations were found between taxonomic and functional indicators. Our results show that increasingly disturbed ecosystems are related with reductions in functional redundancy with probable detrimental effects on the future landscape resilience. Moreover, results highlight that even species-rich Neotropical forest landscapes may be highly vulnerable to the removal of keystone diversity. Remarkably, secondary forests support equivalent functional diversity and, partially, taxonomic diversity to primary forests. Overall, disturbance indicators supported on complementary measures such as composition, species diversity and functionality were sensitive to the ecosystems' gradient and could be used for assessing the extent of landscape change but also to guide restoration and management practices in Neotropical forest landscapes.
Artisanal and small-scale gold mining and biodiversity: a global literature review			Artisanal and small-scale gold mining (ASGM) is crucial to the livelihoods of close to 20 million people in over 80 countries, including 4-5 million women, mainly in rural areas with limited alternative economic prospects, particularly in developing countries. ASGM is largely informal, which can add to the challenge of addressing negative social and environmental effects including impacts on biodiversity. However, with proper guidance, ASGM can operate in a responsible manner, using cleaner production methods that minimize impacts on human health and the environment. This study presents and analyzes the interactions between ASGM and biodiversity based on new findings from 27 ASGM National Action Plans (NAPs) developed within the framework of Article 7 and Annex C of the Minamata Convention on Mercury, as well as a global literature review of more than 100 publications. In terms of key findings according to the literature reviewed, alongside other human occupation such as agriculture and industrial activities, ASGM also has an impact on the environment and biodiversity. The interrelationship between ASGM and biodiversity, including protected areas, is pervasive at every stage of ASGM operations, from extraction to mine closure, and generates significant impacts on the surrounding ecosystems. These impacts include, in descending order of most reported impacts: deforestation, soil degradation, chemical contamination of aquatic and terrestrial systems, and changes to the turbidity of watercourses. Tropical regions and key species such as amphibians and freshwater fish are among the most affected. Singly or combined, these environmental stressors lead to loss or deterioration of habitat and, by extension, indigenous biodiversity and ecosystem services. In addition, legal, institutional, and regulatory frameworks and related measures, inadequate or non-existent in some cases, may not necessarily support sustainable practices, often resulting in exploited sites abandoned without remediation, reclamation, rehabilitation, or restoration measures. To mitigate such impacts a key recommendation arising from the literature review is to strengthen the integration of the interrelationship between ASGM and biodiversity in the implementation of existing relevant national strategies, including those developed under the NAPs. The global literature review also highlights the importance of a multi-stakeholder, systemic approach combining the use of geospatial analysis, scientific and local knowledge, as well as the adaptation of the relevant frameworks, capacity building, and awareness raising. This approach can inform decision making with a view to developing sustainable initiatives that prevent and reduce the impacts of artisanal and small-scale gold mining on ecosystems, and that preserve biodiversity.
Aspects of forest restoration and hydrology: linking passive restoration and soil–water recovery in Brazilian Cerrado			Although the scientific knowledge about some associations between physical parameters of the soil is consolidated, studies focused on investigating the dynamics of forest restoration processes and the structure of soils remain incipient. The study area is located in Cerrado and is called as Private Natural Heritage Reserve (RPPN) Águas Perenes Forest (perennial water forest) and was selected as a “High Conservation Value Forest”, provides scope to investigate the soil physical properties recovery on passive restoration sites, with different ages but with the same land use history. So, the aim was to investigate the soil density, moisture, penetration resistance and infiltration rate with long-term from old (FA, 46 year-old), medium (FB, 11 year-old) and young (FC, 8 year-old) passive restoration sites. It was observed differences in soil density, as well as in soil moisture, resistance to penetration and infiltration rate. Mean densities recorded for FA, FB and FC were 1.38, 1.48 and 1.53 g cm−3, respectively. FA recorded higher mean soil moisture (14.9%) than FB (11.5%) and FC (10.0%), whereas mean soil resistance to penetration was increased from FA (0.87 MPa) to FB (0.91 MPa) and FC (1.10 MPa). The average infiltration rate was almost similar in FA and FB (FA = 76.43 mm h−1; FB = 77.48 mm h−1) and approximately 39% higher than FC (55.79 mm h−1). Thus, although soil density and moisture were different in each passive restoration site, 11 year-old passive restoration site showed similar resistance to penetration and infiltration rate to the old (46 years) passive restoration site. These features allowed seeing improvements in hydrological maintenance in the soil and revealed that passive restoration in Cerrado is able to improve the physical features on a soil presenting similar texture, climate and management history. © 2021, Northeast Forestry University.
Assessing Carbon Pools of Three Indigenous Agroforestry Systems in the Southeastern Rift-Valley Landscapes, Ethiopia			The role of agroforestry (AF) systems in providing ecosystem services is very crucial. The greatest considerable increase in carbon (C) storage is often attained by moving from lower biomass land-use systems to tree-based systems such as AF. However, for estimation of C stocks in indigenous AF systems of southeastern Rift-Valley landscapes, Ethiopia, the data are scarce. This study was aimed to investigate the biomass, biomass carbon (BC), and soil organic carbon (SOC) stock of Enset-based, Enset-Coffee-based, and Coffee-Fruit-tree-Enset based AF systems. Comparison of SOC stock of AF systems against their adjacent monocrop farms was also investigated. Research questions were initiated to answer whether C stocks among the three AF systems vary because of different management systems and how biomass C stock is influenced by species abundance, diversity, and richness in the AF systems. The study was carried out at three selected sites in the Dilla Zuria district of Gedeo zone. Twenty farms (total of 60) representative of each AF system were arbitrarily selected and inventoried, and the biomass C stocks estimated. Ten adjacent monocrop farms which were related to each AF system were selected in a purposive manner for comparison of SOC stock. Inventory and soil sampling were employed in the 10 x 10 m farm plot. The mean AGB ranged from 81.1 to 255.9 t ha(-1) and for BGB from 26.9 to 72.2 t ha(-1). The highest C stock was found in Coffee-Fruittree-Enset based (233.3 +/- 81.0 t ha(-1)), and the lowest was in Coffee-Enset based AF system (190.1 +/- 29.8 t ha(-1)). The result showed that SOC stocks were not statistically significant between the three AF systems, although they showed a significant difference in their BC stock. The C stocks of the investigated AF systems are considerably higher than those reported for some tropical forests and AF systems. The SOC of AF systems is significantly higher than the ones for the adjacent monocrop farms. Therefore, it can be understood that the studied AF systems are storing significant amounts of C in their biomass as well as in soil. This considerable C storage by these systems might contribute to climate change mitigation.
Assessing carbon stocks using indigenous peoples' field measurements in Amazonian Guyana			Accurate estimations of carbon stocks across large tracts of tropical forests are key for participation in programs promoting avoided deforestation and carbon sequestration, such as the UN REDD+ framework. Trained local technicians can provide such data, and this, combined with satellite imagery, allows robust carbon stock estimation across vegetation classes and large areas. In the first comprehensive survey in Guyana conducted by indigenous people, ground data from 21 study sites in the Rupununi region were used to estimate above ground tree carbon density across a diversity of ecosystems and land use types. Carbon stocks varied between village sites from 1 Tg to 22.7 Tg, and these amounts were related to stem density and diameter. This variation was correlated with vegetation type across the region, with savannas holding on average 14 MgC ha(-1) and forests 153 MgC ha(-1). The results indicated that previous estimates based on remotely sensed data for this area may be inaccurate (under estimations). There were also differences in carbon densities between village sites and uninhabited control areas, which are presumably driven by community use. Recruiting local technicians for field work allowed (a) large amounts of ground data to be collected for a wide region otherwise hard to access, and (b) ensured that local people were directly involved in Guyana's Low Carbon Development Strategy as part of REDD+. This is the first such comprehensive survey of carbon stocks, carbon density and vegetation types over a large area in Guyana, one of the first countries to develop such a program. The potential inclusion of forests held by indigenous peoples in REDD+ programs is a global issue: we clearly show that indigenous people are capable of assessing and monitoring carbon on their lands. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Assessing Community Readiness for Payments for Ecosystem Service Schemes for Tropical Primary Forest Protection in the Democratic Republic of Congo			Primary forest conservation is essential for limiting climate change, for meeting conservation objectives, and the Sustainable Development Goals. Schemes that compensate communities for forgone extractive uses are important policy tools, but effective deployment demands an understanding of local deforestation drivers and host communities' preferences. We use Q-methodology to reveal discourses present in three communities in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Our results reveal three factors with a common emphasis on forest conservation and preferences for compensation in the form of social investments, rather than cash. The main contrasts were in attitudes towards farming. The first discourse, we call conservationist-open to ideas, displayed a commitment to learning better practices for community material benefit in service of forest conservation. The second discourse, which demonstrated greater confidence in their capacity to support livelihoods from farming, we call aspirational artisans. The third, which was acutely aware of the impact of their farming on forest conservation, we called passive, conflicted farmers. We also demonstrate an aspiration for the continued development of farming amongst participants, which although still correlated with preferences for forest conservation, may lead to compensation schemes inadvertently stirring future land use tensions if design does not reconcile agricultural development and conservation.
Assessing Ecological Disturbance in Neotropical Forest Landscapes Using High-Level Diversity and High-Level Functionality: Surprising Outcomes from a Case Study with Spider Assemblages			Spiders have been increasingly used as environmental and ecological indicators in conservation and ecosystem management. In the Neotropics, there is a shortage of information regarding spiders' taxonomies and ecological responses to anthropogenic disturbances. To unravel these hitches, we tested the possibility of using high-level diversity and high-level functionality indicators to evaluate spider assemblages' sensitivity to landscape changes. This approach, if proven informative, might overcome the relevant limitations of taxonomic derived indexes, which are considered time-consuming, cost-demanding and dependent on the (few) expert taxonomists' availability. Our results highlight the pertinence of both indicators' responses to the structural changes induced by increasing anthropogenic disturbance, and are associated with reductions in ecosystem complexity, microclimates, and microhabitats. Overall, both indicators were sensitive to structural changes induced by anthropogenic disturbance and should be considered a useful resource for assessing the extent of ecosystems' disruptions in the Neotropics, and also to guide managers in landscapes' restoration.
Assessing ecological restoration as a research topic using bibliometric indicators			A bibliometric analysis was performed to evaluate the global scientific production on ecological restoration from the period of 1997 to 2017. This analysis was based on online database of Science Citation Index Expanded Web of Science and a total of 3297 publications was retrieved. The analysis comprised seven main aspects: (1) publication activity, (2) Web of Science categories, (3) journals, (4) countries, (5) authors, (6) organizations and (7) keywords. The results indicated that the annual publications on ecological restoration study have recently increased. The USA play an important role as they have published highly in this field and have been the most frequent partner in international collaborations. American researchers have accumulated most of the publications. The Chinese Academy of Science is the emblematic organization, with 363 published papers. The Restoration Ecology and Ecological Engineering are the two most used journals to disseminate results. The major related research areas are "Environmental Science Ecology", "Forestry" and "Biodiversity Conservation". Studies about "restoration", "pinus ponderosa", "climate change", "biodiversity" and "ecosystem services" have become the main subject of research along the years. Analyses of keywords suggested that there is a relatively lack of information about "soil" and "tropical ecosystems" among the analyzed studies. Overall, this framework proved to be effective to evaluate the recent research trends and to contribute with researchers and governments on management and decision-making on science.
Assessing economic preferences for biological diversity and ecosystem services at the Central Sulawesi rainforest margin — a choice experiment approach			Recognition of the importance of economically sound conservation strategies is one of the foundations of the Convention on Biological Diversity. Because of their exceptional contribution to global biological diversity, the conservation of the Central Sulawesi (Indonesia) rainforests is a particularly important case for a successful application of such strategies. One of the obstacles to the design and implementation of economically sound conservation strategies is the lack of knowledge on the economic value of non-market benefits generated by tropical forest ecosystems and the agricultural land use systems that replace them. In this paper, we identify and quantify economically relevant preferences towards biological diversity at the rainforest margin that operate at the regional level around Lore Lindu National Park in Central Sulawesi. For economic valuation, choice experiments (CE) were used. We focused on indirect use benefits generated from different local and regional ecosystem functions. An ecosystem service approach was applied to avoid problems of respondent unfamiliarity with ecosystem functioning. One CE study covers preferences for the conservation of the endemic dwarf buffalo anoa, the preponderance of shading trees in cacao plantations, and the availability of water and of rattan. It was conducted in 12 villages across the entire project region (n=249). A second CE was conducted in three selected villages in the Kulawi subdistrict investigating preferences for protection against soil erosion, flooding and — to our knowledge, for the first time ever — for protection against uncertain future environmental threats (preferences for “ecosystem health”; n=585). The results indicate substantial economic preferences for all biodiversity and ecosystem goods and services studied. Preference variations can be explained by attitudes of and perceptions on the human-environment relation. In particular, (i) several attitudinal variables from Protection Motivation Theory explain preference heterogeneity; (ii) preferences for ecosystem health depend on stated respect for Katawua — a normative principle on harmony between humans, supreme beings, and the environment. For an optimistic resource and biodiversity protection scenario, total aggregated mean WTP in the project region is 1.6 billion IDR/yri ∼136,000 €/yr). This local demand for the studied environmental non-market services does not suffice to compensate financial benefits from rainforest conversion or agroforestry intensification that accrue to individual households. © 2007, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Assessing Forest Cover Dynamics and Forest Perception in the Atlantic Forest of Paraguay, Combining Remote Sensing and Household Level Data			The Upper Parana Atlantic Forest (BAAPA) in Paraguay is one of the most threatened tropical forests in the world. The rapid growth of deforestation has resulted in the loss of 91% of its original cover. Numerous efforts have been made to halt deforestation activities, however farmers' perception towards the forest and its benefits has not been considered either in studies conducted so far or by policy makers. This research provides the first multi-temporal analysis of the dynamics of the forest within the BAAPA region on the one hand, and assesses the way farmers perceive the forest and how this influences forest conservation at the farm level on the other. Remote sensing data acquired from Landsat images from 1999 to 2016 were used to measure the extent of the forest cover and deforestation rates over 17 years. Farmers' influence on the dynamics of the forest was evaluated by combining earth observation data and household survey results conducted in the BAAPA region in 2016. Outcomes obtained in this study demonstrate a total loss in forest cover of 7500 km(2). Deforestation rates in protected areas were determined by management regimes. The combination of household level and remote sensing data demonstrated that forest dynamics at the farm level is influenced by farm type, the level of dependency/use of forest benefits and the level of education of forest owners. An understanding of the social value awarded to the forest is a relevant contribution towards preserving natural resources.
Assessing land-use and carbon stock in slash-and-burn ecosystems in tropical mountain of Laos based on time-series satellite images			In the tropical mountains of Southeast Asia, slash-and-burn (S/B) agriculture is a widely practiced and important food production system. The ecosystem carbon stock in this land-use is linked not only to the carbon exchange with the atmosphere but also with food and resource security. The objective of this study was to provide quantitative information on the land-use and ecosystem carbon stock in the region as well as to infer the impacts of alternative land-use and ecosystem management scenarios on the carbon sequestration potential at a regional scale. The study area was selected in a typical slash-and-burn region in the northern part of Laos. The chrono-sequential changes of land-use such as the relative areas of community age and cropping (C) + fallow (F) patterns were derived from the analysis of time-series satellite images. The chrono-sequential analysis showed that a consistent increase of S/B area during the past three decades and a rapid increase after 1990. Approximately 37% of the whole area was with the community age of 1-5 years, whereas 10% for 6-10 years in 2004. The ecosystem carbon stock at a regional scale was estimated by synthesizing the land-use patterns and semi-empirical carbon stock model derived from in situ measurements where the community age was used as a clue to the linkage. The ecosystem carbon stock in the region was strongly affected by the land-use patterns; the temporal average of carbon stock in 1C + 10F cycles, for example, was greater by 33 MgC ha(-1) compared to that in 1C + 2F land-use pattern. The amount of carbon lost from the regional ecosystems during 1990-2004 periods was estimated to be 42 MgC ha(-1). The study approach proved to be useful especially in such regions with low data-availability and accessibility. This study revealed the dynamic change of land-use and ecosystem carbon stock in the tropical mountain of Laos as affected by land-use. Results suggest the significant potential of carbon sequestration through changing land-use and ecosystem management scenarios. These quantitative estimates would be useful to better understand and manage the land-use and ecosystem carbon stock towards higher sustainability and food security in similar ecosystems. (C) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Assessing the economic impact of climate change on forest resource use in Nigeria: A Ricardian approach			Quantifying the impact of climate change at a regional scale is important in trying to develop adaptation policies. We estimated the economic impact of climate change on forest resource use in Nigeria using the Ricardian model in the STATA statistical software. Using a structured questionnaire, data were collected from 400 rural households in forest communities, sampled from five broad ecological regions across Nigeria to estimate income and potential impact on this as a result of climate change. Estimated average value of annual household income from the forest was $3380. The age of the household head, level of education, mode of transport, hudrology (river flow) significantly and positively affected net revenue from the forest, while noticing of climate change negatively affected net revenue. Also while winter and spring precipitation had positive impacts on net revenue ($1.5 and $0.28 respectively), summer and autumn precipitation had negative impacts; (-$0.073 and -$0.05 respectively). Marginal impact analysis shows that increasing rainfall during winter and spring seasons significantly increases the net revenue per household by $62 and $75 respectively, while increasing precipitation marginally during the summer and autumn seasons reduce the net revenue per household by $42 and $18 respectively. This underscores the place of rainfall as a limiting factor in tropical ecosystem productivity and the growing impact of changing rainfall on household income and efforts to moderate water supply in agriculture and forestry will be an effort in the right direction. Annual marginal increase in rainfall increases net revenue per household by $77. The model shows that a 1°C increase in temperature will lead to an annual loss of $39×10-7 in net income per household, after which further increase in temperature or decreases in precipitation shows no significant change in net revenue, thus underscoring the resilience of tropical forest to climate change. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Assessing the impact of landscape development on ecosystem services value in tropical watershed			As development increases with demand, more forest lands are replaced with cropland, commercial plantation, and infrastructures for being able to accommodate the excessive growth in world's population. Environments were destroyed without considering their values in sustaining life on Earth.This phenomenon is still an ongoing scenario in most of the developing countries in the tropical region including Malaysia. Such unrestricted conversion may cause food or water crisis along with irreparable consequences to local and regional climate as the natural ecosystem is not only the main resources generator but also the climate stabilizer. Contrary to this, a study was conducted in Pahang Watershed, the largest watershed in Peninsular Malaysia with forest as the dominant land cover, to investigate the effect of landscape development on the ecosystem in terms of the erosion and ecosystem service value. Results of soil loss based on USLE indicated a direct relationship between development and total soil loss where total annual soil loss in year 2005 and 2010 showed a significant increase compare to year 2000. Meanwhile, developed and agricultural lands were discovered to be the main contributor whereas forest land produce the least soil loss (<10ton/ ha/yr). Apart from this, this study also reports a degrading trend in the overall ecological service value and goods (ESVG). Although oil palm had become the main commercial plantation in current years, the commercial profit brought by oil palm still insufficient to cover losses referring to overall estimated ESVG due to the forest clearance and soil degradation. In addition, for a destroyed ecosystem to be equilibrium again requires years. Therefore, ESVG of the tropical forest are expected to increase continuously in future which mean that the roles of the forest in conserving the environment stabilization and sustainability of life are getting more critical. © Published under licence by IOP Publishing Ltd.
Assessing the potential of community-based forestry programs in Panama			Community-based forestry (CBF) policies have been widely adopted as potentially-effective sustainable natural resource management strategies. Since communities can have local knowledge and a stake in the long-term sustainability of the resource base, CBF is thought to produce better social and environmental outcomes. In practice, though, successful implementation has been inconsistent. Panama, a country experiencing widespread degradation and loss of tropical forests and high rates of rural poverty, has been identified as potentially benefiting from CBF programs. As a result, prominent forest policy actors have been piloting CBF projects to assess the potential for upscaling. This paper reports on these initiatives and reflects on Panama's readiness to support widespread CBF program adoption. Using empirical data collected through key informant interviews, document analysis and observation, we apply an analytical framework originally developed for the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) that identifies six “keys” that a country must possess to remove the major impediments to robust CBF. Based on our case study analysis, none of the keys to effective CBF could be assessed as fully present in Panama, and a seventh potential key labelled ‘Economic Viability’ was identified to assess market competitiveness and economic sustainability. Our results suggest that CBF's ability to drive sustainable rural development and forest conservation in Panama is likely limited. However, a dynamic policy environment and supportive government also suggest that the keys to effective CBF can be attained with time and effort. © 2019
Assessing Tropical Forest Disturbance and Regrowth Using Earth Observation Sources			0
Assessment and prediction of carbon sequestration using Markov chain and InVEST model in Sariska Tiger Reserve, India			Enhancing and conserving carbon pools in vegetation is a major climate change mitigation strategy. The dynamics of carbon in terrestrial ecosystems depend on processes like photosynthesis, respiration, decomposition and combustion, anthropogenic activities like emission of greenhouse gases and climatic variations in rainfall and temperature, and is stored as biomass in different forms. The quantification of biomass is necessary to understand the productivity of forests, carbon sink and source dynamics and recommend ways to aid sequestration through supply side interventions like afforestation and demand side measures that check wood consumption. In this study, carbon sequestration based on the change in total carbon in two different scenarios using Markov chain and InVEST model is evaluated for the years 2000, 2018 and predicted for 2035. The results show that 1.351 Tg carbon has already been lost from 2000 to 2018 in the forest area of Sariska Tiger Reserve and another 0.107 Tg of carbon is expected to be lost in the predicted future, when we compare the land use land cover of the year 2035 with the present scenario. The local communities extract fuel-wood by cutting down tree branches illegally, which leads to carbon loss into the atmosphere. The lower release of carbon in 2035 as compared to 2018 is because of forest management practices e.g., plantations done in the range Tehla-Talabberi, Sariska-Ganeshpura, Alwar buffer-Shoydanpura, Talvriksh-Manavaas, Akbarpur-Kalikhol, Ajabgarh-Jatwana. The study shows that the economic value of carbon lost from 2000 to 2018 is million $ 214.57 and if we see the economic value of the predicted year 2035, carbon sequestration is worth million $ 17.19. Outputs demonstrate the potential for restoration/reforestation and afforestation as the most practical carbon loss mitigation strategy and calls for improved access to cleaner energy sources where the renewable energy industry and government may pitch in. (C) 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Assessment of above-ground biomass and carbon loss from a tropical dry forest in Mexico			Primary forests in seasonally dry tropical regions have undergone intense land-use/cover change, ranging from widespread shifting agriculture to land clearing for livestock production systems, and selective logging. Despite the importance of tropical dry forests (TDF), little is known about the implications of carbon (C) emissions from deforestation in local, national, and global scales. Therefore, the main objective of this study is to quantify and understand the processes that drive major C losses of this ecosystem in Mexico. Also, we evaluated the applicability of the already published above ground biomass (AGB) maps to quantify and allocate changes in C stocks. The results suggest that biomass maps can be used to capture the patterns of AGB distribution and to identify the driving forces of C emissions. The C losses are more related to socioeconomic drivers than biophysical characteristics like topography and climate. Besides, this study shows that published current AGB maps may be used for landscape management, including conservation and restoration areas.
Assessment of Above-Ground Biomass in Pakistan Forest Ecosystem's Carbon Pool: A Review			Climate change is acknowledged as a global threat to the environment and human well-being. Forest ecosystems are a significant factor in this regard as they act both as a sink and a source of carbon. Forest carbon evaluation has received more attention after the Paris Agreement. Pakistan has 5.1% forest cover of its total land area, which comprises nine forest types. This study covers the studies conducted on above-ground biomass and carbon stock in various forest types of Pakistan. Most of the studies on biomass and carbon stock estimation have been conducted during 2015-2020. The non-destructive method is mostly followed for carbon stock estimation, followed by remote sensing. The destructive method is used only for developing allometric equations and biomass expansion factors. The information available on the carbon stock and biomass of Pakistan forest types is fragmented and sporadic. Coniferous forests are more important in carbon sequestration and can play a vital role in mitigating climate change. Pakistan is a signatory of the Kyoto Protocol and still lacks regional and national level studies on biomass and carbon stock, which are necessary for reporting under the Kyoto Protocol. This study will help researchers and decision-makers to develop policies regarding Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation (REDD+), conservation, sustainable forest management and enhancement of forest carbon stocks
Assessment of Carbon Stock in Chronosequence Rehabilitated Tropical Forest Stands in Malaysia			The loss and degradation in tropical forest region are some of the current global concern. Hence, these issues elevated the role of rehabilitated forests in providing ecological products and services. The information on the carbon stock is important in relation to global carbon and biomass use, but lacking from the tropical region. This paper reports the assessment of tree and soil carbon stock in a chronosequence rehabilitated tropical forest stands in Malaysia. The study site was at the UPM-Mitsubishi Forest Rehabilitation Project, UPMKB. 20×20 m plot was established each and assessed in 2009 at 1-, 10- and 19-year-old sites while an adjacent ±23-year-old natural regenerating secondary forest plot was established for comparison. The overall total carbon stock was in the order of 19-year-old＞±23-year-old＞10-year-old＞1-year-old. When forest carbon stock is low, the soil component plays an important role in the carbon storage. The forest carbon recovery is crucial to increase soil carbon stock. The variations in the carbon stock showed the different stages of the forest recovery. Species survived after 19-years of planting are potential species for carbon sequestration activities in rehabilitated forest. Human intervention in rehabilitating degraded forest areas through tree planting initiatives is crucial towards recovering the forest ecological role especially in forest carbon stock capacity.
Assessment of major pools and fluxes of carbon in Indian forests			The major pools including phytomass, soil, litter, and fluxes of carbon (C) due to litterfall and landuse changes were estimated for Indian forests. Based on growing stock-volume approach at the state and district levels, the Indian forest phytomass was estimated in the range of 3.8-4.3 PgC. The total soil organic pool in the top 1m depth was estimated as 6.8 PgC, using estimated soil organic carbon densities and Remote Sensing (RS) based area by forest types. Based on 122 published Indian studies and RS-based forest area, the total litterfall carbon flux was estimated as 208.8 MgC ha(-1) yr(-1). The cumulative net carbon flux (1880-1996) from Indian forests (1880-1996) due to landuse changes (deforestation, afforestation and phytomass degradation) was estimated as 5.4 PgC, using a simple book-keeping approach. The mean annual net C flux due to landuse changes during 1985 1996 was estimated as 9.0 TgC yr(-1). For the recent period, the Indian forests are nationally a small source with some regions acting as small sinks of carbon as well. The improved quantification of pools and fluxes related to forest carbon cycle is important for understanding the contribution of Indian forests to net carbon emissions as well as their potential for carbon sequestration in the context of the Kyoto protocol.
Assessment of peat swamp forest cover of Malaysia using remote sensing			Concern over global problems induced by rising CO2 has prompted attention on the role of forest as carbon 'storage' because forests store a large amount of carbon in vegetation biomass and soil. Monitoring techniques based on multispectral satellite-acquired data have demonstrated potential as a means to detect, identify, and map changes in forest cover. This study was focuses on the role of remote sensing and geographic information system (GIS) in assessment of changes in forest cover between 2005 and 2010, in the peat swamp forest of Malaysia. Peat swamp forests are tropical moist forests where waterlogged soils prevent dead leaves and wood from fully decomposing, which over time creates a thick layer of acidic peat. The importance of peat swamp forests in relation to maintaining the environmental stability includes flood mitigation, revitalizing the soil and providing a limited source of water during droughts, and as a carbon store and carbon sequestration. Forest's mapping is very significant for the estimation and evaluation of the forest resources, carbon sequestration, and to support sustainable forest management. Optical satellite remote sensing such as Landsat TM provides a cost-effective method to obtain current and reliable terrestrial information because of its widespread availability and frequency update. This information is useful to discover the driving forces of the forest changes and can provide policy decision supporting information to the local relevant government in Malaysia. Klias Peninsular peat swamp forest has been selected as a test site in this study to estimates biomass using plotless technique and it was found that the distribution of biomass within the plot is ranging from 96.06 to 213.10 tonne/ha with mean of 169.36 tonne/ha. The object oriented classification technique has been applied to remote sensing data to map the distribution of peat swamp forest cover of Malaysia. The trend of forest cover changes over the time span of 5 years was precisely analysed in this study. From the result, the extent of peat swamp forest of Malaysia in 2005 and 2010 is about 1,156,304.81ha and 744,557.06 ha respectively. It was noticed that the peat swamp forest cover in Malaysia has decrease about 35 % between 2005 and 2010. It is envisage that this project would prove the usefulness of remote sensing and geographic information system in forest resource management. The maps produced could serve as a platform for assessing and monitoring forest resources in Malaysia.
Atlantic rainforest natural regeneration in fragmented formations affected by increasing human disturbance			Forests provides major ecosystem services worldwide. The Brazilian Atlantic Forest (BAF) has been dramatically devastated, with fragmentation processes jeopardizing its long-term sustainability. This study investigated the structure and successional dynamics in BAF natural regeneration along an anthroposequence characterized by increasing human disturbance histories as: secondary (SF) > disturbed (DF) > late forest (LF). We aimed to understand how and the degree to which BAF fragmentation and human disturbance affected plants, soils, and the whole soil-plant relationships and feedbacks. We investigated the natural regeneration conditions of plants (using plant classification and quali-quantitative analyses) and soil chemistry (including pH-CaCl2, H + Al, C, N, Pt, cation-exchange capacity (CEC), exchangeable cations, Al, B, Cu, Fe, K, Mn, and Zn) at twelve permanent, 2000 m2 plots, distributed across LF, DF, and SF forests. Significant differences were determined by ANOVA. Correlation matrix (CM) and factor analysis (FA) were used for understanding correlations and feedbacks/variability among investigated parameters, respectively. Most of investigated plant and soil parameters showed significant differences (p < 0.05) between more developed plant formations (LF) vs less developed ones (SF), with differences mainly due to soil's development stage. All investigated forest formations are featured by a great influence of the soil-plant relationships and feedbacks, with a decreasing magnitude as LF → DF → SF. Thus, there is a direct, statistically recognizable impact of both “recent” as well as “ancient” human disturbance on investigated soil-plant formations. The anthropogenic influence clearly affected not only plant and soil as “separate” systems but the whole complex of interactions and feedbacks among ecosystem components. A decreasing quality in soil and plant parameters was observed as human disturbance increased. We demonstrated that BAF plant and soil require decades for their recovery after human disturbances, with complex mechanisms and behaviors in the relationships among ecosystem components. The results can be useful for managing future recovery in an ecosystem of worldwide strategic importance. © 2022 Elsevier Ltd
Atmospheric nitrogen deposition has minor impacts on the abundance and diversity of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and their contribution to soil carbon stock in tropical forests			Knowledge about arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) is crucial for understanding nutrient limitations on primary productivity and soil organic carbon (C) storage in terrestrial ecosystems. Both theoretical models and empirical evidence hold that nitrogen (N) addition in phosphorus-limited ecosystems can either increase or decrease AMF diversity and abundance. However, many of these studies involved high-level N additions, which do not reflect realistic levels of atmospheric N deposition, thus leading to biased estimations of AMF and their role in the soil C stock. Here, we assessed AMF diversity and abundance under N addition using data from five tropical forests, ranging from 88%, 31%, and 25% arbuscular mycorrhizal tree dominance to dual-mycorrhizal tree dominance, and combined it with a global synthesis of tropical/subtropical forests. Our field study showed that N addition based on realistic N deposition (≤50 kg N ha−1 yr−1, comparable to the actual rate of atmospheric N deposition in the studied sites) caused little change in AMF abundance and diversity, as confirmed by our meta-analysis. The responses of AMF abundance to N addition did not differ significantly across forests with varying mycorrhizal dominance. However, high-level N addition (>50 kg N ha−1 yr−1) from a global dataset reduced AMF abundance and diversity. AMF responses were correlated with plant C, soil nutrient availability, and/or pH. Our findings further indicate that current atmospheric N deposition is unlikely to enhance soil C content via AMF. Given that N deposition has been stable or even declined in major global economies, we propose that previous studies may have overestimated AMF responses to atmospheric N deposition, which neither increased nor reduced AMF abundance and diversity as previously thought. © 2025 Elsevier Ltd
Attributes or tree species and their capability or carbon capture in the municipality or Queretaro, Mexico			Attributes of the shrub and tree species components of the tropical deciduous forest within the Municipality of Queretaro, Queretaro are described. We used a random sampling of 36 sites of natural vegetation with exclusion criteria. Sites were delimited to a 25 m x 25 m quadrant. Within the quadrant, the species of all individuals of the tree and shrub species greater than 150 cm were identified, not taking into account the Cactaceae and Succulents. Measurements were made of the trees: basal diameter, diameter at breast height, total tree height, canopy height and diameter; carbon capture by species was estimated taking into account the climatic site variables, where they grow. Twenty-two species of shrubs and trees were observed, with Acacia schaffneri, Bursera fagaroides, Forestiera phillyreoides, Karwinskia humboldtiana, Dodonaea viscosa and Ipomea murucoides being the most abundant, while the ones with the highest carbon content are species such as: Prosopis laevigata and Leucaena leucocephala and the less abundant were Randia thurberi and Erytrina coralloides. These results are indispensable for developing and designing proposals for reforestation and conservation of the tropical deciduous forest.
ATTRIBUTES QUALITY INDICATORS IN CERRADO SOILS SURROUNDING THE PARQUE NACIONAL DAS EMAS, STATE OF GOIAS, BRAZIL			Incorporation of native areas to production systems induced changes in ecosystems, especially in tropical regions, due to inappropriate land use, resulting in the rapid loss of organic carbon. This study aimed to evaluate impact of soil management and land use on biomass and microbial activity, as well as soil organic carbon and its fractions in an Oxisol and Quartzipsamment in Cerrado. Management and land use systems in Quartzipsamment were native vegetation, crop-livestock integration, pasture, no-till 1 (soybean/Brachiaria) and two no-till 2 (corn/Brachiaria). In Oxisol the systems were native vegetation, crop-livestock integration, conventional tillage, no-till 3 (soybean/radish/corn radish) and no-till 4 (soybean/corn/sorghum/soybean). Both soils evaluated, integrated crop-livestock improved the microbial biomass levels and soil carbon pools. In Quartzipsamment, management and land use systems not increased microbial biomass carbon, urease activity, hydrolysis of fluorescein diacetate and the carbon stock of the light fraction. In Oxisol, conventional tillage system decreased soil organic carbon and total carbon in the free light fraction soil. Furthermore, although it increased the organic carbon soil losses, the soil conservation systems enhanced the light fraction carbon in relation to native vegetation.
Atypical Pattern of Soil Carbon Stocks along the Slope Position in a Seasonally Dry Tropical Forest in Thailand			The pattern of soil carbon stock is atypical along the slope position in a seasonally dry tropical forest; the mean stock values increase from the lower, middle, to upper slopes, at 11.5, 13.2, and 15.5 kg m(-2), respectively. In sloping landscapes, soil organic carbon tends to accumulate in lower slopes, but our previous soil respiration study suggested that soil carbon stock distribution along the slope position in seasonally dry tropical forests is atypical. The aims of this study were: (i) to examine whether the atypical pattern occurs widely in the watershed; and (ii) to examine the pattern of root development in the soil profile as a source of soil carbon. The density and stock of soil carbon in three soil layers (0-10, 10-30, and 30-100 cm) of 13 soil profiles were compared in different positions on the slope (upper, middle, and lower). Root biomass at each slope position was also determined. Soil carbon density in each layer increased significantly with an increase in the relative position of the slopes, particularly in the 10-30 cm soil layer. The density of medium root (3-10 mm in diameter) in the upper slopes was significantly higher than that in the middle and lower slopes, especially for 15-60 cm soil layers. The atypical pattern of soil carbon accumulation along the slope position occurred widely in the studied watershed and appeared to be caused by the development of root systems in deeply weathered soil under xeric soil conditions in the upper slopes. Roots of bamboo undergrowth may also contribute to soil carbon stabilization by reducing soil erosion in the surface soil.
Australian Termite Diversity			0
Automated method for measuring the extent of selective logging damage with airborne LiDAR data			Selective logging has an impact on the global carbon cycle, as well as on the forest micro-climate, and longer-term changes in erosion, soil and nutrient cycling, and fire susceptibility. Our ability to quantify these impacts is dependent on methods and tools that accurately identify the extent and features of logging activity. LiDAR-based measurements of these features offers significant promise. Here, we present a set of algorithms for automated detection and mapping of critical features associated with logging – roads/decks, skid trails, and gaps – using commercial airborne LiDAR data as input. The automated algorithm was applied to commercial LiDAR data collected over two logging concessions in Kalimantan, Indonesia in 2014. The algorithm results were compared to measurements of the logging features collected in the field soon after logging was complete. The automated algorithm-mapped road/deck and skid trail features match closely with features measured in the field, with agreement levels ranging from 69% to 99% when adjusting for GPS location error. The algorithm performed most poorly with gaps, which, by their nature, are variable due to the unpredictable impact of tree fall versus the linear and regular features directly created by mechanical means. Overall, the automated algorithm performs well and offers significant promise as a generalizable tool useful to efficiently and accurately capture the effects of selective logging, including the potential to distinguish reduced impact logging from conventional logging. © 2018 International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Inc. (ISPRS)
Availability of large seed-dispersers for restoration of degraded tropical forest			An estimated 63% of Southeast Asian forests are classed as disturbed and secondary as a result of human activity. Many of these forests remain important for biodiversity conservation and ecosystem services so there is much interest in their capacity for restoration. The role of larger animals as seed dispersers in natural regeneration is well-attested since they are often the only agent by which large-seeded trees can effectively disperse. This is especially important for late successional shade-tolerant species which might otherwise be excluded from disturbed sites. However, many larger animals are sensitive to habitat degradation so may be lost from the very areas that require them. We investigated the persistence of a suite of large mammals that are known seed-dispersers and are also threatened species, in a degraded site in lowland south-central Sumatra. We used camera traps and field observations to relate their distributions to prevailing vegetation conditions. Although most species were more frequently detected in the more intact areas, most were able to occupy habitats with high levels of disturbance and population densities were relatively high. It is clear that severe habitat degradation does not necessarily lead to the immediate loss of large-bodied seed dispersers, so ensuring adequate protection for these species from external threats, such as hunting, must be built into management plans for restoration concessions.
Avian species identity drives predation success in tropical cacao agroforestry			Avian ecosystem services such as the suppression of pests are considered to be of high ecological and economic importance in a range of ecosystems, especially in tropical agroforestry. However, how bird predation success is related to the diversity and composition of the bird community, as well as local and landscape factors, is poorly understood. We quantified arthropod predation in relation to the identity and diversity of insectivorous birds using experimental exposure of artificial, caterpillar-like prey in 15 smallholder cacao agroforestry systems differing in local shade-tree management and distance to primary forest. The bird community was assessed using both mist-netting (targeting active understorey insectivores) and point counts (higher completeness of species inventories). Bird predation was not related to local shade-tree management or overall bird species diversity, but to the activity of insectivorous bird species and the proximity to primary forest. Insectivore activity was best predicted by mist-netting-based data, not by point counts. We identified the abundant Indonesian endemic lemon-bellied white-eye Zosterops chloris as the main driver of predation on artificial prey. Synthesis and applications. The suppression of arthropods is a major ecosystem service provided by insectivorous birds in agricultural systems world-wide, potentially reducing herbivore damage on plants and increasing yields. Our results show that avian predation success can be driven by single and abundant insectivorous species, rather than by overall bird species richness. Forest proximity was important for enhancing the density of this key species, but did also promote bird species richness. Hence, our findings are both of economical as well as ecological interest because the conservation of nearby forest remnants will likely benefit human needs and biodiversity conservation alike. The suppression of arthropods is a major ecosystem service provided by insectivorous birds in agricultural systems world-wide, potentially reducing herbivore damage on plants and increasing yields. Our results show that avian predation success can be driven by single and abundant insectivorous species, rather than by overall bird species richness. Forest proximity was important for enhancing the density of this key species, but did also promote bird species richness. Hence, our findings are both of economical as well as ecological interest because the conservation of nearby forest remnants will likely benefit human needs and biodiversity conservation alike. © 2015 British Ecological Society.
Avoid or reduce deforestation to mitigate climate change: The REDD challenge			For a number of years, Reducing greenhouse gas Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation (REDD) has been the subject of debates and proposals within the framework of international negotiations for the treaty that will succeed the Kyoto protocol. This paper reviews knowledge on this emerging initiative which has a double objective: integrate tropical forests in the struggle against climate change and ensure that developing countries take part in international efforts for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Considering the differences between proposals formulated by States and the difficulties of quantifying deforestation and forest degradation really avoided, the paper reveals problems for the implementation of this initiative, which has a strong commercial connotation in the current context of financial and economic crisis. © Armand Colin.
Avoided Deforestation: How Costly? How Powerful a Tool?			Tropical deforestation has been a major environmental issue for decades, yet the main focus of the rationale for forest protection has been shifted over time. Recently, in the light of climate change, forests are attracting attention for its function of carbon sequestration and storing. In order to slow down the accelerating emission of carbon arising from deforestation in the carbon-rich tropical forests, the concept of reduced emissions from destruction and degradation (REDD) has emerged. This article reviews a number of earlier and recent efforts to estimate value of forests and costs of mitigating those deforestation, which is central to the ongoing discussion of REDD. © 2012 Copyright Taylor and Francis Group, LLC.
Balancing carbon dioxide: a case study of forest preservation, out-migration, and afforestation in the Pueblos Mancomunados of Oaxaca, Mexico			Carbon-based payments for ecosystem services solely consider afforestation and reforestation to assess sequestration. However, political ecology researchers demonstrate that tropical forests are complex socioecological systems where humans and institutions play an integral role in shaping landscapes. The current framing overlooks the net effect of traditional subsistence agriculturalists leaving behind low emission lifestyles, despite the likelihood of a significant increase in per capita emissions over time. In this case study, we use the history of forest use in the Pueblos Mancomunados-a commonwealth of indigenous communities in Oaxaca, Mexico-to explore sequestration through a socioecological systems lens. As negative emissions programs consider afforestation, we triangulated semistructured interviews, an unsupervised GIS classification of land cover, and a review of carbon dioxide emissions to consider out-migration, abandonment, and lifestyle change. We find that communities are struggling to maintain livelihoods as migration to urban centers and the United States continues. Meanwhile, spatial analysis revealed 800 ha of afforestation. Our analysis of out-migration scenarios and per capita emissions changes identified a tipping point in which no net-sequestration would occur from afforestation due to the changing lifestyles of the migrants and recommend improved local development to avoid this form of "leakage" when assessing global carbon stocks.
Balancing livestock production and environmental outcomes in northern Australia’s tropical savanna under global change			Livestock production is an integral part of the global food system and the livelihoods of local people, but it also raises questions of environmental sustainability due to issues such as greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, biodiversity decline, land degradation, and water use. Further challenges to extensive livestock systems may arise from changes in climate and the global economy (particularly variation in prices for livestock and carbon). However, significant potential exists for both mitigating these impacts and adapting to change via altering stocking rates, managing fire, and supplementing cattle diets to reduce methane emissions. We developed an integrated, spatio-temporal modelling approach to assess the effectiveness of these options for land management in northern Australia’s tropical savanna under different global change scenarios. Performance was measured against a range of sustainability indicators, including environmental (GHG emissions, biodiversity, water intake, and land condition) and agricultural (profit, beef production) outcomes. Our model shows that maintaining historical stocking rates is not environmentally sustainable due to the accelerated land degradation exacerbated by a changing climate. However, planned early dry season burning substantially reduced emissions, and in our simulations was profitable under all global change scenarios that included a carbon price. Overall, the balance between production and environmental outcomes could be improved by stocking below modelled carrying capacity and implementing fire management. This management scenario was the most profitable (more than double the profit from maintaining historical stocking rates), prevented land degradation, and reduced GHG emissions by 23%. By integrating the cumulative impacts of climate change, external economic drivers, and management actions across a range of sustainability indicators, we show that the future of rangelands in Australia’s savannas has the potential to balance livestock production and environmental outcomes. © 2024 The Author(s). Published by IOP Publishing Ltd.
Barriers and opportunities in effective management of forest landscape restoration: Tain II degraded forest restoration, Ghana			Forest landscape restoration (FLR) approach has become a key strategy to ensure sustainable forest management and counteract the impacts of deforestation and forest degradation on biodiversity, greenhouse gas emissions, climate change, and food insecurity. However, the management of FLR to restore degraded forest landscapes remains a major conundrum in most tropical regions, including Ghana. This study, conducted in Tain II degraded forest Reserve landscape in Ghana, examined the management of the forest landscape restoration project and associated barriers and opportunities. A structured questionnaire was administered to 150 respondents from three fringe communities. A partial least squares path model (PLS-PM) was used to examine and identify interrelations between opportunity and barrier factors. The results indicated positive effects of incentives, farmers' access to information, community-driven fire management, and technical assistance on FLR initiatives, while in contrast, social restrictions, conflicts over resources and land usage, difficulty in sustaining FLR, land ownership challenges, and governance issues impeded the FLR. There was a high degree of interdependence among the various contributing factors, suggesting that effective management of the FLR requires diligent management of trade-offs to help achieve sustainable forest management. Our findings underscore the need for community-based restoration programs and innovative interventions that offer incentives and technical assistance to farmers and provide constant information to stakeholders to foster synergistic future forest landscape trajectories for sustainable development.
Baseline assessment for environmental services payments from satellite imagery: A case study from Costa Rica and Mexico			In this study we evaluate the accuracy of four global and regional forest cover assessments (MODIS, IGBP, GLC2000, PROARCA) as tools for baseline estimation. We conduct this research at the national scale for Costa Rica and for two tropical dry forest study sites in Costa Rica (Santa Rosa) and Mexico (Chamela-Cuixmala). We found that at the national level, the total forest cover accuracy of the four land cover maps was inflated due to an overestimation of forest in areas with an evergreen canopy. However, the four maps greatly underestimated the extent of the deciduous forest (dry forest); an ecosystem that faces high deforestation pressure and poses complications to the mapping of its extent from remotely sensed data. For the tropical dry forest sites, all maps have low forest cover accuracies (mean for Santa Rosa: 27%; mean for Chamela-Cuixmala: 56%). This has implications for policy implementation. (C) 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Baselines for land-use change in the tropics: Application to avoided deforestation projects			Although forest conservation activities, particularly in the tropics, offer significant potential for mitigating carbon (C) emissions, these types of activities have faced obstacles in the policy arena caused by the difficulty in determining key elements of the project cycle, particularly the baseline. A baseline for forest conservation has two main components: the projected land-use change and the corresponding carbon stocks in applicable pools in vegetation and soil, with land-use change being the most difficult to address analytically. In this paper we focus on developing and comparing three models, ranging from relatively simple extrapolations of past trends in land use based on simple drivers such as population growth to more complex extrapolations of past trends using spatially explicit models of land-use change driven by biophysical and socioeconomic factors. The three models used for making baseline projections of tropical deforestation at the regional scale are: the Forest Area Change (FAC) model, the Land Use and Carbon Sequestration (LUCS) model, and the Geographical Modeling (GEOMOD) model. The models were used to project deforestation in six tropical regions that featured different ecological and socioeconomic conditions, population dynamics, and uses of the land: (1) northern Belize; (2) Santa Cruz State, Bolivia; (3) Paraná State, Brazil; (4) Campeche, Mexico; (5) Chiapas, Mexico; and (6) Michoacán, Mexico. A comparison of all model outputs across all six regions shows that each model produced quite different deforestation baselines. In general, the simplest FAC model, applied at the national administrative-unit scale, projected the highest amount of forest loss (four out of six regions) and the LUCS model the least amount of loss (four out of five regions). Based on simulations of GEOMOD, we found that readily observable physical and biological factors as well as distance to areas of past disturbance were each about twice as important as either sociological/demographic or economic/infrastructure factors (less observable) in explaining empirical land-use patterns. We propose from the lessons learned, a methodology comprised of three main steps and six tasks can be used to begin developing credible baselines. We also propose that the baselines be projected over a 10-year period because, although projections beyond 10 years are feasible, they are likely to be unrealistic for policy purposes. In the first step, an historic land-use change and deforestation estimate is made by determining the analytic domain (size of the region relative to the size of proposed project), obtaining historic data, analyzing candidate baseline drivers, and identifying three to four major drivers. In the second step, a baseline of where deforestation is likely to occur-a potential land-use change (PLUC) map-is produced using a spatial model such as GEOMOD that uses the key drivers from step one. Then rates of deforestation are projected over a 10-year baseline period based on one of the three models. Using the PLUC maps, projected rates of deforestation, and carbon stock estimates, baseline projections are developed that can be used for project GHG accounting and crediting purposes: The final step proposes that, at agreed interval (e.g., about 10 years), the baseline assumptions about baseline drivers be re-assessed. This step reviews the viability of the 10-year baseline in light of changes in one or more key baseline drivers (e.g., new roads, new communities, new protected area, etc.). The potential land-use change map and estimates of rates of deforestation could be re-done at the agreed interval, allowing the deforestation rates and changes in spatial drivers to be incorporated into a defense of the existing baseline, or the derivation of a new baseline projection. © 2007 Springer Science+Business Media, B.V.
Bee landscape relations in changing contexts, implications for stingless bee management			Giventhe pollinator global crisis and its relation to human activities, it is important to understand how regional landscapes affects pollinators, especially those of ecological, cultural, and economic importance. In the tropics, managed stingless bees (Meliponini) depend on plant resources surrounding hives, in what can be regarded as the bee landscape. As socioecological processes converge shaping landscapes regionally, human-modified landscapes affect resources at the bee landscape level. Through geospatial analyses, we assessed how variables like ecosystem integrity, landscape composition, and land use type affect ecosystem services such as pot-honey production. Based on the case study of Veracruz, Mexico, a state with a long history of land use and land cover change, we found that stingless beekeeping thrives in diverse landscape configurations. In this study, bee landscapes of Scaptotrigona mexicana, an important managed stingless bee species, are mostly agricultural landscapes with patches of tropical forests. The patchy distribution of natural vegetation mixed with the extensive distribution of agriculture related to cattle management and agroforestry systems, result in non-linear relationships between land use composition, land use type, and ecosystem integrity. Multivariate analysis showed that pot-honey harvest benefits from heterogeneous landscapes, although ecosystem integrity and proportion of land use cover were not found to be good predictors of pot-honey production. On the other hand, regional characteristics in interaction with beehive density affect positively the average harvest rate. These findings suggest that beekeeping with S. mexicana is affected by socioecological contexts of complex agricultural landscapes. Given the relevance of stingless bees in tropical areas and the ecological services they provide, this study alleges for integrating bee requirements with development plans in tropical landscapes.
Beneath the Canopy: Tropical Forests Enrolled in Conservation Payments Reveal Evidence of Less Degradation			Assessments of programs offering payments for forest conservation have largely focused on their contribution to avoiding deforestation but have overlooked degradation. We integrated remotely-sensed forest cover images, georeferenced landscape information, field-level forest inventories and face-to-face landowner surveys to quantify avoided deforestation and degradation within the context of Ecuador's Socio Bosque Program (PSB). We found the PSB prevented 9% of enrolled forest area in Ecuador's Amazon Basin from being deforested over the 2008-2014 period. This value is higher than previous assessments conducted in other Latin American nations. Inventory data suggest that forests within PSB-enrolled areas exhibited less evidence of degradation although statistical differences were only marginally significant On average, PSB-enrolled forests had between one and two more tree species per hectare than non-enrolled forests. These additional tree species'were twice as likely to be of commercial timber value and at greater threat of extinction. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Benefits and trade-offs of optimizing global land use for food, water, and carbon			Current large-scale patterns of land use reflect history, local traditions, and production costs, much more so than they reflect biophysical potential or global supply and demand for food and freshwater, or - more recently - climate change mitigation. We quantified alternative land-use allocations that consider trade-offs for these demands by combining a dynamic vegetation model and an optimization algorithm to determine Pareto-optimal land-use allocations under changing climate conditions in 2090-2099 and alternatively in 2033-2042. These form the outer bounds of the option space for global land-use transformation. Results show a potential to increase all three indicators (+83% in crop production, +8% in available runoff, and +3% in carbon storage globally) compared to the current land-use configuration, with clear landuse priority areas: Tropical and boreal forests were preserved, crops were produced in temperate regions, and pastures were preferentially allocated in semiarid grasslands and savannas. Transformations toward optimal land-use patterns would imply extensive reconfigurations and changes in land management, but the required annual land-use changes were nevertheless of similar magnitude as those suggested by established landuse change scenarios. The optimization results clearly show that large benefits could be achieved when land use is reconsidered under a "global supply"perspective with a regional focus that differs across the world's regions in order to achieve the supply of key ecosystem services under the emerging global pressures. Copyright © 2023 the Author(s).
Benefits of Investing in Ecosystem Restoration			Measures aimed at conservation or restoration of ecosystems are often seen as net-cost projects by governments and businesses because they are based on incomplete and often faulty cost-benefit analyses. After screening over 200 studies, we examined the costs (94 studies) and benefits (225 studies) of ecosystem restoration projects that had sufficient reliable data in 9 different biomes ranging from coral reefs to tropical forests. Costs included capital investment and maintenance of the restoration project, and benefits were based on the monetary value of the total bundle of ecosystem services provided by the restored ecosystem. Assuming restoration is always imperfect and benefits attain only 75% of the maximum value of the reference systems over 20 years, we calculated the net present value at the social discount rates of 2% and 8%. We also conducted 2 threshold cum sensitivity analyses. Benefit-cost ratios ranged from about 0.05:1 (coral reefs and coastal systems, worst-case scenario) to as much as 35:1 (grasslands, best-case scenario). Our results provide only partial estimates of benefits at one point in time and reflect the lower limit of the welfare benefits of ecosystem restoration because both scarcity of and demand for ecosystem services is increasing and new benefits of natural ecosystems and biological diversity are being discovered. Nonetheless, when accounting for even the incomplete range of known benefits through the use of static estimates that fail to capture rising values, the majority of the restoration projects we analyzed provided net benefits and should be considered not only as profitable but also as high-yielding investments.
Benefits of tropical forest management under the new climate change agreement-a case study in Cambodia			Promoting sustainable forest management as part of the reduced emissions from deforestation and degradation in developing countries (REDD)-plus mechanism in the Copenhagen Accord of December 2009 implies that tropical forests will no longer be ignored in the new climate change agreement. As new financial incentives are pledged, costs and revenues on a 1-ha tract of tropical forestland being managed or cleared for other land use options need to be assessed so that appropriate compensation measures can be proposed. Cambodia's highly stocked evergreen forest, which has experienced rapid degradation and deforestation, will be the first priority forest to be managed if financial incentives through a carbon payment scheme are available. By analyzing forest inventory data, we assessed the revenues and costs for managing a hypothetical 1 ha of forestland against six land use options: business-as-usual timber harvesting (BAU-timber), forest management under the REDD-plus mechanism, forest-to-teak plantation, forest-to-acacia plantation, forest-to-rubber plantation, and forest-to-oil palm plantation. We determined annual equivalent values for each option, and the BAU-timber and REDD-plus management options were the highest, with both options influenced by logging costs and timber price. Financial incentives should be provided at a level that would allow continuation of sustainable logging and be attractive to REDD-plus project developers. (C) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Between economic loss and social identity: The multi-dimensional cost of avoiding deforestation in Eastern Madagascar			This paper exhibits the multiple dimensions of the cost of stopping the main driver of deforestation in Madagascar, slash-and-bum agriculture (tavy). As well as being a major component of the economic livelihoods of most local households living at the edge of forests, tavy has been described by anthropologists as an important cultural practice. In this paper, we show that stopping tavy does not only entail an economic cost for local households. The loss of the cultural dimension of tavy would come at an additional "cultural cost" for some. Our results suggest that a viable cessation of deforestation in Madagascar would require going beyond simple compensation of the opportunity costs of avoiding deforestation. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Beyond Carbon Accounting: A Landscape Perspective on Measuring and Monitoring Tropical Forest Degradation			0
Beyond hectares: four principles to guide reforestation in the context of tropical forest and landscape restoration			New climate change agreements emerging from the 21st Conference of the Parties and ambitious international commitments to implement forest and landscape restoration (FLR) are generating unprecedented political awareness and financial mobilization to restore forests at large scales on deforested or degraded land. Restoration interventions aim to increase functionality and resilience of landscapes, conserve biodiversity, store carbon, and mitigate effects of global climate change. We propose four principles to guide tree planting schemes focused on carbon storage and commercial forestry in the tropics in the context of FLR. These principles support activities and land uses that increase tree cover in human-modified landscapes, while also achieving positive socioecological outcomes at local scales, in an appropriate contextualization: (1) restoration interventions should enhance and diversify local livelihoods; (2) afforestation should not replace native tropical grasslands or savanna ecosystems; (3) reforestation approaches should promote landscape heterogeneity and biological diversity; and (4) residual carbon stocks should be quantitatively and qualitatively distinguished from newly established carbon stocks. The emerging global restoration movement and its growing international support provide strong momentum for increasing tree and forest cover in mosaic landscapes. The proposed principles help to establish a platform for FLR implementation and monitoring based on a broad set of socioenvironmental benefits including, but not solely restricted, to carbon mitigation and wood production.
Beyond opportunity costs: who bears the implementation costs of reducing emissions from deforestation and degradation?			Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+) in developing countries is based on the premise that conserving tropical forests is a cost-effective way to reduce carbon emissions and therefore can be fully funded by international actors with obligations or interests in reducing emissions. However, concerns have repeatedly been raised about whether stakeholders in REDD+ host countries will actually end up bearing the costs of REDD+. Most prior analyses of the costs of REDD+ have focused on the opportunity costs of foregone alternative uses of forest land. We draw on a pan-tropical study of 22 subnational REDD+ initiatives in five countries to explore patterns in implementation costs, including which types of organizations are involved and which are sharing the costs of implementing REDD+. We find that many organizations involved in the implementation of REDD+, particularly at the subnational level and in the public sector, are bearing implementation costs not covered by the budgets of the REDD+ initiatives. To sustain this level of cost-sharing, REDD+ must be designed to deliver local as well as global forest benefits. © 2017, The Author(s).
Beyond the blame game: a restoration pathway reconciles ecologists' and local leaders' divergent models of seasonally dry tropical forest degradation			An understanding of ecosystem dynamics under different scenarios of degradation is required to reverse ecological degradation and identify restoration priorities. Such knowledge can be the result of scientific investigation, but important insight can also reside in observant local land managers. In seasonally dry tropical forests in southern Ecuador, recent decades have seen important advances in the knowledge of the biodiversity values of these forests, but the available data have not yet been integrated and translated into tools that support managers in deciding restoration measures. One powerful framework to organize and communicate information about ecosystem degradation and recovery dynamics is the state-transition model. We generated such a model by combining ecologist and local knowledge obtained through an adaptation of the Stanford/SRI expert elicitation protocol. Through this information, we identified five forest states with specific attributes of vegetation, human pressures, and restoration needs. Ecologists and locals agreed on the restoration actions but partially disagreed on the causes of degradation. Whereas ecologists considered that grazing management, often introduced with or after logging, was the catalyst for a transition to degraded states, locals attributed those transitions to the effects of logging alone. Importantly, however, both ecologists and locals considered that exclusion of livestock grazing was a necessary action to promote ecological recovery. A forward-looking strategy focusing on objectives for ecosystem recovery and ecosystem management for biodiversity and human well-being might be more successful than strategies that emphasize or seek to attribute responsibility for degradation.
Beyond the mirror: Tropical forest fragmentation and its impact on rural livelihoods			Forest fragmentation is overwhelmingly the result of changes in land use and the development of infrastructures. It can be considered as the spatial manifestation of deforestation and degradation in a landscape. Forest fragmentation thus results in the same loss of ecosystem services as these other forms of land-cover change, but how does it affect livelihoods? We propose here an analysis of the livelihood impacts of tropical forest fragmentation, which will begin with a better definition of the spatial processes involved in fragmentation. As it is difficult to analyse the impacts of fragmentation without consideration of the associated impacts of the causes - or drivers - of forest fragmentation, we will analyse them in detail. Fragmentation results from a range of drivers that are categorized into five groups: (i) economic factors; (ii) governance factors; (iii) demographic factors; (iv) technological factors; and (v) cultural factors. Economic factors are prevalent in decisions, with forest conservation often being a luxury for wealthy people. Stakeholders who gain direct economic returns from deforestation - from logging, farming and facilitated access to markets - will also benefit globally from forest fragmentation, the benefits from these drivers by far outweighing the loss of ecosystem services. However, forest dwellers and isolated forest communities will often have to choose between 'modern' life or the cultural specificities that shaped their identity. Throughout the chapter, the forest-transition curve is used as a heuristic framework to understand the relationships between human development and the loss and fragmentation of forest cover. © CAB International 2014. All rights reserved.
Bibliometric and literature synthesis on assisted natural regeneration: an evidence base for forest and landscape restoration in the tropics			Assisted Natural Regeneration (ANR) is a set of restoration strategies and interventions primarily based on natural regeneration, aimed at accelerating succession and providing multiple benefits in degraded ecosystems and landscapes. These strategies have the potential to significantly contribute to global Forest and Landscape Restoration efforts. However, ANR faces challenges due to limited recognition, support, and formal integration into relevant sectors and restoration policies, particularly in tropical regions. The dearth of evidence-based syntheses further compounds these challenges. To address this gap, a bibliometric analysis of selected scientific publications on ANR (n = 208) from 1987 to 2023 was conducted, using Web of Science and Google Scholar databases. A systematic review was undertaken, using a subset of original research articles (n = 44), to synthesize published data on interventions, contexts, costs, and benefits of ANR and to identify major knowledge gaps. Analysis of bibliometric metadata revealed an increasing annual output of ANR publications in over 80 journals, encompassing various document types and authors from over 40 countries. Despite ANR's formal emergence in the Philippines, Brazil has taken the lead in both its research and implementation, and international collaboration in ANR research has grown. While ANR research focused mostly on ecosystem services and ecological outcomes, social aspects have been poorly studied. Diverse ANR interventions align not only with ecological restoration but also with integrated land management, biodiversity conservation, forest and landscape restoration, and forest management. The cost-effectiveness of ANR implementation, especially in restoration for carbon storage, exhibited considerable variability when compared to active tree planting, and varied with intervention types, time, land use history, and long-term costs. This synthesis provides critical insights and evidence to enhance the effective integration of ANR into restoration and reforestation programs and policies.
Biochar addition drives soil aggregation and carbon sequestration in aggregate fractions from an intensive agricultural system			Biochar application is deemed to modify soil properties, but current research has been mostly conducted on the degraded land in tropical regions. Using six consecutive years of biochar field trial, we investigated effects of biochar on soil aggregates, structural stability, and soil organic carbon (SOC) and black C (BC) concentrations in aggregate fractions. The findings have important implications in managing soil structure and SOC sequestration in high fertility soils of the temperate areas.The study had four treatments: control; biochar rate at 4.5 (B4.5) and biochar rate at 9.0 t ha(-1) year(-1) (B9.0); and straw return (SR). Soil samples were collected from 0-10-cm layer, and aggregate size distribution was determined with the wet-sieving method. Then, the mean weight diameter (MWD) of aggregates and the aggregate ratio (AR), i.e., the ratio of the > 250 mu m to the 53-250 mu m size were calculated to assess the structural stability. Total SOC and BC concentrations in bulk soil (< 2 mm) and separated fractions (i.e., > 2000, 250-2000, 53-250, and < 53 mu m) were measured.The B4.5 and B9.0 significantly increased macroaggregate (250-2000 mu m) and MWD and AR indices relative to the control. Comparing to the SR, the improvements in soil aggregation under biochar treatments were limited. Additionally, more SOC in larger fractions (> 2000, 250-2000, and 53-250 mu m) and BC in extracted fractions under biochar soils were observed. These results implied that biochar addition enhanced both native SOC and BC physical protection by aggregation.Biochar application is effective in mediating soil aggregation, and thus improves both native SOC and BC stabilization in an intensive cropping system of North China.
Biochar Addition Increased Soil Carbon Storage but Did Not Exacerbate Soil Carbon Emission in Young Subtropical Plantation Forest			Forests play a crucial role in mitigating global warming, contributing approximately 46% of the global terrestrial carbon sink. However, it remains uncertain whether the addition of biochar to forests enhances the ecosystem’s carbon sink capacity. This study aims to address this scientific question by investigating whether biochar application increases carbon storage, potentially leading to an overall rise in carbon emissions by influencing soil respiration and identifying the underlying mechanisms. A controlled experiment was conducted in a young plantation forest that had grown for three years, where soil CO2 efflux rate and physicochemical properties, photosynthesis, and plant growth traits were measured across varying biochar addition rates (0, 5, and 10 t/ha) over five seasons. Then, statistical methods including one-way ANOVA, regression analysis, and structural equation modeling (SEM) were employed to assess differences in biological and abiotic factors among biochar addition gradients and understand the influencing mechanisms of soil CO2 efflux change. The findings revealed that biochar addition significantly increased the contents of soil organic carbon (SOC) and microbial biomass carbon (MBC), consequently promoting photosynthesis and plant growth (p < 0.05). Biochar addition accounted for 73.8% of the variation in soil CO2 efflux by affecting soil physicochemical properties, photosynthesis, and plant basal diameter growth. However, the net effect of biochar addition on soil CO2 efflux was found to be low. The positive effects of biochar addition on soil CO2 efflux via factors such as soil bulk density, total nitrogen (TN), MBC, and photosynthesis were counteracted by its negative impact through soil total phosphorus (TP), water content, pH, SOC, and plant basal diameter growth. Overall, our findings indicate that there was no significant increase in soil CO2 efflux in the short term (totaling 16 months) over the biochar addition gradient. However, we observed a substantial increase in soil carbon storage and an enhancement in the soil’s capacity to act as a carbon sink. Therefore, adding biochar to forests may be a feasible strategy to increase carbon sinks and mitigate global climate change. © 2024 by the authors.
Biochar and forest restoration: a review and meta-analysis of tree growth responses			"Biochar", or charcoal intended for use as a soil amendment, has received great attention in recent years as a means of enhancing carbon sequestration and soil properties in agricultural systems. Here we address the potential for biochar use in the context of forest restoration, reviewing relevant experimental studies on biochar use in forest ecosystems, the properties of chars generated from wood waste material, and available data on tree growth responses to biochar. To our knowledge the earliest mention of char use as a soil amendment is actually specifically in the context of forest restoration (in the 1820s in Scotland). Wood waste biochars have an unusual set of properties that suggest their applicability in a forest restoration context: namely, high recalcitrance promoting long-lasting effects, retention of cations, anions, and water, in the soil, sorptive properties that can reduce bioavailability of a wide range of toxic materials, and relative ease of production from locally available feedstocks. A meta-analysis of recent studies on biochar responses of woody plants indicates a potential for large tree growth responses to biochar additions, with a mean 41 % increase in biomass. Responses are especially pronounced at early growth stages, and appear to be higher in boreal and tropical than in temperate systems, and in angiosperms than conifers; however, there is high variability, and field studies are few. The properties of biochars also vary greatly depending on feedstock and pyrolysis conditions; while this complicates their use, it provides a means to design biochars for specific restoration situations and objectives. We conclude that there is great promise for biochar to play an important role in a wide variety of forest restoration efforts, specifically as a replacement product for other forms of organic matter and liming agents.
Biodiversity across trophic levels drives multifunctionality in highly diverse forests			Human-induced biodiversity change impairs ecosystem functions crucial to human wellbeing. However, the consequences of this change for ecosystem multifunctionality are poorly understood beyond effects of plant species loss, particularly in regions with high biodiversity across trophic levels. Here we adopt a multitrophic perspective to analyze how biodiversity affects multifunctionality in biodiverse subtropical forests. We consider 22 independent measurements of nine ecosystem functions central to energy and nutrient flow across trophic levels. We find that individual functions and multifunctionality are more strongly affected by the diversity of heterotrophs promoting decomposition and nutrient cycling, and by plant functional-trait diversity and composition, than by tree species richness. Moreover, cascading effects of higher trophic-level diversity on functions originating from lower trophic-level processes highlight that multitrophic biodiversity is key to understanding drivers of multifunctionality. A broader perspective on biodiversity-multifunctionality relationships is crucial for sustainable ecosystem management in light of non-random species loss and intensified biotic disturbances under future environmental change.
Biodiversity and Carbon Sequestration in Chakra-Type Agroforestry Systems and Humid Tropical Forests of the Ecuadorian Amazon			Currently, there are several studies related to climate change, carbon sequestration, and floristic composition in different scenarios and land uses. In this context, the objective of this research is: (a) to characterize biodiversity based on ecological indicators and diversity indices and (b) to evaluate carbon sequestration in different components of chakra-type agroforestry systems and secondary tropical humid forests of the Ecuadorian Amazon. For this, temporary sampling plots of 1600 m2 are established on the properties to be investigated. The study found that the structural characteristics and floristic composition vary according to the forest arrangement and the management system. Secondary forests are the most diverse, according to the Shannon (3.49), Simpson (0.96), and Margaleft (9.34) diversity indices, in addition to having the largest carbon stores with 233 (Mg C ha-1), followed by agroforestry systems in association with timber trees (TAFS) and fruit trees (FAFS) with 97.8 and 95.1 (Mg C ha-1) respectively, and cocoa monoculture (CMC) with 90.4 (Mg C ha-1). These results demonstrate the importance of conserving the remnants of tropical forests that still remain, due to the diversity of species, ecosystem services, and the total carbon they contain, as well as the agroforestry systems (AFS), systems analogous to forests, which are gradually becoming important management systems, especially if they are associated with potential species to sequester carbon, such as those documented in this and several other studies that seek solutions to global climate change.
Biodiversity and carbon storage co-benefits of coffee agroforestry across a gradient of increasing management intensity in the SW Ethiopian highlands			Agroforestry has been proposed as a way to reconcile biodiversity conservation, food production and the delivery of other ecosystem services in tropical landscapes. One such a key ecosystem service, especially in the light of climate change mitigation, is carbon storage. Increasing human disturbance and management intensification, however, are known to affect the carbon storage potential of forests. Here we assessed how the above- and belowground carbon stocks in Ethiopian moist evergreen Afromontane forest co-varied with their biodiversity, and with increasing agroforestry management intensity for the production of Arabica coffee (Coffea arabica L.). We assessed above- and belowground carbon storage in 60 plots across a gradient of agricultural intensification ranging from natural forest, over two different coffee agroforestry systems, to intensified shade plantations. We quantified the diversity of ground beetles and woody plants in the same plots. Carbon stocks in natural forests (413 +/- 55.6 S.E. Mg ha(-1)) and in the most extensively managed agroforestry systems (387 +/- 50.0 Mg ha(-1)) were significantly higher than those in the more intensified agroforest system (258 +/- 39.4 Mg ha(-1)) and in shade plantations (219 +/- 22.8 Mg ha(-1)). Diversity of woody plants, but not of ground beetles, declined with increasing management intensity and decreasing carbon stocks. Overall, this study demonstrates that extensive coffee farming in Ethiopian moist Afromontane forests is able to deliver important co-benefits in terms of woody plant species conservation and carbon storage. Given the associated coffee yield cost, it is most likely, however, that supporting payments from certification or policy mechanisms such as REDD+ are required to keep these extensive coffee agroforestry systems economically viable, which is required to avoid management intensification and associated carbon and biodiversity losses. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM FUNCTIONAL ENHANCEMENT BY FOREST RESTORATION: A META-ANALYSIS IN CHINA			Large-scale forest loss and degradation have dire consequences for biodiversity maintenance and provision of vital ecosystem services. Despite recent increasing efforts for forest restoration and sustainable management, there have been no comparative studies of biological taxonomy and multiple ecosystem functions to assess the effectiveness of forest restoration programmes, and how they vary through space and time. Here, we provided a quantitative assessment of the recovery of biodiversity and ecosystem functions by forest restoration in China using a meta-analysis of 172 studies. We found that biodiversity and ecosystem functions were substantially increased in restored forests comparing with the degraded states. However, these restoration effects varied considerably by degradation origin, restoration approach, restoration age, ecological domains, taxonomic group and ecosystem function that is measured. Results also revealed that forest restoration from degraded states could not lead to full recovery of biodiversity and ecosystem functions, highlighting the irreplaceability of primary forests. We advocate allowing for natural or passive recovery, especially where biophysical conditions are favourable for spontaneous succession, or too harsh for human-aided restoration, and choosing a combination of passive and active restoration measures based on adaptive management strategies. Our meta-analysis provided fundamental insights into bridging the gap between small-scale experiments and broad-scale management needs towards highly effective and sustainable forest ecosystem restoration. Copyright (c) 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Biodiversity and ecosystem services in forest ecosystems: a research agenda for applied forest ecology			Given the substantial contributions of forest biodiversity and ecosystem services to society, forest sciences have a large potential to contribute to the integrity and sustainability of our future. This is especially true when the roles of biodiversity for sustaining ecosystem services are considered. The rapid expansion of sustainable forest management (SFM) has resulted in the adoption of various forest management frameworks intended to safeguard biodiversity. Concurrently, the importance of forest ecosystem services has been increasingly recognized. Although some initiatives aimed at conserving both biodiversity and ecosystem services are emerging, knowledge gaps still exist about their relationships and potential trade-offs in forests. Given recent advancements, increasing opportunities and some lags in forest ecology, further research on biodiversity, ecosystem functions and services will play substantial roles in the development of SFM practices. Here, we identified key issues including (i) relationships between biodiversity and ecosystem function as a foundation of ecological integrity, (ii) resilience thinking to better prepare for and adapt to environmental changes, (iii) social-ecological perspectives that facilitate real-world conservation and management and (iv) theory-driven restoration that bridges science and practice. Thus, we illustrate priorities and future possibilities in applied ecology studies in forests, which will help society and ecosystems to build capacity and resilience to face uncertainty in the changing environment.Synthesis and applications. Under substantial human influences, forests are highly likely to be largely altered, potentially leading to the emergence of novel ecosystems or alternative stable states. Management thus needs more flexible, novel measures to address the significant uncertainty this generates. Resilience-based approaches are important to respond adaptively to future changes and cope with surprises, potentially providing multiple options. Although challenges exist, theory should play an important role in managing, conserving and restoring forest ecosystems. The issues discussed here should receive further attention in the context of the multiple goals of sustainable forest management.
Biodiversity and ecosystem services in the Campo Rupestre: A road map for the sustainability of the hottest Brazilian biodiversity hotspot			Global sustainability rests on a myriad of benefits provided by natural ecosystems that support human livelihoods and well-being, from biodiversity persistence to climate regulation. The undeniable importance of conserving tropical forests has drawn most of the conservation spotlight towards it. However, open ecosystems such as the Brazilian Campo Rupestre (rupestrian grassland), have been historically overlooked despite their high diversity and key associated ecosystem services. We highlight major current threats to the persistence of the Campo Rupestre emphasizing its ecological, social, cultural, geoenvironmental, and economic importance. We call attention to the importance of the Campo Rupestre as a reservoir of biodiversity and ecosystem services and offer priority actions that resulted from discussions involving scientists, industry representatives, environmental managers, and other members of civil society. Proposed actions include efforts related to ecological restoration, sustainable ecotourism, protection of traditional ecological knowledge, identification of emerging research questions, and development of tailored public policies. Such issues are integrated into a framework that collectively represents a road map to safeguard the Campo Rupestre from further degradation and steer its historical overexploitation towards sustainable management. Safeguarding the future of non-forest biomes like this poses a challenge to current paradigms of nature conservation. By establishing priorities and guidelines, we propose an actionable plan, which we hope can support informed decision-making policy towards a sustainable use of the Campo Rupestre. (c) 2020 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of AssociacAo Brasileira de Ciencia Ecologica e Conservacao. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons. org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services in Tropical Forests: The Role of Forest Allocations in the Dja Area, Cameroon			0
Biodiversity and livelihoods in southwestern Ethiopia: Forest loss and prospects for conservation in shade coffee agroecosystems			0
Biodiversity conservation in human-modified landscapes of Mesoamerica: Past, present and future			Mesoamerica provides a unique context for biodiversity conservation in managed landscapes because of its geography, history of human intervention, and present conservation and development initiatives. The long and narrow form of the Mesoamerican landmass, and its division by a central mountain range, has served as both a bridge and a barrier. Conservation efforts in Mesoamerica are unique for the emphasis they place on regional connectivity through the Mesoamerican Biological Corridor and on biodiversity conservation in managed landscapes. The emphasis on conservation in agricultural systems has fostered innovations in payment for ecosystem services, and provides novel insights on the functional role that biodiversity plays in the provisioning of ecosystem services. The increasing rate of economic development in the region and the advent of new payment for ecosystem service schemes have provided new opportunities for forest regeneration and restoration. However, the small scale of private landholdings and the diversity of land uses featured in the region, while contributing to biodiversity conservation due to their structural and floristic complexity, present challenges for biodiversity monitoring and management. (C) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Biodiversity conservation in the sacred groves of north-west Ethiopia: diversity and community structure of woody species			Forest fragmentation is globally pervasive but especially severe in tropical forests, as exemplified by the state of Afrotropical montane forests in Ethiopia, where remnant forests almost exclusively exists as small, isolated fragments centered around churches, forming networks of partially intact 'habitat islands.' Church forests deliver ecosystem services such as forest products and erosion control, and are considered a benchmark for assessing forest biodiversity quality. However, safeguarding church forest integrity necessitates a better understanding of the factors determining their biodiversity and community structure. Therefore, we surveyed a network of church forests southeast of Lake Tana to assess factors explaining their tree species richness and composition. We found that the 24 church forests studied here represent about 20% of the ca. 270 tree species that occur in tropical northeast Africa. All surveyed forests however face strong extinction debts, with five tree species at risk of completely disappearing from the region and many more species only regenerating in a limited number of church forests. Church forest integrity partially reflected the anthropogenic pressure on the area, as forest regeneration tended to be stronger in fenced church forests. Seedling abundance depended on the local presence of large, mature conspecific trees and on the geographic distance to potential source populations of seeds, strongly suggest that metapopulation dynamics likely are important. We conclude that church forest conservation and minimizing further degradation of the landscape matrix are needed to help sustaining the ecological and socioeconomic potential of this unique network of remnant forests. (C) 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license.
Biodiversity observation for land and ecosystem health (BOLEH): A robust method to evaluate the management impacts on the bundle of carbon and biodiversity ecosystem services in tropical production forests			The Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) has initiated a new sustainability mechanism, the ecosystem-services certification. In this system, management entities who wish to be certified for the maintenance of ecosystem services (carbon, biodiversity, watershed, soil and recreational services) must verify that their activities have no net negative impacts on selected ecosystem service(s). Developing a robust and cost-effective measurement method is a key challenge for establishing a credible certification system. Using a single method to evaluate a bundle of ecosystem services will be more efficient in terms of transaction costs than using multiple methods. We tested the efficiency of a single method, "biodiversity observation for land and ecosystem health (BOLEH)", to simultaneously evaluate biodiversity and carbon density on a landscape scale in FSC-certified tropical production forests in Sabah, Malaysia. In this method, forest intactness based on the tree-generic compositional similarity with that of a pristine forest was used as an index of biodiversity. We repeated BOLEH in 2009 and 2014 in these forests. Our analysis could detect significant spatiotemporal changes in both carbon and forest intactness during these five years, which reflected past logging intensities and current management regimes in these forests. Enhancement of these ecosystem services occurred in the forest where sustainable management with reduced-impact logging had long been implemented. In this paper, we describe the procedure of the BOLEH method, and results of the pilot test in these forest. © 2018 by the authors.
Biodiversity of the cocoa agroforests of the bengamisa-yangambi forest landscape in the democratic republic of the congo (Drc)			Cocoa agroforestry has evolved into an accepted natural resource conservation strategy in the tropics. It is regularly proposed as one of the main uses for REDD+ projects (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, few studies have characterized the cocoa agroforestry systems in this country. Hence, this research proposes to determine the impact of distance from Kisangani (the unique city in the landscape) and land-use intensity on the floristic composition of cocoa agroforests in Bengamisa-Yangambi forest landscape in the Congo Basin. The results revealed that species diversity and density of plants associated with cocoa are influenced by the distance from Kisangani (the main city in the landscape and province). Farmers maintain/introduce trees that play one or more of several roles. They may host caterpillars, provide food, medicine, or timber, or deliver other functions such as providing shade to the cocoa tree. Farmers maintain plants with edible products (mainly oil palms) in their agroforests more than other plants. Thus, these agroforests play key roles in conserving the floristic diversity of degraded areas. As cocoa agroforestry has greater potential for production, biodiversity conservation, and environmental protection, it should be used to slow down or even stop deforestation and forest degradation. © 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Biodiversity patterns and trophic interactions in human-dominated tropical landscapes in Sulawesi (Indonesia): plants, arthropods and vertebrates			The need to capture primary production in order to sustain and improve economic livelihoods has lead to increasing conversion of natural habitat and intensification of agricultural practices in many parts of the world including most tropical regions. Understanding how these processes affect ecosystems and their functioning, in particular in the high-diversity ecosystems of the tropics, has become a key issue in ecological research. In this chapter, our focus is on the agriculture-forest landscapes of Central Sulawesi, Indonesia, an island widely known for its endemic yet still poorly known flora and fauna. The rise of the region to one of the largest cacao producing areas in the world is at the core of recent land-use change and intensification processes. Covering plants (trees, rattan palms, herbs, bryophytes) and several invertebrate (ants, dung beetles, cacao insect herbivores, fruit-feeding butterflies, parasitic Hymenoptera, spiders) and vertebrate groups (amphibians, birds, murids, reptiles), we give an in-depth overview of the determinants of biodiversity in cacao landscapes, including both management and landscape-scale variables into our analyses. Results show that shaded agroforests host a rich community of species. By adopting a large-scale study design we showed that proximity of natural forest is a key predictor for species richness of plants, invertebrates and vertebrates alike. Endemics and forest specialists benefit most from indigenous shade tree cover and proximity to natural forest. Importantly, several functionally important groups such as insectivorous and seed-dispersing birds benefit from tall shade trees, shade tree diversity and proximity to forest edge, while parasitoid diversity is greatest close to natural forests. Available data on the effects of landuse change in cacao landscape of Central Sulawesi is increasing. Change in landscape configuration and management practices are being clearly reflected in the composition of species communities, with likely impacts on ecosystem services such as pest control and pollination. More knowledge is needed especially in terms of species interactions and ecosystem functioning, but also on how existing knowledge can contribute to effective conservation in human-dominated landscapes outside protected areas. © 2010, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Biodiversity, Carbon and Chocolate: Toward an Environmentally Friendly Cocoa Production System in Ghana			0
Bioeconomic approaches to sustainable management of natural tropical forests			Bioeconomic models are idealized representations of human-nature interactions used to describe how the decisions that people make regarding the harvest of biological resources affect the future condition of resource stocks and the flow of net economic benefits. This modeling approach posits an assumed goal or objective that a decision-maker seeks to optimize subject to a set of biological constraints. The power of this method derives from its ability to evaluate a wide array of alternative policy or management innovations over timescales that are radically longer than the timescales considered in many other approaches to economic analysis. In this chapter, we review techniques and applications of two complementary classes of bioeconomic models that have been used to analyze alternative strategies for sustainable use of tropical forests. First, continuoustime bioeconomic models have been used to derive dynamic policy prescriptions for optimally balancing tropical timber production and tropical forest conservation over very long time scales. Second, discrete-time bioeconomic models have been used to evaluate alternative on-the-ground timber harvesting strategies. Emerging threats associated with climate change could be addressed with bioeconomic models that consider the resilience of tropical forests to potentially catastrophic changes. © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016.
BIOECONOMY based on non-timber forest products for development and forest conservation - untapped potential or false hope? A systematic review for the BRAZILIAN amazon			The continuing destruction of the Amazonian forest, the largest remaining tropical forest ecosystem, has massive social and environmental consequences for local populations, but also for the climate, global food security and biodiversity. With some 20% of the forest already lost and the Amazon region likely approaching a tipping point, the conservation of its forests is a burning issue. High expectations are vested in the sustainable use of non-timber forest products (NTFPs) as a means to reconcile conservation and development. Accordingly, hundreds of initiatives have been launched over the decades that rely on NTFPs. With the proliferation of the bioeconomy discourse in recent years, they have received a new impetus. But are these expectations justified and backed-up by facts? Based on a systematic literature review, this article assesses the state of knowledge on NTFPs as a basis for sustainable local development in the Brazilian Amazon. The analysis reveals that while the number of studies has been growing continuously, the knowledge base is rather patchy. Coverage is limited mostly to a few NTFPs with high commercial value. The literature mostly attests positive effects of NTFP use on forest conservation and contributions to meeting socio-cultural needs of local communities. By contrast, existing studies identify limitations in terms of local income generation and suggest to combine the use of NTFPs with the commercial management for timber and the sale of environmental services. In terms of biodiversity conservation, some studies also point to risks of initiatives that emphasize income generation and stress the importance of diversifying production. It is worrying, that empirical knowledge on the effects of such combined and diversified approaches is scarce. A research agenda is crucial to support the successful promotion of NTFP-based value chains in the Brazilian Amazon. This agenda should include a comprehensive analytical framework that enables robust evaluations of past and future interventions. A better understanding of the actual impacts of such initiatives is vital as evidence for proof of concept and for deploying them at scale.
Biofuels from Jatropha curcas oil - Perspectives for tropical regions			Almost 40% of the world's population of 6,7 billion people do not have access to affordable energy resources and drinking water of acceptable quality. But nothing is more important than the alleviation of hunger. The number of hungry people, according to the newest FAO statistics, has risen to close to one billion in 2008. Therefore, special attention needs to be given to research in food and agriculture. To this stock of global problems new challenges are added through the increase in human population of 80 million persons a year and the concomitant loss of large areas of former fertile agricultural land, mostly in the poorest countries. Jatropha curcas is the most primitive member of the large genus Euphorbiaceae. The name is derived from the Greek iatros (doctor) and trophe (food). Jatropha curcas is a perennial plant, native and widely spread throughout the tropics. It is not grazed by animals, grows readily on degraded lands, is drought and to some extent disease resistant. It is a multipurpose plant. There are two genotypes of Jatropha curcas, a toxic and a non-toxic one. The latter genotype is found in Mexico only. Well developed dry seeds from Jatropha curcas weigh between 650750 mg and contain 30-35% of oil that is suitable for conversion into biodiesel of high quality by the conventional, proven processes. The kernel forms around 65% of the seeds. The de-oiled kernel meal has a crude protein content of between 58% and 60% and a favourable amino acid profile. Extracts of the toxic genotype provide chemicals with potential in medicinal, pharmaceutical and bio-pesticide application. In contrast to other fossil fuel alternatives, like biofuels from food crops such as maize, soybean, sugar cane and palm, bioenergy from Jatropha curcas grown on wasteland incurs no carbon debt and thus, offers immediate and sustained greenhouse gas advantages. Potential benefits of large scale Jatropha plantations on degraded land are expected to be: availability of CO2 neutral fuel in remote rural areas; potential availability of high protein concentrates and biofertilizer locally; wasteland reclamation for food production; carbon sequestration for emission trading; employment generation and socioeconomic development for impoverished farmers and rural labourers. Because of the wild nature of the plant, productivity reports vary considerably from less than 100 kg to more than 10.000 kg of seeds per ha. This huge variation is of importance from a breeder's point of view for future selection and breeding programmes. Such programmes coupled with the development of agronomical practices, are essential prerequisites for economic exploitation to give Jatropha curcas a bright future.
Biogeophysical effects of historical land cover changes simulated by six Earth system models of intermediate complexity			Six Earth system models of intermediate complexity that are able to simulate interaction between atmosphere, ocean, and land surface, were forced with a scenario of land cover changes during the last millennium. In response to historical deforestation of about 18 million sq km, the models simulate a decrease in global mean annual temperature in the range of 0.13-0.25 degrees C. The rate of this cooling accelerated during the 19th century, reached a maximum in the first half of the 20th century, and declined at the end of the 20th century. This trend is explained by temporal and spatial dynamics of land cover changes, as the effect of deforestation on temperature is less pronounced for tropical than for temperate regions, and reforestation in the northern temperate areas during the second part of the 20th century partly offset the cooling trend. In most of the models, land cover changes lead to a decline in annual land evapotranspiration, while seasonal changes are rather equivocal because of spatial shifts in convergence zones. In the future, reforestation might be chosen as an option for the enhancement of terrestrial carbon sequestration. Our study indicates that biogeophysical mechanisms need to be accounted for in the assessment of land management options for climate change mitigation.
Biogeophysical effects of land use on climate: Model simulations of radiative forcing and large-scale temperature change			Changes in land cover affect climate through the surface energy and moisture budgets. Here we assess the importance of these biogeophysical effects for present-day climate, and quantify the radiative forcing of historical climate change by land use change for comparison with radiative forcings due to anthropogenic changes in greenhouse gases and aerosols. We also discuss the implications of biogeophysical effects for the use of forestry as a tool for mitigating climate change through carbon sequestration. Our model results suggest that since most historical deforestation has taken place in temperate regions where the main climatic effect is an increase in surface albedo, the dominant biogeophysical effect of past land cover change has been a cooling. The northern mid-latitude agricultural regions are simulated to be approximately 1-2 K cooler in winter and spring in comparison with their previously forested state. This conflicts with the suggestion that land use change is responsible for the warming observed over the 20th century. The increase in albedo by 1750 is simulated to exert a negative radiative forcing of approximately -2 W m(-2) locally over Europe, China and India, suggesting a potential anthropogenic influence on climate before fossil fuel burning began. The present-day global mean radiative forcing by anthropogenic surface albedo change relative to the natural state is simulated to be -0.2 W m(-2), which is comparable with the estimated forcings relative to pre-industrial times by stratospheric and tropospheric ozone, N2O, the halocarbons, and the direct effect of anthropogenic aerosols. In cold regions, afforestation or reforestation would decrease the surface albedo and induce a positive radiative forcing (warming) which could partly or completely offset the negative forcing (cooling) due to carbon sequestration. This suggests that carbon sink plantations could be less effective than expected at reducing warming, and could even cause further warming. However, we note that reforestation (or avoided deforestation) in tropical regions could exert a double cooling effect through carbon sequestration and increased evaporation and cloud cover. (c) 2006 Published by Elsevier B.V.
Biological Flora of the Tropical and Subtropical Intertidal Zone: Literature Review for Rhizophora mangle L.			Rhizophora mangle L. is a tropical and subtropical mangrove species that occurs as a dominant tree species in the intertidal zone of low-energy shorelines. Rhizophora mangle plays an important role in coastal zones as habitat for a wide range of organisms of intertidal food webs, as a natural barrier to coastal erosion, and as carbon sequestration. A review of mangrove literature has been performed, but a review specifically on red mangroves has not. The approach was to cover a broad range of topics with a focus on topics that have seen significant work since the 1970s. This review includes a brief introduction to red mangroves and then focuses on the following topics: biogeography, habitats and zonation, geomorphological interactions, taxonomy, histology, anatomy, physiological ecology, productivity, biomass, litter, reproduction, population biology, plant communities, interactions with other species, impacts of storms, reforestation, remote sensing, modelling, and economic importance.  © Coastal Education and Research Foundation, Inc. 2020.
Biological processes influencing nutrient limitation in a lowland tropical wet forest in Costa Rica			0
Biomass accumulation after 10-200 years of shifting cultivation in bornean rain forest			I examined the effect of repeated long-fallow shifting cultivation on biomass accumulation in a rain-forest landscape occupied for over 200 years in West Kalimantan, Indonesia, The diameters of stems >5 cm dbh were measured in nine secondary forests using a stratified random design of nested plots (3000 m(2) per site). The stands were 9-12 years old and had experienced from I to 10 or more cycles of shifting cultivation. Accounting for differences in soil fertility, analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) demonstrated that aboveground live biomass increment (ABI, in megagrams per hectare per year) was significantly greater after four cycles than after six or more cycles. ABI was lowest after two cycles, highest after one or four cycles and intermediate after 6-10 cycles. Differences were driven by the density and biomass of trees >10 cm dbh, which followed a similar pattern. Although the diameter increment and contribution to total biomass of trees >10 cm dbh increased significantly with inherent soil fertility, variation in the rate of biomass accumulation depended primarily on the number of prior cultivation cycles. An ANCOVA with soil fertility as the main effect was not significant. One hypothesis to explain observed patterns of ABI associated with changes in tree density is a shift, over many cycles, in the dominance of seed-banking vs. resprouting species. Previous work has shown that total phosphorus did not decline after six or more cycles; however, a shift from available to occluded forms may be related to lower ABI in sites with the longest cultivation history. An 11% decline in ABI could substantially alter the carbon-sequestration value of secondary tropical forests as they enter their second century of persistent human disturbance.
Biomass accumulation in tropical lands with different disturbance histories: Contrasts within one landscape and across regions			Large areas of tropical forests have been converted to agricultural land and subsequently abandoned. If restoration can occur on these abandoned lands, it offers great potential for biodiversity recovery, carbon sequestration, and enhanced ecosystem services. To understand the interaction between different forms of anthropogenic degradation and restoration strategies we examined biomass accumulation at two different scales. First, using small scale comparisons where the tree species pool, climate, and dispersers were similar, we quantified regeneration in degraded sites in Kibale National Park, Uganda subjected to different restoration strategies. Second, we contrasted biomass accumulation for 57 tropical studies where the nature and time since disturbance differed. The above ground biomass of 10-32 year old forest in Kibale ranged from 15,675 to 34,294 kg/ha and was a function of the type of the management strategy used to promote regeneration. The above ground biomass accumulation from other tropical sites ranged extensively; from 470 kg/ha in an 8 year old abandoned pasture in Brazil to 272,000 kg/ha in a 16 year old abandoned agricultural field in Mexico. Overall, the time since abandonment was a good predictor of biomass accumulation. This review demonstrates that once left to regenerate, secondary forests accumulate above ground biomass in a very positive manner; however, the speed of biomass accumulation can be facilitated by site-specific restoration strategies. Both the cost and efficiency of different restoration strategies vary dramatically and our research in Kibale suggests that making larger financial investments does not necessarily result in more positive biomass accumulation. (C) 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Biomass and carbon balance in a dry tropical forest area in northeast Brazil			Forest ecosystems play an important role in mitigating the concentration increase of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere through carbon sequestration by plants and its storage in biomass and soil. The objective was to determine the aerial biomass carbon stock in a dry tropical forest in Brazil. It was developed between 2012 to 2015, in an area with an advanced regeneration stage (50 years) in the semi-arid region of Pernambuco and it was used 40 permanent plots (400 m2) distant 80 m apart, with 50 m from the border, totaling 1.6 ha of the area to sample the shrubby-arboreal component, where all individuals with circumference at breast height (1.30 m of the soil) equal or greater than 6 cm were identified, measured and labeled in 2012 and remeasured in 2015. It was calculated the biomass and carbon stocks through developed equations available in the literature. The results showed that the total biomass and carbon stock in the first year was 27.97 e 12.92 Mg.ha-1 while in 2015 it was 18.49 and 8.39 Mg.ha-1 respectively. The results showed a biomass and carbon stock reduction of more than 30% in the period evaluated, even this, the area manages to present values within the expected pattern for the region, assuring the importance of sustainable forest management of these native/ natural vegetation areas.
Biomass and carbon stock along an altitudinal gradient in the forest of Manipur, Northeast India			Forests are natural storehouses of biomass and store more carbon than any other terrestrial ecosystem. The relationship between species richness, aboveground biomass and carbon stock at different altitudes can have crucial implications for the management and conservation of carbon sinks. The study was undertaken to assessthe aboveground biomass and carbon stock in ten forest stands along an altitudinal gradient in Manipur, Northeast India. Stand density varied from 128 to 168 trees ha(-1) across the study sites with the highest stand density at higher altitude. The aboveground biomass varied between 124.56 and 254.99 t ha(-1) and carbon stock ranged from 60.09 to 121.43 t C ha(-1) across the study sites. Our results show that there is a significant positive correlation of stand density, aboveground biomass and carbon stock with increasing altitude. This positive relationship could be attributed to less disturbance and the dominance of larger trees at higher altitudes as compared to lower altitudes. Our results could be helpful to devise appropriate strategies in the restoration of degraded forests ecosystems to enhance carbon sequestration and to mitigate climate change.
Biomass and carbon stocks of four vegetation types in the Llanos Orientales of Colombia (Mapiripan, Meta)			Agricultural lands occupy 38% of global land surface and are expected to grow significantly in the next years, increasing the need for more sustainable practices, as well as better informed conservation practices of natural ecosystems. Carbon stocks are important estimates for the assessment of potential emissions caused by defor-estation, and therefore widely used in strategies to mitigate climate change in agroforestry systems. Although research on biomass and carbon accumulation in agricultural lands is well documented, comparisons with adjacent natural forest areas are uncommon, mainly in tropical regions. Here, we used forest inventory data and allometric models to estimate biomass and carbon stocks of natural vegetation types (gallery forest-GF, morichal-MOR, and savanna-SAV) and oil palm (Elaeis guineensis) crops in the Orinoquia bioregion, in Eastern Colombia. We found that natural forests (GF and MOR) hold 542.45 Mg ha-1 of aboveground biomass, whereas oil palm plantations store 284.87 Mg ha-1. Morichal vegetation, commonly known as peat swamp forests, accumulated the highest aboveground biomass and carbon per hectare among all vegetation types (natural and agricultural), with an estimate of 402.76 Mg ha-1. Thus, although oil palm crops are great reservoirs of biomass and carbon at the landscape level, it is the combination of natural and agricultural lands which assure highest carbon sequestration in the study area. These results highlight the importance of preserving natural areas in agricultural landscapes for climate mitigation and conservation of biodiversity, which may jointly benefit plantations sus-tainable development.
Biomass and carbon storage in an age-sequence of Acacia mangium plantation forests in Southeastern region, Vietnam			Aim of study: The major objective of this study was to estimate the biomass increment and carbon (C) storage of the main ecosystem components in an age-sequence of three Acacia mangium plantation stands.Area of study: Chang Riec Historical - Cultural Forest, Southeastern region, Vietnam.Material and methods: In order to assess the biomass of different tree components, 36 trees with diameter at breast height ranging from 13.38 to 22.87 cm were harvested from the different aged stands. Biomasses of understory (shrubs and herbs), and litter were also determined. Carbon storage in the trees and understory biomass, litter, and mineral soil (0-50 cm) were determined by analyzing the C content of each compartment.Main results: The biomass in trees, understory vegetation, litter, and ecosystem increased with stand age. Soil C represented 61.99% of the total, aboveground tree biomass C made up 26.73%, belowground tree biomass C accounted for 7.01%, and litter comprised 2.96%, whereas only a small amount (1.30%) was associated with understory vegetation. The average C content of total tree (47.97%) was higher than those of understory and litter. Soil organic C stock in the top 50 cm depth in 4-, 7- and 11-year-old stands of A. mangium were 86.86, 126.88 and 140.94 Mg. C ha(-1) respectively. Soil C concentration decreased continually with increasing soil depth. Total C storage of three planted forests ranged from 131.36 to 255.86 Mg. C ha-1, of which 56.09 - 67.61% of C storage was in the soil and 26.88 - 40.40% in the trees.Research highlights: These results suggest that A. mangium is a promising afforestation tree species with fast growing, high biomass accumulation and high C sequestration potential.
Biomass and carbon storage of Eucalyptus and Acacia plantations in the Pearl River Delta, South China			Forest plantations represent an important carbon sink. In the Pearl River Delta (PRD) in Southern China, fast-growing Eucalyptus and Acacia are favoured plantation species, but little is known regarding their efficiency with respect to biomass production, partitioning and dynamics with stand age, or the contribution made by the understory, litter and coarse woody debris (CWD) to the volume of biomass and fixed carbon. Here, a set of 21 plantations of various ages were monitored for the pattern of biomass accumulation and partitioning. A continuous biomass expansion factor (BEF) method was applied to a set of forest inventory data (FID) over the periods 1989-2003 to estimate biomass accumulation, carbon storage and its pattern of change over time. The accumulation of biomass increased with stand age, reaching, respectively, 207.45 and 189.35 t ha(-1) in mature Eucalyptus and Acacia plantations. The contribution of secondary biomass from the understory, litter layer and CWD accounted for, respectively, up to 10.2% and 20.3% of the total biomass in the two types of plantation, highlighting the significance of secondary biomass. At a similar growth stage, the ranking of the contribution to secondary biomass in the Eucalyptus plantations was litter > herbaceous plants > shrubs > CWD, while in the Acacia plantations, it was litter > CWD > shrubs > herbaceous plants. The Eucalyptus and Acacia plantations in the PRD accumulated some 2.66-7.84 Mt of biomass and sequestered 1.33-3.92 Mt of carbon. For both species, the bulk of the plantations (Eucalyptus 82.1%, Acacia 89.3%) were at the young to middle-aged stage. The Acacia plantations generated a higher biomass density than the Eucalyptus plantations. Forest management intensification and reforestation programmes, especially targeting Acacia or mixed Eucalyptus/Acacia forests, offer good potential for future carbon sequestration. (C) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Biomass and soil carbon stocks of indigenous agroforestry systems on the south-eastern Rift Valley escarpment, Ethiopia			Biomass carbon (C) and soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks in three indigenous agroforestry (AF) systems (Enset [Ensete ventricosum, Musaceae], Enset-Coffee and Fruit-Coffee) practiced on the Rift Valley escarpment of Ethiopia are presented and evaluated. These unique AF systems are characterised by a high proportion and diversity of trees.Data were collected from six smallholdings per AF system. Above- and belowground biomass of trees (fruit and non-fruit), enset and coffee plants were calculated using allometric equations while the biomasses of herbs, litter and fine roots (< 2 cm) were determined by destructive sampling techniques. SOC stocks (0-30 and 30-60 cm) were calculated from measured C contents and bulk density values.Smallholding total biomass C stocks averaged 67 Mg ha(-1) with trees accounting for 39-93 %. Herbs accounted for < 4 % of aboveground biomass. Coffee accounted for 11 % and enset 9 % of total biomass C on average. SOC stocks (0-60 cm) were 109-253 Mg ha(-1) (52-91 % of total C stocks) and uncorrelated to biomass C stocks. Biomass C or SOC stocks did not significantly differ between AF systems but biomass C stocks were significantly correlated to elevation.The C stocks of the three studied AF systems were found to be amongst the highest reported for tropical forests and agroforestry systems. These unique AF systems are therefore well suited to REDD+ projects. However, the C stocks were more determined by individual smallholder management practice than by AF system or climate (elevation).
Biomass Carbon Sequestration by Planted Forests in China			The planted forest area and carbon sequestration have increased significantly in China, because of large-scale reforestation and afforestation in the past decades. In this study, we developed an age-based volume-to-biomass method to estimate the carbon storage by planted forests in China in the period of 1973-2003 based on the data from 1209 field plots and national forest inventories. The results show that the total carbon storage of planted forests was 0.7743 Pg C in 1999-2003, increased by 3.08 times since the early 1970s. The carbon density of planted forests varied from 10.6594 Mg/ha to 23.9760 Mg/ha and increased by 13.3166 Mg/ha from 1973-1976 to 1999-2003. Since the early 1970s, the planted forests in China have been always a carbon sink, and the annual rate of carbon sequestration was 0.0217 Pg C/yr. The carbon storage and densities of planted forests varied greatly in space and time. The carbon storage of Middle South China was in the lead in all regions, which accounted for 23%-36% of national carbon storage. While higher C densities (from 17.79 Mg/ha to 26.05 Mg/ha) were usually found in Northeast China. The planted forests in China potentially have a high carbon sequestration since a large part of them are becoming mature and afforestation continues to grow.
Biomass carbon stocks of different land use management in the forest vegetative zone of Nigeria			Land use/land cover change tends to play a more critical role in controlling CO2 emissions and annual storage. Despite the fact that the majority of the deforestation and forest degradation and consequent emissions have been occurring in tropical developing countries, little or no direct quantifications of the effects of land use change on the Carbon pools of these land use systems have been done. Taking into consideration four (4) land use systems in Ekiti State, South-western Nigeria, we quantified the magnitude of biomass and biomass carbon stocks in the following carbon pools: trees, non-woody vegetation, litter, coarse woody debris and roots. Total biomass carbon stocks of the different land use land cover types decreased in the order: Natural forests (NF) (155.61 Mg C ha(-1)) > Plantations (TP) (80.37 Mg C ha(-1)) > Woodlands (WD) (41.17 Mg C ha-1) > Croplands (CP) (35.33 Mg C ha(-1)). Approximately 50% of the total vegetation carbon stocks are contained in natural forests in the study. Estimation of C stocks in Necromass pools is important for carbon quantification most especially in the croplands and agroforestry ecosystems. Natural forest of all the land use types has the greatest biomass carbon storage potential with an estimated standing stock of 155.61 Mg C ha(-1) while cropland has the least carbon storage with a measured standing stock of 35.33 Mg C ha-1. We observed a reduction of 120.28 Mg C ha(-1) and 75.24 Mg C ha(-1) of the total biomass carbon stocks as a result of a change of natural forest to croplands and plantations, suggesting important C loses in the ecosystems. Improving our knowledge of terrestrial sources and sinks of CO2 and other greenhouse gases (GHGs), and their spatiotemporal variability is a key action to better understand and predict the global change and enhance human capacity to undertake mitigation and adaptation strategies.
Biomass energy in industrialised countries - A view of the future			Biomass fuels currently (1994) supply around 14% of the world's energy, but most of this is in the form of traditional fuelwood, residues and dung, which is often inefficient and can be environmentally detrimental. Biomass can supply heat and electricity, liquid and gaseous fuels. A number of developed countries derive a significant amount of their primary energy from biomass: USA 4%, Finland 18%, Sweden 16% and Austria 13%. Presently biomass energy supplies at least 2 ET year(-1) in Western Europe which is about 4% of primary energy (54 EJ). Estimates show a likely potential in Europe in 2050 of 9.0-13.5 EJ depending on land areas (10% of useable land, 33 Mha), yields (10-15 oven-dry tonnes (ODt) ha(-1)), and recoverable residues (25% of harvestable). This biomass contribution represents 17-30% of projected total energy requirements up to 2050. The relative contribution of biofuels in the future will depend on markets and incentives, on continuous research and development progress, and on environmental requirements. Land constraints are not considered significant because of the predicted surpluses in land and food, and the near balance in wood and wood products in Europe.There is considerable potential for the modernisation of biomass fuels to produce convenient energy carriers such as electricity, gases and transportation fuels, whilst continuing to provide for traditional uses of biomass; this modernisation of biomass and the industrial investment is already happening in many countries. When produced in an efficient and sustainable manner, biomass energy has numerous environmental and social benefits compared with fossil fuels. These include improved land management, job creation, use of surplus agricultural land in industrialised countries, provision of modem energy carriers to rural communities of developing countries, a reduction of CO2 levels, waste control, and nutrient recycling. Greater environmental and net energy benefits can be derived from perennial and woody energy cropping than from annual arable crops which are short-term alternative feedstocks for fuels. Agroforestry systems can play an important role in providing multiple benefits to growers and the community, besides energy. In order to ameliorate CO2 emissions, using biomass as a substitute for fossil fuels (complete replacement, co-firing, etc.) is more beneficial from social and economic perspectives than sequestering the carbon in forests.Case studies are presented for several developed countries and the constraints involved in modernising biomass energy along with the potential for turning them into entrepreneurial opportunities are discussed. It is concluded that the long term impacts of biomass programmes and projects depend mainly on ensuring income generation, environmental sustainability, flexibility and replicability, while taking account of local conditions and providing multiple benefits, which is an important attribute of agroforestry-type systems. Biomass for energy must be environmentally acceptable in order to ensure its widespread adoption as a modern energy source. Implementation of biomass projects requires governmental policy initiatives that will internalise the external economic, social and environmental costs of conventional fuel sources so that biomass fuels can become competitive on a 'level playing field'.
Biomass Equations and Carbon Stock Estimates for the Southeastern Brazilian Atlantic Forest			Tropical forests play an important role in mitigating global climate change, emphasizing the need for reliable estimates of forest carbon stocks at regional and global scales. This is essential for effective carbon management, which involves strategies like emission reduction and enhanced carbon sequestration through forest restoration and conservation. However, reliable sample-based estimations of forest carbon stocks require accurate allometric equations, which are lacking for the rainforests of the Atlantic Forest Domain (AFD). In this study, we fitted biomass equations for the three main AFD forest types and accurately estimated the amount of carbon stored in their above-ground biomass (AGB) in Rio de Janeiro state, Brazil. Using non-destructive methods, we measured the total wood volume and wood density of 172 trees from the most abundant species in the main remnants of rainforest, semideciduous forest, and restinga forest in the state. The biomass and carbon stocks were estimated with tree-level data from 185 plots obtained in the National Forest Inventory conducted in Rio de Janeiro. Our locally developed allometric equations estimated the state's biomass stocks at 70.8 +/- 5.4 Mg ha-1 and carbon stocks at 35.4 +/- 2.7 Mg ha-1. Notably, our estimates were more accurate than those obtained using a widely applied pantropical allometric equation from the literature, which tended to overestimate biomass and carbon stocks. These findings can be used for establishing a baseline for monitoring carbon stocks in the Atlantic Forest, especially in the context of the growing voluntary carbon market, which demands more consistent and accurate carbon stock estimations.
Biomass is the main driver of changes in ecosystem process rates during tropical forest succession			Over half of the world's forests are disturbed, and the rate at which ecosystem processes recover after disturbance is important for the services these forests can provide. We analyze the drivers' underlying changes in rates of key ecosystem processes (biomass productivity, litter productivity, actual litter decomposition, and potential litter decomposition) during secondary succession after shifting cultivation in wet tropical forest of Mexico.We test the importance of three alternative drivers of ecosystem processes: vegetation biomass (vegetation quantity hypothesis), community-weighted trait mean (mass ratio hypothesis), and functional diversity (niche complementarity hypothesis) using structural equation modeling. This allows us to infer the relative importance of different mechanisms underlying ecosystem process recovery.Ecosystem process rates changed during succession, and the strongest driver was aboveground biomass for each of the processes. Productivity of aboveground stem biomass and leaf litter as well as actual litter decomposition increased with initial standing vegetation biomass, whereas potential litter decomposition decreased with standing biomass. Additionally, biomass productivity was positively affected by community-weighted mean of specific leaf area, and potential decomposition was positively affected by functional divergence, and negatively by community-weighted mean of leaf dry matter content.Our empirical results show that functional diversity and community-weighted means are of secondary importance for explaining changes in ecosystem process rates during tropical forest succession. Instead, simply, the amount of vegetation in a site is the major driver of changes, perhaps because there is a steep biomass buildup during succession that overrides more subtle effects of community functional properties on ecosystem processes. We recommend future studies in the field of biodiversity and ecosystem functioning to separate the effects of vegetation quality (community-weighted mean trait values and functional diversity) from those of vegetation quantity (biomass) on ecosystem processes and services.
Biomass Production and Carbon Sequestration Potential of Different Agroforestry Systems in India: A Critical Review			Agroforestry systems (AFS) and practices followed in India are highly diverse due to varied climatic conditions ranging from temperate to humid tropics. The estimated area under AFS in India is 13.75 million ha with the highest concentration being in the states of Uttar Pradesh (1.86 million ha), followed by Maharashtra (1.61 million ha), Rajasthan (1.55 million ha) and Andhra Pradesh (1.17 million ha). There are many forms of agroforestry practice in India ranging from intensified simple systems of monoculture, such as block plantations and boundary planting, to far more diverse and complex systems, such as home gardens. As a result, the biomass production and carbon sequestration potential of AFS are highly variable across different agro-climatic zones of India. Studies pertaining to the assessment of biomass and carbon storage in different agroforestry systems in the Indian sub-continent are scanty and most of these studies have reported region and system specific carbon stocks. However, while biomass and carbon stock data from different AFS at national scale has been scanty hitherto, such information is essential for national accounting, reporting of C sinks and sources, as well as for realizing the benefits of carbon credit to farmers engaged in tree-based production activities. Therefore, the objective of this study was to collate and synthesize the existing information on biomass carbon and SOC stocks associated with agroforestry practices across agro-climatic zones of India. The results revealed considerable variation in biomass and carbon stocks among AFS, as well as between different agro-climatic zones. Higher total biomass (>200 Mg ha(-1)) was observed in the humid tropics of India which are prevalent in southern and northeastern regions, while lower total biomass (<50 Mg ha(-1)) was reported from Indo-Gangetic, western and central India. Total biomass carbon varied in the range of 1.84 to 131 Mg ha(-1) in the agrihorticulture systems of western and central India and the coffee agroforests of southern peninsular India. Similarly, soil organic carbon (SOC) ranged between 12.26-170.43 Mg ha(-1), with the highest SOC in the coffee agroforests of southern India and the lowest in the agrisilviculture systems of western India. The AFS which recorded relatively higher SOC included plantation crop-based practices of southern, eastern and northeastern India, followed by the agrihorticulture and agrisilviculture systems of the northern Himalayas. The meta-analysis indicated that the growth and nature of different agroforestry tree species is the key factor affecting the carbon storage capacity of an agroforestry system. The baseline data obtained across various regions could be useful for devising policies on carbon trading or financing for agroforestry.
Biomass production and carbon stock potential of natural vegetation, agroforestry and cultivated land use systems along altitudinal gradient in north western Himalaya			The present study was undertaken in two altitudinal ranges 365-635 m and 636-914 m above mean sea level covering sub-montane, low hills and sub-tropical regions of Himachal Pradesh, India. The two altitudinal ranges were selected because of having common eight land use systems viz., agriculture (T-1), horticulture (T-2), agrisilvicultural (T-3), silvopastoral (T-4), agrihorticulture (T-5), agrihortisilvicultural (T-6), forest (T-7) and grassland (T-8). The experiment was carried out to identify variation in different land use systems in terms of biomass production and carbon stock potentials. The maximum value of aboveground biomass (184.75 t ha(-1)), belowground biomass (47.84 t ha(-1)) and total biomass (232.59 t ha(-1)) was recorded in forest land use system. All traits of biomass followed the order of T-6>T-2>T-5>T-3>T-4 >T-1>T-8 Among the agroforestry systems maximum aboveground (66.46 t ha(-1)), belowground (20.84 t ha(-1)) and total biomass (86.48 t ha(-1)) were accumulated in agrihortisilviculture system. The values of above, below and total biomass showed declining trend with increase in altitude. Vegetation carbon density also decreased with increasing altitudinal range. Among agroforestry systems, maximum (90.10 t ha(-1)) total carbon stock was observed in agrihortisilviculture, which was 2.45, 4.42, 10.67 and 44.80% higher than agrihorticulture, silvopastoral, agrisilviculture and agriculture land use system.
Biomass, carbon, and nutrient dynamics of secondary forests in a humid tropical region of Mexico			Tropical secondary forests have the capacity to function as large carbon and nutrient sinks and may offset losses resulting from deforestation and land use. In the heavily deforested Los Tuxtlas Region of Mexico, aboveground biomass as well as aboveground and mineral soil C, N, S, and P pools were quantified in Il secondary forest sites. These sites ranged in age from 6 mo to 50 yr following abandonment and had experienced between 1 and 30 yr of land use prior to abandonment. Total aboveground biomass (TAGB) increased with increasing site age and ranged from 4.8 Mg/ha in a recently abandoned site to 287 Mg/ha in the 50-yr-old secondary forest site. Results indicate that secondary forests would reach TAGB levels equivalent to those of primary forests in the Los Tuxtlas Region after 73 yr. Furthermore, mean annual aboveground biomass accumulation (ABA) of secondary forests was strongly and inversely related to the duration of prior land use.Aboveground pools of C, N, S, and P were also positively correlated with secondary forest age. For forests between 6 mo and 50 yr of age, C pools increased from 2 to 136 Mg/ha, N increased from 72 to 1167 kg/ha, S increased from 9 to 147 kg/ha, and P increased from 5 to 147 kg/ha. In contrast, C, N, and S pools in mineral soil to a l-m depth remained relatively stable throughout the successional chronosequence and averaged 207, 20, and 3.4 Mg/ha, respectively. Mineral soil pools did not differ with respect to forest age or prior land use history and did not differ from soil pools of primary forest, cornfield, and pasture sites in the Los Tuxtlas Region.Dynamics of the combined aboveground and mineral soil C pools (i.e., excluding C in root biomass) were characterized by increasing contributions from aboveground pools with increasing forest age; aboveground C pools accounted for 9% and 42% of the combined pool in the youngest and oldest forests, respectively. In contrast, changes in combined aboveground and mineral soil pools of N and S during secondary succession were relatively small because >90% of N and S mass was located in mineral soil pools.
Biome Awareness Disparity is BAD for tropical ecosystem conservation and restoration			We introduce the concept of Biome Awareness Disparity (BAD)-defined as a failure to appreciate the significance of all biomes in conservation and restoration policy-and quantify disparities in (a) attention and interest, (b) action and (c) knowledge among biomes in tropical restoration science, practice and policy. By analysing 50,000 tweets from all Partner Institutions of the UN Decade of Ecosystem Restoration, and 45,000 tweets from the main science and environmental news media world-wide, we found strong disparities in attention and interest relative to biome extent and diversity. Tweets largely focused on forests, whereas open biomes (such as grasslands, savannas and shrublands) received less attention in relation to their area. In contrast to these differences in attention, there were equivalent likes and retweets between forest versus open biomes, suggesting the disparities may not reflect the views of the general public. Through a literature review, we found that restoration experiments are disproportionately concentrated in rainforests, dry forests and mangroves. More than half of the studies conducted in open biomes reported tree planting as the main restoration action, suggesting inappropriate application of forest-oriented techniques. Policy implications. We urge scientists, policymakers and land managers to recognise the value of open biomes for protecting biodiversity, securing ecosystem services, mitigating climate change and enhancing human livelihoods. Fixing Biome Awareness Disparity will increase the likelihood of the United Nations Decade on Ecosystem Restoration successfully delivering its promises.
Bird and bat predation services in tropical forests and agroforestry landscapes			Understanding distribution patterns and multitrophic interactions is critical for managing bat- and bird-mediated ecosystem senzices such as the suppression of pest and non-pest arthropods. Despite the ecological and economic importance of bats and birds in tropical forests, a.grotbrestry systems, and agricultural systems mixed with natural forest, a systematic review of their impact is still missing. A growing number of bird and bat exclosure experiments has improved our knowledge allowing new conclusions regarding their roles in food Webs and associated ecosystem seivices. Here, 1,ye review the distribution patterns of insectivorous birds and bats, their local and landscape drivers, and their effects on trophic cascades in tropical ecosystems. We report that for birds but not bats comanmity composition and relative importance of functional groups changes conspicuously from forests to habitats including both agricultural areas and forests, here termed 'forest-agri' habitats, with reduced representation of insectivores in the latter. In contrast to previous theory regarding trophic cascade strength, we find that birds and bats reduce the density and biomass of arthropods in the tropics with effect sizes similar to those in temperate and boreal communities. The relative importance of birds versus bats in regulating pest abundances varies with s(ason, geography and management. Birds and bats may even suppress tropical arthropod outbreaks, although positive effects on plant growth are not always report,ed. As both bats and birds are major ag,ents of pest suppression, a better understanding of the local and landscape factoi-s driving the variability of their impact is needed.
Bird functional diversity and ecosystem services in tropical forests, agroforests and agricultural areas			Although most bird species avoid agricultural areas, nearly a third of all birds regularly to occasionally use such habitats, often providing important ecosystem services like pest control, pollination, and seed dispersal. Combining literature review with large-scale analyses of the ecological characteristics of the world's birds, I compared tropical bird species that prefer forests, agricultural areas or both, with respect to body mass, diet, range and population size, frequency, conservation status, habitat and resource specialization. Compared to primary forests, species richness of large frugivorous and insectivorous birds (especially terrestrial and understorey species) often declines in agroforests. In contrast, nectarivores, small-to-medium insectivores (especially migrants and canopy species), omnivores, and sometimes granivores and small frugivores do better, frequently by tracking seasonal resources. However, changes in guild species numbers do not necessarily translate to changes in relative abundance, biomass or function, and more studies are needed to quantify these important measures. These findings indicate that the replacement of forests and agroforests with simplified agricultural systems can result in shifts towards less specialized bird communities with altered proportions of functional groups. These shifts can reduce avian ecosystem function and affect the ecosystem services provided by birds in agroforests and other agricultural landscapes.
Bird Pollinator Visitation is Equivalent in Island and Plantation Planting Designs in Tropical Forest Restoration Sites			Active restoration is one strategy to reverse tropical forest loss. Given the dynamic nature of climates, human populations, and other ecosystem components, the past practice of using historical reference sites as restoration targets is unlikely to result in self-sustaining ecosystems. Restoring sustainable ecological processes like pollination is a more feasible goal. We investigated how flower cover, planting design, and landscape forest cover influenced bird pollinator visits to Inga edulis trees in young restoration sites in Costa Rica. I. edulis trees were located in island plantings, where seedlings had been planted in patches, or in plantation plantings, where seedlings were planted to cover the restoration area. Sites were located in landscapes with scant (10-21%) or moderate (35-76%) forest cover. Trees with greater flower cover received more visits from pollinating birds; neither planting design nor landscape forest cover influenced the number of pollinator visits. Resident hummingbirds and a migratory bird species were the most frequent bird pollinators. Pollination in the early years following planting may not be as affected by details of restoration design as other ecological processes like seed dispersal. Future work to assess the quality of various pollinator species will be important in assessing this idea.
Bird’s nest fern epiphytes facilitate herpetofaunal arboreality and climate refuge in two paleotropic canopies			In tropical forests, epiphytes increase habitat complexity and provision services rare to canopy environments, such as water retention, nutrient cycling, and microclimate refuge. These services facilitate species diversity and coexistence in terrestrial ecosystems, and while their utility in forest ecosystems is appreciated for the Bromeliaceae of the Neotropics, fewer studies have examined the role of Paleotropic epiphytes in ecological niche theory. Here, we compare herpetofaunal presence, abundance, and diversity of in bird’s nest fern (Asplenium nidus complex; BNF) to other microhabitats in Madagascar and the Philippines. We measure BNF fern microclimates, examine temporal use of canopy microhabitats, and test models of fern characteristics hypothesized to predict herpetofaunal use. In both countries, one in five BNFs were occupied by herpetofauna, mostly amphibians, and species using BNFs were highly dissimilar from those in other microhabitats. Herpetofaunal presence and abundance were greater in BNFs than in other canopy microhabitats and were most commonly used during the day when fern temperatures were highly buffered. Finally, BNF area was the best predictor of herpetofaunal presence and abundance, compared to canopy cover and BNF height. Importantly, these patterns remained consistent despite the distinct phylogenetic histories of our two communities (Asian versus African). Our results suggests that BNFs and their microclimate services play a critical role in the ecology of two Paleotropic forests, and facilitate the use of canopy habitats by climate-sensitive species. However, future studies are needed to assess the consistency of BNFs’ utility as a microclimate refuge across their large range. © 2019, Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature.
Blockchain and conservation: Why does it matter: Applications in payments for ecosystem services and bolsa floresta program			Blockchain has created an innovative framework for safe, efficient and transparent chain of transactions, with the impressive rise of more than 2.100 cryptocurrencies traded anytime, worldwide. These transactions are registered on the web, with no central server, or proprietors. Blockchain also offers exchange and data solutions for businesses and society with tokenized currency, immutable data registry, smart contracts and funding sources. The Amazon region and forest conservation have a positive benefit from Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES) models that reward landowners and users for keeping the standing forest, thus providing services for the climate and biodiversity. A Blockchain proposition addresses key difficulties for PES models, such as lack of trust, high transaction costs and distance among parties. In the Brazilian Amazon, Bolsa Floresta Program (Standing Forest Program) benefits nearly 9.500 families living in traditional riverine communities, rewarding them for their role as the tropical forest keepers. A Blockchain proposition for Bolsa Floresta indicates positive impacts for forest conservation. In project finance, it allows the alternative funding with cryptocoins, observed possible regulatory issues. In project activities, Blockchain provides platforms for a safe exchange of information, goods, and possibly, monetary values, among families and associations, thus improving the standing forest community model. The technical configurations for these proposals include Application Program Interface solutions with online and offline mobility among members. Overall, an analysis of key issues linked to a Blockchain proposition indicates a favourable deployment for pilot projects in the Amazon region, and likely, to conservation projects with forests and communities, worldwide. © Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021.
Bombax ceiba is a Good Native Tree Species for Performing Reforestation to Restore Highly Degraded Tropical Forests in Hainan Island, China			Reforestation is an effective way to alleviate deforestation and its negative impacts on ecosystem services. It is widely recognized that the most key step for reforestation is using suitable native species, but selecting suitable native tree species is much more complex and challenging than the selection of non-native tree species that have been widely used for reforestation. Here, we quantify whether the native tree species (Bombax ceiba) can be suitable for performing reforestation to restore a 0.2 km(2) highly degraded tropical monsoon forest in Baopoling Mountain (BPL), Sanya, China, due to 20 years of limestone mining for cement production. We found that stomatal closure helped Bombax ceiba develop higher drought stress tolerance than the most dominant native tree species (Bridelia tomentosa) in an undisturbed tropical rainforest in BPL, thereby better adapting well to drought stress in the dry season. These characteristics in turn facilitated it to have high survival rate (92% +/- 4%) and fast growth rate, after three years of monoculture in BPL. Thus, Bombax ceiba is very suitable for performing reforestation to recover highly degraded tropical forests in Hainan Island, China.
Boosting C Sequestration and Land Restoration through Forest Management in Tropical Ecosystems: A Mini-Review			Soil has a major role in sequestering atmospheric CO2. This has further benefits and potential to improve soil fertility and food production, mitigate climate change, restore land degradation, and conserve ecosystem biodiversity. However, its health is increasingly being threatened by the growing population, land degradation and climate change effects. Despite its importance, soil organic carbon (SOC) is understudied in the tropics. This paper reviews how managing forests in tropical ecosystems can benefit SOC sequestration and land restoration. Sequestered SOC has the potential to improve soil fertility, as well as to reduce both land degradation and atmospheric CO2 emissions. It further improves soil structure, aggregation and water infiltration, enhances soil faunal activity and boosts nutrient cycling (C, N, P and S). Managing forest ecosystems is crucial to boost C sequestration, mitigate climate change and restore degraded lands, besides other ecosystem services they provide. Apart from managing natural forests and planted forests, afforesting, reforesting marginal or degraded lands especially when associated with specific practices (organic residue management, introducing nitrogen-fixing species) boost C storage (in both soil and biomass) and foster co-benefits as soil health improvement, food production, land restoration and mitigation of climate change. Improved soil health as a result of sequestered C is confirmed by enhanced physical, biological and chemical soil fertility (e.g., sequestered C stability through its link to N and P cycling driven by soil biota) which foster and sustain soil health.
Branchfall dominates annual carbon flux across lowland Amazonian forests			Tropical forests play an important role in the global carbon cycle, but knowledge of interannual variation in the total tropical carbon flux and constituent carbon pools is highly uncertain. One such pool, branchfall, is an ecologically important dynamic with links to nutrient cycling, forest productivity, and drought. Identifying and quantifying branchfall over large areas would reveal the role of branchfall in carbon and nutrient cycling. Using data from repeat airborne light detection and ranging campaigns across a wide array of lowland Amazonian forest landscapes totaling nearly 100 000 ha, we find that upper canopy gaps - driven by branchfall - are pervasive features of every landscape studied, and are seven times more frequent than full tree mortality. Moreover, branchfall comprises a major carbon source on a landscape basis, exceeding that of tree mortality by 21%. On a per hectare basis, branchfall and tree mortality result in 0.65 and 0.72 Mg C ha-1 yr-1 gross source of carbon to the atmosphere, respectively. Reducing uncertainties in annual gross rates of tropical forest carbon flux, for example by incorporating large-scale branchfall dynamics, is crucial for effective policies that foster conservation and restoration of tropical forests. Additionally, large-scale branchfall mapping offers ecologists a new dimension of disturbance monitoring and potential new insights into ecosystem structure and function. © 2016 IOP Publishing Ltd.
Brazilian Atlantic forest: impact, vulnerability, and adaptation to climate change			Biodiversity hotspots are among some of the habitats most threatened by climate change, and the Brazilian Atlantic forest is no exception. Only 11.6 % of the natural vegetation cover remains in an intensely fragmented state, which results in high vulnerability of this biome to climate change. Since >60 % of the Brazilian people live within the Atlantic forest domain, societies both in rural and urban areas are also highly vulnerable to climate change. This review examines the vulnerabilities of biodiversity and society in the Atlantic forest to climate change, as well as impacts of land use and climate change, particularly on recent biological evidence of strong synergies and feedback between them. We then discuss the crucial role ecosystem-based adaptation to climate change might play in increasing the resilience of local society to future climate scenarios and provide some ongoing examples of good adaptive practices, especially related to ecosystem restoration and conservation incentive schemes such as payment for ecosystem services. Finally, we list a set of arguments about why we trust that the Atlantic forest can turn from a "shrinking biodiversity hotspot'' to a climate adaptation "hope spot'' whereby society's vulnerability to climate change is reduced by protecting and restoring nature and improving human life standards.
Brazil's forest restoration, biomass and carbon stocks: A critical review of the knowledge gaps			0
Bridging the divide between rural and urban community-based forestry: A bibliometric review			Community-based forest management takes myriad forms, including community forestry, urban and community forestry, and joint forest management. These variations are all implemented with a promise to include local communities (to varying degrees) in forest decision-making and management, but distinctions are often made between rural versus urban focused research and practice. Such distinctions may be arbitrary and increasingly unnecessary, as rural and urban communities exist on a continuum. To understand whether there is a measurable divide between urban and rural community forestry scholarship, we conduct a systematic bibliometric analysis including examining co-citation networks, citation counts, and keywords. We find there is a multi-dimensional divide between the scholars studying community-based forestry in rural and urban focused contexts, including in terms of discipline, topics of focus, and the intellectual foundations of each community. The separation we find between urban and rural community-based forest research represents an opportunity to explore where researchers and practitioners typically isolated in rural or urban research may learn from and connect with each other. Ultimately, we argue that community-based forestry cannot achieve its potential to improve forests and reduce inequality without increased connections between scholars and practitioners from the often siloed rural and urban communities. Connecting these communities will require increased collaboration between natural and social scientists and increased attention to the research needs of practitioners and local communities, which we argue may help facilitate more just forest governance.
Bringing the forest back: Restoration priorities in Colombia			Aim: Colombia has committed to ambitious forest restoration targets which include a 1 million ha Bonn Challenge commitment and 6.47–8.31 million ha (rehabilitation and restoration, respectively) under the National Restoration Plan. Determining where and how to implement programs to achieve these targets remains a significant challenge. Location: Colombia. Methods: We adopt a multi-objective optimisation framework for restoration planning and apply it to Colombia. We explore cost-effective solutions that leverage the potential for assisted natural regeneration benefits while accounting for opportunity and establishment costs of restoration and maximising biodiversity conservation and climate change mitigation benefits. We explore four politically relevant restoration area-based targets (1, 6, 6.47 and 8.31 million ha) and identify minimum cost, and suites of maximum benefit and cost-effective solutions. Results: We identify solutions that simultaneously perform well across biodiversity and carbon objectives, despite trade-offs between these objectives. We find that cost-effective solutions can achieve on average 91.1%, 90.8%, 90.5% and 90.1% of maximum carbon benefit and 100% of the maximum biodiversity benefit while significantly reducing costs. On average, the cost-effective solutions reduce the cost by 87.5%, 56.8%, 59.6% and 46.2% compared to the maximum benefit solutions considering one, six, 6.47 and 8.31 million ha restoration targets, respectively. Main Conclusions: Colombia has committed to bold restoration and conservation targets, such as those under the new 2030 Convention on Biological Diversity Global Biodiversity Framework. Strategic forest restoration planning will play an important role in achieving Colombia's biodiversity conservation and climate mitigation goals. We provide quantitative evidence to inform planning for environmentally and economically sensible restoration policy and practice in the country. Our framework and results can help guide Colombia towards meeting its ambitious forest restoration targets cost-effectively. © 2024 The Authors. Diversity and Distributions published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Bryophyte abundance, composition and importance to woody plant recruitment in natural and restoration forests			Restoration of tropical forests can lead to enhanced ecosystem services and increases in native biodiversity. Bryophytes may be an integral part of the forest restoration process and can serve a critical role in forest functioning. However, the recovery of bryophytes and their ability to facilitate woody plant establishment during restoration remains poorly studied, especially in the tropics. We investigate how bryophyte abundance and community composition, as well as woody plant seedling associations with bryophyte mats and other ground cover types change from under the canopy of intact forest to under trees in restoration corridor plantings in Hawaii. Restoration corridors consisted of corridors of koa (Acacia koa) trees that were planted roughly 30 years ago. Some corridors were planted around remnant 'ohi'a trees (Metrosideros polymorpha) that can be several hundred years old. We sampled under 'ohi'a in intact forest and both koa and 'ohi'a trees in restoration corridors. In restoration corridors, bryophyte abundance was low relative to intact forest and species diversity was a subset of that found in intact forest despite restoration corridors being several decades old. Seedlings strongly associated with bryophytes across all habitats suggesting that bryophytes may significantly enhance forest seedling establishment when present in restoration corridors. Other ground cover types like woody litter and nurse logs also had a positive association with forest seedlings but were rare in restoration corridors. Grass remained a dominant ground cover type in restoration corridors under koa and remnant 'ohi'a trees and only a single seedling was ever found growing in this grass. Enhancing bryophyte growth and recovery within restoration plantings through the reduction of grass cover could facilitate native plant establishment.
Building a socio-ecological monitoring platform for the comprehensive management of tropical dry forests			Societal Impact Statement Tropical dry forests (TDF) underpin the wellbeing of millions, mostly rural populations; yet have suffered from severe clearing in Colombia, triggering cascading effects such as desertification. By engaging scientists, society, and institutions in the establishment of platforms for monitoring biodiversity and ecosystem functioning, crucial knowledge gaps will be bridged, helping to find a path toward sustainable development. Science-led but socially and economically anchored information on biodiversity will help to incorporate nature's contributions to people into the society's cultural values. Ultimately, these transformative actions will translate into the comprehensive management of TDF through a greater impact in decision making.SummaryThousands of permanent plots have been established across the tropics with the purpose of monitoring tree communities. Research outcomes from these platforms, however, have been mainly directed toward the academic community, and their contribution to society has been limited so far. Here, we show how generating robust data on biodiversity has supported decision making in Colombian tropical dry forests (TDF), where less than 8% of their original cover remains. As a first step to build a national dialogue around the critical status of this ecosystem, a national collaborative network on TDF research and monitoring was born in 2014, the Red de Investigacion y Monitoreo del Bosque Seco Tropical en Colombia (Red BST-Col). Our main goal is to generate scientifically sound information that feeds into the comprehensive management of this ecosystem. To do so, a set of biodiversity monitoring platforms has been established across the country, which have already served to answer socio-ecological questions related with deforestation drivers, citizen science, or the valuation of ecosystem services. Overall, this research agenda has nurtured the four lines that underpin the Program for the comprehensive management of dry forests in Colombia (knowledge management, preservation, restoration, and sustainable use), formulated by the Humboldt Institute, the United Nations Development Programme, and the Ministry of Environment in 2019. Many challenges are ahead, however, for a complex territory where multiple social actors and productive sectors coexist. The ultimate goal is to integrate all the dimensions of biodiversity to achieve a synthetic understanding of the functioning of the most endangered ecosystem in Colombia, and its relationship with local communities' wellbeing.
Cacao agroforestry systems have higher return on labor compared to full-sun monocultures			The global demand for cacao has recently increased. To meet this demand, the cultivated area has been expanded in tropical forest areas and production has intensified by replacing traditional agroforestry systems with mono-cultures. This has led to a loss of biodiversity in cacao-growing areas. More sustainable production systems such as agroforestry and organic managed systems are expected to yield less cacao, but by-crops and premium prices, respectively, might economically compensate for the lower yields. Here, we compared the productivity and the return on labor, that is the return per working day, of four different cacao production systems: agroforestry and monocultures under organic and conventional management. Cacao and by-crop yields, costs, revenues, and labor were registered during the first 5 years after establishment. Results show that cacao yields were, on average, 41% higher in monocultures, but the revenues derived from agroforestry by-crops economically overcompensated for this difference. Indeed, the return on labor across the years was roughly twice as high in the agroforestry systems compared to the monocultures. We found similar cacao yields and return on labor in conventional and organically managed agroforestry systems. However, in the monocultures, cacao yields were 48% lower under organic compared with conventional farming, but the return on labor was similar, mainly due to the higher costs associated to the conventional management. Overall, our findings show that cacao agroforestry systems have higher return on labor.
Cacao Cultivation under Diverse Shade Tree Cover Allows High Carbon Storage and Sequestration without Yield Losses			One of the main drivers of tropical forest loss is their conversion to oil palm, soy or cacao plantations with low biodiversity and greatly reduced carbon storage. Southeast Asian cacao plantations are often established under shade tree cover, but are later converted to non-shaded monocultures to avoid resource competition. We compared three co-occurring cacao cultivation systems (3 replicate stands each) with different shade intensity (non-shaded monoculture, cacao with the legume Gliricidia sepium shade trees, and cacao with several shade tree species) in Sulawesi (Indonesia) with respect to above-and belowground biomass and productivity, and cacao bean yield. Total biomass C stocks (aboveand belowground) increased fivefold from the monoculture to the multi-shade tree system (from 11 to 57 Mg ha(-1)), total net primary production rose twofold (from 9 to 18 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1)). This increase was associated with a 6fold increase in aboveground biomass, but only a 3.5fold increase in root biomass, indicating a clear shift in C allocation to aboveground tree organs with increasing shade for both cacao and shade trees. Despite a canopy cover increase from 50 to 93%, cacao bean yield remained invariant across the systems (variation: 1.1-1.2 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1)). The monocultures had a twice as rapid leaf turnover suggesting that shading reduces the exposure of cacao to atmospheric drought, probably resulting in greater leaf longevity. Thus, contrary to general belief, cacao bean yield does not necessarily decrease under shading which seems to reduce physical stress. If planned properly, cacao plantations under a shade tree cover allow combining high yield with benefits for carbon sequestration and storage, production system stability under stress, and higher levels of animal and plant diversity.
Calling for landscape-level assessments of participatory forestry?s role in improving forest biophysical conditions			Participatory forest management (PFM) has been applied to address declining tropical forest conditions. In the literature, there is a mixed evidence on PFM's role in improving forest conditions. However, most assessments ignore a relationship between household distance from PFM forests and impacts to non-PFM forests albeit being an essential aspect. Some PFM assessments show that distance matters in determining an individual's participation But, sparsely discussing the distance in relation to forest biophysical conditions in a landscape context. Drawing on the landscape approach and insights from Miombo forests of Kilwa in southern Tanzania, we illustrate the importance of studying PFM schemes in a landscape context to illuminate the relationship between household distance from PFM forests and impacts to non-PFM forests. Our study villages have forest abundances in areas between households and PFM forests. The average distance between households and PFM forests is 7.8 km. The long distances and forest abundances produce an 'outbound effect', whereby degrading and deforesting activities shift from PFM to non-PFM forests. Our analysis calls for landscape-level assessments that include forests under different governance regimes even those in unreserved landscapes - non-PFM forests. This is important for two reasons. First, for generating locally grounded contextual insights necessary for developing understandings of global forest conservation efforts from the 'ground up'. Second, for revealing correct forest conditions in the entire landscape critical in the light of ongoing national and international interests to manage trees inside and outside designated forest reserves for both carbon sequestration and landscape restoration.
CAMARV: Capacity Building for Mangrove Assessment, Restoration and Valuation in East Africa			Mangroves are tropical and sub-tropical forests that grow in the inter-tidal zone. They are valuable for many reasons: they provide shelter for juvenile fish, they protect shorelines from erosion, they filter sediments and pollution out of rivers and their wood can be used for timber and fuel. They are also amongst the most productive ecosystems on earth and are capable of storing large quantities of carbon both above-ground (as wood) and below-ground (as dead roots and carbon particles derived from the sea, and eventually as peat). This means losing them could accelerate global warming. Despite their importance, mangroves are being lost rapidly, with 1-2% of these forests destroyed each year. This project aims to help conserve and restore mangroves in East Africa. We will do this by developing the expertise and capacity needed to exploit new and emerging markets for 'ecosystem services'. In East Africa, most mangrove destruction occurs because of poverty; people need fuel and building materials and cannot afford to buy them from other sources, so use the mangroves despite often being aware of their importance. If money was available to communities for mangrove conservation and restoration this would provide a powerful conservation incentive. Our project consortium has experience in running community based forestry projects, including one in Mozambique that utilises voluntary payments for carbon sequestration by western companies and individuals to fund new tree planting and conservation. We will apply this experience to mangroves. We will train African scientists, NGO and community workers in a range of skills, and develop networks and methodologies that will help our African partner institutions exploit these new market opportunities. This will require training and development at each stage of the following project development plan: 1) Assessment of extent and quality of ecosystem We need to know how much mangrove forest is present and whether it is in good health (or for example whether is has been heavily poached for wood). This can be done using satellite imagery, but work on the ground ('groundtruthing') will be needed to relate the images to the reality, for example to determine the characteristic features of degraded woodland. 2) Assessment of threats We need to know which forests are most threatened, for example by looking at patterns of past land use or by measuring risk factors such as proximity to large cities. This is important for governments in their conservation planning, but also may be required in order to access conservation money from the new REDD (Reductions in Emissions from forest Destruction and Degradation) fund developed by the United Nations. 3) Assessment of ecosystem value We need to demonstrate the potential monetary value of the mangrove ecosystems, by 'pricing' the various services they provide. In some cases this will be useful as a tool for influencing decision makers - by giving a demonstration in 'hard cash' of the costs of destroying a mangrove - and in others it could translate to real income - for example by calculating the total value of the above and below ground carbon stored. 4) Assessment of barriers to the market or to conservation What factors are likely to prevent projects working successfully, and how can we address these? For example, it is essential that local communities see the benefits of any projects run on their behalf. This will require careful consultation and co-operation with local people and sensitivity to issues such as land management and tenure. We will train partners in techniques of participatory appraisal and in using GIS technology in mapping local resources. The results of this project development process will be proposals for full pilot projects and the establishment of an East African Advisory Group, based in Kenya, that will help oversee projects and encourage communication and good practice in the region.
Can agroforestry systems enhance biodiversity and ecosystem service provision in agricultural landscapes? A meta-analysis for the Brazilian Atlantic Forest			Human land use has extensively degraded ecosystems, leading to biodiversity losses and reducing the provision of ecosystem services (ES). Agroforestry systems have been recommended as a cost-effective strategy that integrates production and biodiversity conservation, yet few studies have quantified the capacity of agroforestry systems to conserve biodiversity and ES provision. Here we quantify the effects of different types of agroforestry systems on biodiversity and ES in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. We compared values of biodiversity and ES in different agroforestry systems with those found in conventional production systems and in old-growth forests (reference ecosystem). We assessed 72 studies encompassing 143 study sites and 1700 quantitative comparisons. In general, agroforestry and conventional production systems had lower values of mean effect size for biodiversity and ES provision than the reference systems. However, biodiverse agroforestry systems had higher values of mean effect size for biodiversity and ES provision than simple agroforestry systems and conventional production systems. The use of biodiverse agroforestry systems as an alternative production system reduces biodiversity loss and the negative impact on ES in production areas. Agroforestry systems provide up to 45% and 65% more benefits for biodiversity and ES levels, respectively, than conventional production systems; however, these benefits differ according to the type of agroforestry system. Our findings provide empirical evidence that a biodiverse agroforestry system is the best option to enhance biodiversity and ES in degraded areas where production systems based on sustainable management of natural resources are allowed by law. Our results support environmental public policies focused on environmentally-friendly land management practice and forest landscape restoration techniques.
Can silvopasture with arboreal legumes increase root mass at deeper soil layers and improve soil aggregation?			Silvopastoral system (SPS) is a multifunctional agroforestry practice. This study evaluate soil properties and root biomass under SPS in Pernambuco, Brazil. The experiment was established in 2011. The treatments were (1) monoculture signalgrass (MS) [Urochloa decumbens (Stapf.) R. D. Webster], (2) intercropped pasture of signalgrass with legume Gliricidia (SG) [Gliricidia sepium (Jacq.) Steud.], and (3) intercropped pasture of signalgrass with legume sabi & aacute; (SS) (Mimosa caesalpiniifolia Benth). Treatments were allocated in randomized complete block design with three replications. Samples were collected at 0- to 10-, 10- to 20-, 20- to 40-, 40- to 60-, 60- to 80-, 80- to 100-, and 100- to 120-cm soil depths. Soil samples were also taken from the native forest (NF) considered as a reference at the same Experimental Station. Legume SPS (SG and SS) presented greater root biomass per unit area compared to MS at 60- to 80-cm depth (p < 0.05); however, MS had greater root biomass per hectare at the top layers. The average values of the weighted mean diameter of soil aggregates were 3.20, 3.19, 3.07, and 3.27 mm in MS, SG, SS, and NF, respectively, at 0- to 120-cm depths. The SPS increased soil cation exchange capacity in deeper layers, indicating greater biological activity at greater depth. Grasslands and SPS store 235 Mg C ha-1 with 71% of that found in deeper layers (20-120 cm). SPS with signalgrass intercropped with arboreal legumes has potential to improve deep soil C storage and resilience of livestock systems in tropical regions.
Can we predict carbon stocks in tropical ecosystems from tree diversity? Comparing species and functional diversity in a plantation and a natural forest			Linking tree diversity to carbon storage can provide further motivation to conserve tropical forests and to design carbon-enriched plantations. Here, we examine the role of tree diversity and functional traits in determining carbon storage in a mixed-species plantation and in a natural tropical forest in Panama. We used species richness, functional trait diversity, species dominance and functional trait dominance to predict tree carbon storage across these two forests. Then we compared the species ranking based on wood density, maximum diameter, maximum height, and leaf mass per area (LMA) between sites to reveal how these values changed between different forests. Increased species richness, a higher proportion of nitrogen fixers and species with low LMA increased carbon storage in the mixed-species plantation, while a higher proportion of large trees and species with high LMA increased tree carbon storage in the natural forest. Furthermore, we found that tree species varied greatly in their absolute and relative values between study sites. Different results in different forests mean that we cannot easily predict carbon storage capacity in natural forests using data from experimental plantations. Managers should be cautious when applying functional traits measured in natural populations in the design of carbon-enriched plantations. © The Authors (2010). Journal compilation © New Phytologist Trust (2010).
Canopy Walkways for Conservation: A Tropical Biologist's Panacea or Fuzzy Metrics to Justify Ecotourism			0
Carbon accumulation in agroforestry systems is affected by tree species diversity, age and regional climate: A global meta-analysis			Aim Agroforestry is a globally practised system of land use for achieving greater and more diverse biomass production, but it has other ecological benefits, such as mitigation of climate change. Despite this, long-term carbon (C) accumulation in different components of agroforestry systems, the drivers for C accumulation and the linkages between tree biomass and soil C stocks remain unclear. Location Global. Time period From 1989 to 2019. Major taxa studied Trees. Methods Here, we report on a global meta-analysis based on 141 studies to identify patterns of C accumulation in tree-based agroforestry systems compared with sole cropland and pasture. Results We found that agroforestry systems had, on average, 46.1 Mg/ha (95% confidence interval, 36.4-55.8 Mg/ha) more C in tree biomass compared with sole cropland- or pasture-based land uses without trees. Furthermore, agroforestry systems with multiple tree species contained greater biomass C stocks and accumulated biomass C faster than systems with a single tree species. The effect of agroforestry practices on soil C stock increased with tree age, although such increases varied among climatic zones. Agroforestry systems in tropical zones had the ability to increase soil C to peak levels quickly, whereas soil C in temperate zones increased at a slower rate but peaked at a greater overall soil C level. Our structural equation model did not detect a direct linkage between biomass C and changes in total soil C stock in agroforestry systems. Main conclusions Our results demonstrate that planting multiple tree species in agroforestry systems is an important strategy to increase biomass C sequestration, with regional climate affecting the temporal change of soil C in response to agroforestry practices.
Carbon accumulation in the biomass and soil of different aged secondary forests in the humid tropics of Costa Rica			Efforts are needed in order to increase confidence for carbon accounts in the land use sector, especially in tropical forest ecosystems that often need to turn to default values given the lack of precise and reliable site specific data to quantify their carbon sequestration and storage capacity. The aim of this study was then to estimate biomass and carbon accumulation in young secondary forests, from 4 and up to 20years of age, as well as its distribution among the different pools (tree including roots, herbaceous understory, dead wood, litter and soil), in humid tropical forests of Costa Rica. Carbon fraction for the different pools and tree components (stem, branches, leaves and roots) was estimated and varies between 37.3% (±3.3) and 50.3% (±2.9). Average carbon content in the soil was 4.1% (±2.1). Average forest plant biomass was 82.2 (±47.9) Mgha-1 and the mean annual increment for carbon in the biomass was 4.2Mgha-1yr-1. Approximately 65.2% of total biomass was found in the aboveground tree components, while 14.2% was found in structural roots and the rest in the herbaceous vegetation and necromass. Carbon in the soil increased by 1.1Mgha-1yr-1. Total stored carbon in the forest was 180.4Mgha-1 at the age of 20years. In these forests, most of the carbon (51-83%) was stored in the soil. Models selected to estimate biomass and carbon in trees as predicted by basal area had R2 adjustments above 95%. Results from this study were then compared with those obtained for a variety of secondary and primary forests in different Latin-American tropical ecosystems and in tree plantations in the same study area. © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
Carbon allocation in a Costa Rican dry forest derived from tree ring analysis			The rising discussion on carbon balance of tropical forests often does not consider the sequestration. potential of secondary dry forests, which are becoming an increasing importance due to land use change and reforestation. We have developed an easy applicable tool for the estimation of biomass increment of tropical secondary forest stands on the base of tree ring analysis. The existence of annual rings was shown by a combination of anatomical examination and radiocarbon estimations. With tree ring analysis, forest inventories and destructive sampling the above-ground biomass increment of secondary forest stands of age between 9 and 48 years in the dry forest region of Guanacaste, Costa Rica were estimated. The above-ground biomass increment of the tree layer varies between 2.4 and 3.2 Mg/ha yr in different stands. Lianas contribute with up to 23% additional production. Differences in productivity among the stands along a chronosequence were not significant. The measured carbon allocation potential of 1.7-2.1 Mg C/ha yr lies in the range of reported values from other tropical dry forests and old growth humid forests as well. (C) 2012 Istituto Italian di Dendrocronologia. Published by Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
Carbon and nitrogen in a temperate agroforestry system: Using stable isotopes as a tool to understand soil dynamics			Natural exchanges of carbon (C) between the atmosphere, the oceans, and terrestrial ecosystems are currently being modified through human activities as a result of fossil fuel burning and the conversion of tropical forests to agricultural land. These activities have led to a steady increase of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) over the last two Centuries. The goal of this study was to determine the potential of temperate agroforestry systems to sequester C in soil. Therefore, changes in the soil organic C (SOC) and nitrogen (N) pools were quantified and the delta C-13 and delta N-15 stable isotope technique was applied to assess soil C and N dynamics in a 13-year old hybrid poplar alley cropping system in Southern Canada. Results from this study showed that after 13 years of alley cropping the SOC and N pools did not differ significantly (p = 0.01) with distance from the tree row, although a trend of a larger SOC and N pool near the tree row could be observed. Soil organic C after 13 years of alley cropping, was 19 mg C g(-1) compared to 11 mg C g(-1) upon initiation of agroforestry. Soil organic C and N were not evenly distributed throughout the plow layer. The largest C and N pool occurred in the top 20 cm, which is due to the accumulation of organic material in the upper horizons as a result of no-till cultivation. The entire soil, to a 40 cm depth, showed a delta(13) C shift to that of C-3 residue. This shift reflects the greater input of residues from C3 plants such as that derived from beans, wheat, and hybrid poplar leaf litterfall. The proportion of C derived from a C-3 source ranged from 64 to 69% to a 40 cm depth. The soil delta N-15 signature of this study is similar to that of mineral soil, and reflect values characteristic of N mineralization processes. However, the entire soil shows a positive shift in delta N-15 as a result of historical additions of manure and current use of mineral fertilizers, and ongoing processes of denitrification and nitrate leaching, which leads to an enrichment of the soil. (c) 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Carbon and Nitrogen Isotopic Survey of Flora of Mt. Pangasugan in Leyte, the Philippines			Stable isotope surveys provide valuable insights into nutrient cycling, food web dynamics, and forest ecosystem functioning, aiding in tracing nutrient sources, assessing carbon sequestration and climate change impacts, and understanding plant-water relations. In the Philippines, studies on carbon and nitrogen isotopic surveys or any other stable isotopic survey are very limited. Here, we aimed to survey the carbon and nitrogen isotopes component of the flora in Mt. Pangasugan at various altitudes. Leaves from three individuals from each species were collected and combined into one sample per species and analyzed using isotope ratio mass spectrometry for δ13C and δ15N signatures. A total of 104 plants coming from 82 species and 44 families were sampled. The result shows that the average foliar δ13C of the altitudinal sampling points sampled ranged from – 33.53‰ to – 35.84‰ while that of δ15N ranged from 0.80‰ to – 2.88‰. No clear trend was observed for foliar δ13C across elevation while that of δ15N showed decreased depletion with an increase in altitude. No correlation was observed for foliar δ13C and δ15N with any of the environmental parameters measured. The lack of correlation between foliar δ13C and δ15N with environmental parameters could be influenced by several factors like genetic factors, sampling scale, lag effects, and local adaptation of plants. By providing an overview of the isotopic baselines of the plants from Mt Pangasugan, this study fills in some of the gaps in the scarce research and data for stable isotopic profiling of the majority of the country's forest species. © 2024, Department of Science and Technology. All rights reserved.
Carbon and nutrient accumulation in secondary forests regenerating on pastures in central Amazonia			Over the past three decades, large expanses of forest in the Amazon Basin were converted to pasture, many of which later degraded to woody fallows and were abandoned. While the majority of tropical secondary forest (SF) studies have examined post-deforestation or post-agricultural succession, we examined post-pasture forest recovery in 10 forests ranging in age from 0 to 14 years since abandonment. We measured aboveground biomass and soil nutrients to 45 cm depth and computed total site carbon (C) and nutrient stocks to gain an understanding of the dynamics of nutrient and C buildup in regenerating SF in central Amazonia. Aboveground biomass accrual was rapid, 11.0 Mg·ha -1·yr-1, in the young SFs. Within 12-14 yr, they accumulated up to 128.1 Mg/ha of dry aboveground biomass, equivalent to 25-50% of primary forest biomass in the region. Wood nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) concentrations decreased with forest age. Aboveground P and calcium (Ca) stocks accumulated at a rate of 1.2 and 29.4 kg·ha-1·yr -1; extractable soil P stocks declined as forest age increased. Although soil stocks of exchangeable Ca (207.0 ± 23.7 kg/ha) and extractable P (8.3 ± 1.5 kg/ha) were low in the first 45 cm, both were rapidly translocated from soil to plant pools. Soil N stocks increased with forest age, probably due to N fixation, atmospheric deposition, and/or subsoil mining. Total soil C storage to 45 cm depth ranged between 42 and 84 Mg/ha, with the first 15 cm storing 40-45% of the total. Total C accrual (7.04 Mg C·ha-1·yr-1) in both aboveground and soil pools was similar or higher than values reported in other studies. Tropical SFs regrowing on lightly to moderately used pasture rapidly sequester C and rebuild total nutrient capital following pasture abandonment. Translocation of some nutrients from deep soil (>45 cm depth) may be important to sustaining productivity and continuing biomass accumulation in these forests. The soil pool represents the greatest potential for long-term C gains; however, soil nutrient deficits may limit future productivity.
Carbon and nutrient stocks in roots of forests at different altitudes in the Ecuadorian Andes			Carbon and nutrient stocks in below-ground biomass have rarely been investigated in tropical montane forests. In the present study, the amounts of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulphur, potassium. calcium and magnesium in root biomass were determined by soil coring and nutrient analysis in forests at three attitudes (1900, 2400 and 3000 m) in the Ecuadorian Andes. Root biomass increased markedly from 2.8 kg m(-2) at 1900 m and 4.0 kg m(-2) at 2400 to 6.8 kg m(-2) at 3000 m. The contribution of coarse roots (> 2 mm in diameter) to total root biomass increased from about 70%. at 1900 rn to about 80%, at higher altitudes. In fine roots (<= 2 mm in diameter), concentrations of nutrients except calcium markedly decreased with altitude. Therefore, the nutrient stocks in fine roots were similar at 1900 m and 3000 m for nitrogen and sulphur. and were even lower at higher altitudes for phosphorus, potassium and magnesium. In coarse roots of Graffenrieda emarginata concentrations of nutrients were substantially lower than in fine roots, and were little affected by attitude. The data suggest that the importance of coarse roots for long-term carbon and nutrient accumulation in total plant biomass increases with increasing altitude.
Carbon content and allometric models to estimate aboveground biomass for forest areas under restoration			Maximizing carbon sequestration is crucial to mitigate climate change and indicates that the restoration technique used was effective. To quantify carbon stock over time on areas being restored, suitable allometric equations are needed. These equations are lacking for the Atlantic forest, lacking even more for restoration sites, and rare for restoration areas implemented with the active method, technique often used to restore Atlantic forest areas. Thus, the objective of this study was 3-fold. First, to provide an equation to estimate aboveground biomass for 5-year-old Atlantic forest under restoration implemented with the active method. Second, to determine carbon content for the branch, stem, and foliage pools for those areas. Third, to present biomass, carbon content, and carbon stock benchmarks for 5-year-old areas under restoration implemented with the active method. Three sites were sampled with nine plots each, measuring tree height and diameter. One subplot was established in each plot, and all trees within it were harvested and had fresh weight measured and samples were taken to the laboratory to dry weight and carbon content determination. Ten models estimating biomass were fitted and tested. Mean carbon content in foliage, branch, stem, and the weighted average were 44.8, 44.5, 45.8, and 45.3%, respectively. Mean biomass and carbon stock were 20.19 +/- 0.146 Mg/ha and 9.73 Mg C/ha. We concluded that the equation that we provide is precise, and very necessary to estimate biomass for young restoration areas at the Atlantic forest.
Carbon costs and benefits of Indonesian rainforest conversion to plantations			Land-use intensification in the tropics plays an important role in meeting global demand for agricultural commodities but generates high environmental costs. Here, we synthesize the impacts of rainforest conversion to tree plantations of increasing management intensity on carbon stocks and dynamics. Rainforests in Sumatra converted to jungle rubber, rubber, and oil palm monocultures lost 116 Mg C ha(-1), 159 Mg C ha(-1), and 174 Mg C ha(-1), respectively. Up to 21% of these carbon losses originated from belowground pools, where soil organic matter still decreases a decade after conversion. Oil palm cultivation leads to the highest carbon losses but it is the most efficient land use, providing the lowest ratio between ecosystem carbon storage loss or net primary production (NPP) decrease and yield. The imbalanced sharing of NPP between short-term human needs and maintenance of long-term ecosystem functions could compromise the ability of plantations to provide ecosystem services regulating climate, soil fertility, water, and nutrient cycles.
Carbon cycling and storage in mangrove forests			Mangroves are ecologically and economically important forests of the tropics. They are highly productive ecosystems with rates of primary production equal to those of tropical humid evergreen forests and coral reefs. Although mangroves occupy only 0.5 of the global coastal area, they contribute 10-15 (24 Tg C y-1) to coastal sediment carbon storage and export 10-11 of the particulate terrestrial carbon to the ocean. Their disproportionate contribution to carbon sequestration is now perceived as a means for conservation and restoration and a way to help ameliorate greenhouse gas emissions. Of immediate concern are potential carbon losses to deforestation (90-970 Tg C y -1) that are greater than these ecosystems' rates of carbon storage. Large reservoirs of dissolved inorganic carbon in deep soils, pumped via subsurface pathways to adjacent waterways, are a large loss of carbon, at a potential rate up to 40 of annual primary production. Patterns of carbon allocation and rates of carbon flux in mangrove forests are nearly identical to those of other tropical forests. Copyright © 2014 by Annual Reviews.
Carbon cycling and storage in world forests: biome patterns related to forest age			Forest age, which is affected by stand-replacing ecosystem disturbances (such as forest fires, harvesting, or insects), plays a distinguishing role in determining the distribution of carbon (C) pools and fluxes in different forested ecosystems. In this synthesis, net primary productivity (NPP), net ecosystem productivity (NEP), and five pools of C (living biomass, coarse woody debris, organic soil horizons, soil, and total ecosystem) are summarized by age class for tropical, temperate, and boreal forest biomes. Estimates of variability in NPP, NEP, and C pools are provided for each biome-age class combination and the sources of variability are discussed. Aggregated biome-level estimates of NPP and NEP were higher in intermediate-aged forests (e.g., 30-120 years), while older forests (e.g., >120 years) were generally less productive. The mean NEP in the youngest forests (0-10 years) was negative (source to the atmosphere) in both boreal and temperate biomes (-0.1 and -1.9 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1), respectively). Forest age is a highly significant source of variability in NEP at the biome scale; for example, mean temperate forest NEP was -1.9, 4.5, 2.4, 1.9 and 1.7 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1) across five age classes (0-10, 11-30, 31-70, 71-120, 121-200 years, respectively). In general, median NPP and NEP are strongly correlated (R-2=0.83) across all biomes and age classes, with the exception of the youngest temperate forests. Using the information gained from calculating the summary statistics for NPP and NEP, we calculated heterotrophic soil respiration (R-h) for each age class in each biome. The mean R-h was high in the youngest temperate age class (9.7 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1)) and declined with age, implying that forest ecosystem respiration peaks when forests are young, not old. With notable exceptions, carbon pool sizes increased with age in all biomes, including soil C. Age trends in C cycling and storage are very apparent in all three biomes and it is clear that a better understanding of how forest age and disturbance history interact will greatly improve our fundamental knowledge of the terrestrial C cycle.
Carbon density and C-sequestration of tree plantation ecosystems in the mid-hills of the NW-Himalayas: Implications for climate change mitigation			In the current era of global warming, the Himalayan forests are under tremendous pressure due to intensified anthropogenic activity, resulting in the loss of forest diversity. However, the potential of carbon (C) sinks for increasing carbon storage and/or sequestration is still uncertain. Therefore, the present study was undertaken to examine the C-sequestration and mitigation potential of eight different tree plantations, namely: Pinus roxburghii, Quercus leucotrichophora, Acacia mollissima, Acacia catechu, Alnus nitida, Albizia procera, Ulmus villosa, and Eucalyptus tereticornis in the mid-hills of the Indian Himalayas. The soil samples used in our study (humus, 0-20cm, 20-40cm, and 40-100 cm) were used to determine the soil and ecosystem C-density. The analysis revealed that the maximum tree biomass (300.19 Mg ha(-1)), vegetation biomass (305.43 Mg ha(-1)), vegetation carbon (153.59 Mg ha(-1)), and total ecosystem C density (369.93 Mg ha(-1)) occurred under U. villosa plantation. Similarly, P. roxburghii plantations had the maximum detritus C-density (7.25 Mg ha(-1)), whereas A. nitida (224.71 Mg ha(-1)) had the maximum soil C-density. The highest C-sequestration was recorded under U. villosa (183.0 Mg ha(-1)). A significantly higher and lower rate of C-sequestration and CO2 mitigation was observed in Ulmus villosa (5.9 and 21.64 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1)) and Eucalyptus tereticornis (3.9 and 14.3 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1)). Our study found that indigenous tree species such as U. villosa, A. procera, A. nitida, and Q. leucotrichophora should be encouraged for afforestation on degraded lands to support climate change mitigation strategies in the sub-temperate forest ecosystem.
Carbon density and distribution of six Chinese temperate forests			Quantifying forest carbon (C) storage and distribution is important for forest C cycling studies and terrestrial ecosystem modeling. Forest inventory and allometric approaches were used to measure C density and allocation in six representative temperate forests of similar stand age (42-59 years old) and growing under the same climate in northeastern China. The forests were an aspen-birch forest, a hardwood forest, a Korean pine plantation, a Dahurian larch plantation, a mixed deciduous forest, and a Mongolian oak forest. There were no significant differences in the C densities of ecosystem components (except for detritus) although the six forests had varying vegetation compositions and site conditions. However, the differences were significant when the C pools were normalized against stand basal area. The total ecosystem C density varied from 186.9 tC hm(-2) to 349.2 tC hm(-2) across the forests. The C densities of vegetation, detritus, and soil ranged from 86.3-122.7 tC hm(-2), 6.5-10.5 tC hm(-2), and 93.7-220.1 tC hm(-2), respectively, which accounted for 39.7% +/- 7.1% (mean +/- SD), 3.3% +/- 1.1%, and 57.0% +/- 7.9% of the total C densities, respectively. The overstory C pool accounted for > 99% of the total vegetation C pool. The foliage biomass, small root (diameter < 5mm) biomass, root-shoot ratio, and small root to foliage biomass ratio varied from 2.08-4.72 tC hm(-2), 0.95-3.24 tC hm(-2), 22.0%-28.3%, and 34.5%-122.2%, respectively. The Korean pine plantation had the lowest foliage production efficiency (total biomass/foliage biomass: 22.6 g g(-1)) among the six forests, while the Dahurian larch plantation had the highest small root production efficiency (total biomass/small root biomass: 124.7 g g(-1)). The small root C density decreased with soil depth for all forests except for the Mongolian oak forest, in which the small roots tended to be vertically distributed downwards. The C density of coarse woody debris was significantly less in the two plantations than in the four naturally regenerated forests. The variability of C allocation patterns in a specific forest is jointly influenced by vegetation type, management history, and local water and nutrient availability. The study provides important data for developing and validating C cycling models for temperate forests.
Carbon Depletion by Plowing and its Restoration by No-Till Cropping Systems in Oxisols of Subtropical and Tropical Agro-Ecoregions in Brazil			The continuous use of plowing for grain production has been the principal cause of soil degradation. This project was formulated on the hypothesis that the intensification of cropping systems by increasing biomass-C input and its biodiversity under no-till (NT) drives soil restoration of degraded agro-ecosystem. The present study conducted at subtropical [Ponta Grossa (PG) site] and tropical regions [Lucas do Rio Verde, MT (LRV) site] in Brazil aimed to (i) assess the impact of the continuous plow-based conventional tillage (CT) on soil organic carbon (SOC) stock vis-a-vis native vegetation (NV) as baseline; (ii) compare SOC balance among CT, NT cropping systems, and NV; and (iii) evaluate the redistribution of SOC stock in soil profile in relation to soil resilience. The continuous CT decreased the SOC stock by 058 and 067MgCha(-1)y(-1) in the 0- to 20-cm depth at the PG and LRV sites, respectively, and the rate of SOC sequestration was 059 for the PG site and ranged from 048 to 130MgCha(-1)y(-1) for the LRV site. The fraction of C input by crop residues converted into SOC stock was 142% at the PG site and 205% at the LRV site. The SOC resilience index ranged from 029 to 079, and it increased with the increase in the C input among the NT systems and the SOC sequestration rates at the LRV site. These data support the hypothesis that NT cropping systems with high C input have a large potential to reverse the process of soil degradation and SOC decline. Copyright (c) 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Carbon dioxide (CO2) storage and sequestration of land cover in the Leyte Geothermal Reservation			This study estimated the existing stored carbon © and rate of sequestration by vegetation that can potentially serve as a sink for the carbon dioxide emitted from eight geothermal plants in Leyte Geothermal Reservation, Philippines. For the 20,438 ha watershed in the vicinity of the power project, the total C storage is 3.84 Mt C (14.10 Mt CO2) while C sequestration based on biomass change was 47.35 kt C (173.77 kt CO2). Relative to power plant emission, the C stored in the reserve is equivalent to more than 22 years of CO2 emission. Annual C sequestration is 27% of CO2 emission per year. For the next 25 years, two scenarios were projected. Under Scenario I ("Business as Usual"), the forest reserve will be able to store and sequester more than 32 years of CO2 emission from the power plants. Under Scenario II ("Accelerated Reforestation"), the reserve will be able to store and sequester about 34 years of CO2 emission. In addition, the rate of C sequestration based on biomass change in vegetation was recorded to assess the optimum land use that can absorb the carbon dioxide emitted by the power project. These are as follows: tree plantations (10.09 tC/ha/yr)>coconut (4.78 tC/ha/yr)>brushland (4.29 tC/ha/yr)>natural forest (0.92 tC/ha/yr). In terms of cost, the power project operator is spending P1.22 per t CO2 (P4.4 or US$0.12 per tC for every year of C storage and sequestration. For 25 years, the total cost is P30.40 per tCO2 (P111.5 or US$2.94 per tC) which is comparable to the cost of C offset in other tropical countries. © 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
Carbon Dioxide and Methane Fluxes from Various Vegetation Communities of a Natural Tropical Freshwater Wetland in Different Seasons			Abstract: Emission of carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) is of interest in tropical wetland studies because the high and relatively stable temperatures year-round enhance both primary productivity and organic matter decomposition. Nonetheless, there is scarcity of data on emission of these carbon-based greenhouse gases from tropical wetlands. We investigated CO2 and CH4 fluxes from a natural tropical freshwater wetland in Uganda under different dominant vegetation communities, i.e., Cyperus papyrus (Papyrus), Typha latifolia (Typha) and Phragmites mauritianus (Phragmites), during the dry and wet seasons. Gas samples were collected using static chambers and analyzed by gas chromatography. Fluxes (mg C m−2 h−1) of both CO2 and CH4 from Papyrus (732.9 ± 48.7 [mean ± standard error] and 14.1 ± 0.8, respectively) and from Typha (759.7 ± 51.4 and 13.5 ± 1.2, respectively) insignificantly varied (p > 0.05) during the dry season. However, CO2 and CH4 fluxes from both vegetation communities during this season were significantly lower and higher (p < 0.05), respectively, than in Phragmites (871.8 ± 56.7 and 8.7 ± 0.5). During the wet season, no significant variation (p > 0.05) occurred among the three vegetation communities for both CO2 and CH4 fluxes (Phragmites: 691.9 ± 55.8 and 15.6 ± 1.1, Typha: 682.0 ± 53.3 and 16.3 ± 1.2, and Papyrus: 651.2 ± 49.0 and 17.1 ± 1.7, respectively). Water level was the main driver of CO2 and CH4 fluxes from the wetland, suggesting its importance in any efforts to regulate fluxes of both gases in tropical wetlands. We estimated total annual CO2 and CH4 emissions from Uganda’s wetland soils in the ranges of 159.5 × 106–180.2 × 106 t C (tonnes of carbon) and 278.9 × 104–359.7 × 104 t C, respectively. Highlights: • Vegetation community does not influence CO2 and CH4 fluxes from a tropical freshwater wetland soil under continuous flooding • High water level in a tropical freshwater wetland lowers CO2 flux but increases CH4 flux • A wetland’s role in climate change mitigation is a function of carbon sequestration and emission © 2021, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG part of Springer Nature.
Carbon dynamics and land use carbon footprints in mangrove-converted aquaculture: The case of the Mahakam Delta, Indonesia			Mangroves provide a number of important ecosystem services to humanity but their persistence is threatened from deforestation, conversion, and climate change. The Mahakam Delta was once among the largest mangrove forests in Southeast Asia comprising 2% of Indonesia's total mangroves. Currently, about 62% of this extensive mangrove in the Mahakam Delta has been lost mainly due to conversion into aquaculture. To understand the impacts of mangrove conversion on carbon losses and therefore their values in climate change mitigation, we sampled 10 intact mangroves and 10 abandoned shrimp ponds to quantify: (1) the total ecosystem carbon stocks; (2) potential CO2 emissions arising from mangrove conversion to shrimp ponds; and (3) the land use carbon footprints of shrimp production. The mean ecosystem carbon stocks in shrimp ponds (499 ± 56 Mg C ha−1) was less than half of the relatively intact mangroves (1023 ± 87 Mg C ha−1). This equates to a potential annual emission factor over 16 years following mangrove conversion of 120 Mg CO2e ha−1 yr−1, which is similar with the total carbon loss from land conversion in freshwater tropical peat swamp forests. Inclusion of C losses from land use/cover change in a life cycle analysis (i.e., the land use carbon footprint) resulted in an estimated 2250 kg CO2-e emitted for every kg of shrimp produced in mangrove-converted ponds. Conversion of mangroves to shrimp ponds in the Mahakam Delta resulted in a carbon loss equivalent to 226 years of soil carbon accumulation in natural mangroves. Conservation of mangroves are of great value for inclusion in climate change mitigation strategies because of their large carbon stocks, the large carbon emissions generated from land use, and the potentially long period of time required to recover carbon stocks following abandonment. © 2018 Elsevier B.V.
Carbon dynamics in slash-and-burn agriculture and land use alternatives of the humid forest zone in Cameroon			One of the environmental consequences of slash-and-burn farming is the loss of forest system carbon which in turn contributes to atmospheric change and impacts upon global climates. International attention has become focused upon the development of alternatives to slash-and-burn agriculture to alleviate poverty, protect biodiversity and reduce climate change. Before alternative land use systems can be evaluated in terms of carbon sequestration, baseline measurements of carbon dynamics resulting from current practices are required. We have characterized the carbon stocks in six slash-and-burn chronosequences in the humid forest zone of Cameroon, Each chronosequence consisted of original forest, two year-old cropland, a cacao plantation, bush fallow, tree fallow and secondary forest. Four, nine and seventeen years, respectively, had passed since the original forest was cleared for the latter three land uses. At each of 36 site x land use combinations, tree, understorey, litter, root and soil (0-50 cm) carbon were measured in five 100 m(2) quadrates, The original forest contained 308 t C ha(-1) and lost 220 t C ha(-1) upon conversion to agriculture, The most vulnerable carbon pool was the above ground tree biomass and the most stable was soil organic matter. Carbon reaccumulated in the recovering fallows at a rate of 9.4 t C ha(-1) yr(-1) (r = 0.83). When these results were extrapolated using a geographic information system, deforestation rates in Southern Cameroon were estimated to be 1,355 km(-2) yr(-1) between 1973 and 1988 resulting in annual forest system carbon losses of 13.5 million t C. During the course of this study, three alternatives to slash-and-burn were identified: commercial cassava cultivation, improved forest conversion, and stratified agroforestry. These alternative land uses have the potential to reduce C losses over current practices by 10, 55 and 75 t C ha(-1), respectively, and also differ greatly in their potential to alleviate rural poverty, protect biodiversity and deflect additional deforestation. (C) 1997 Elsevier Science B.V.
CARBON DYNAMICS OF MEXICAN TROPICAL EVERGREEN FORESTS - INFLUENCE OF FORESTRY MITIGATION OPTIONS AND REFINEMENT OF CARBONFLUX ESTIMATES			Tropical evergreen forests (TEF) of Mexico were deforested al a rate of approximately 206,000 ha/yr with a carbon (C) efflux of nearly 21 Tg/yr between 1980 and 1993. Land formerly occupied by these forests have potential to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. In this paper, we model two management scenarios in southeast Mexico and their effects on CO2 flux. We also model two scenarios to examine possible adjustments to the region's net C-flux estimate by accounting for regrowth of degraded forests and increase of C stocks in mature forests. Potential TEF distribution in the study area and current forest inventory data from Mexico's National Periodic Forest Inventory are compared to calculate areas available for modeling land-based C flux. The CO2FIX model was used to evaluate potential C sequestration of mahogany plantations. Possible C conservation through reduced deforestation in TEF is evaluated by a simple spreadsheet model, as are improvements to the region's C-flux estimates from degraded land regrowth and C accretion in mature forests. Total C sequestration modeled in the four scenarios accounted for up to 31 Tg/yr. This illustrates the significant impacts that land management may have on carbon balance estimates and accounting for a portion of the missing global carbon sink.
Carbon emissions and sequestration potential of Central African ecosystems			Joint Implementation under the Climate Change Convention and Clean Development Mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol require a scientific understanding of current carbon stocks, fluxes, and sequestration potential, especially in tropical ecosystems where there are large carbon reservoirs, significant carbon emissions, and large land areas available for reforestation. Central Africa contains 10% of the world's remaining tropical moist forests and has received little attention in carbon studies. In 1980, above-ground carbon stocks in the central African ecosystem were 28.92 Pg and were reduced to 24.79 Pg by 1990. Improved forest management aimed at increasing biomass density could sequester 18.32 Pg of carbon, and over 500 000 km2 formerly forested land will be available by 2050 for reforestation with a capacity to offset 10 Pg carbon. Understanding the spatial distribution of biomass carbon and sequestration potential will be essential for carbon trading initiatives through Joint Implementation and Clean Development Mechanism.
Carbon emissions from Mexican forests: Current situation and long-term scenarios			Estimates of carbon emissions from the forest sector in Mexico are derived for the year 1985 and for two contrasting scenarios in 2025. The analysis covers both tropical and temperate closed forests. In the mid-1980s, approximately 804,000 ha/year of closed forests suffered major perturbations, of which 668,000 ha was deforestation. Seventy-five percent of total deforestation is concentrated in tropical forests. The resulting annual carbon balance from land-use change is estimated at 67.0 x 10(6) tons/year, which lead to net emissions of 52.3 x 10(6) tons/year accounting for the carbon uptake in restoration plantations and degraded forest lands. This last figure represents approximately 40% of the country's estimated annual total carbon emissions for 1985-1987. The annual carbon balance from the forest sector in 2025 is expected to decline to 28.0 x 10(6) t in the reference scenario and to become negative (i.e., a carbon sink), 62.0 x 10(6) t in the policy scenario. A number of policy changes are identified that would help achieve the carbon sequestration potential identified in this last scenario.
Carbon flux and budget of agroforestry			The agroforestry system (AFs) has a diverse range of products through agriculture systems, including planting trees into the agricultural landscape. Agroforestry (AF) farming techniques are used extensively in tropical and underdeveloped nations, with an estimated 1.2 billion people worldwide relying on them. Over the last century, the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases (GHGs) has increased in the atmosphere. Tropical forests have been converted into agricultural land. According to recent forecasts, the world's AF area will grow significantly soon and undoubtedly influence carbon (C) flow. The protocol has already authorized emissions offsets through reforestation or afforestation, and agricultural soil sequestrate C has been added later. Soil organic carbon (SOC) in the soil increases in many ways, including conservation tillage, fertilizer, pesticide management, and efficient irrigation, combined with the increase in the yields and by reducing the SOC loss from soil. Afforestation is combined with the production of agricultural techniques to reduce the C emissions in the atmosphere and mitigate the effects of climate change on ecosystems. The analysis of AF at the economic level provides a basis for calculating financial demands and feasibility, highlighting trade-offs among different advantages, and tracking economic efficiency. Financial budgeting is a highly adaptable method. There is a “planning horizon” of more than one season in the AFs due to the addition of tree components as compared to the agricultural fields. A “planning horizon” is a period over which costs and revenues of all practices are realized. AFs can improve soil fertility, minimize erosion, improve water quality, promote biodiversity, improve esthetics, and sequester C. AF land use systems can sequester more CO2 than croplands; this is highly dependent on the local environment, as well as the socioeconomic, biological, and physical characteristics of the system of land use. Generally, the key objective of the AFs is to enhance the current conditions by improving the quality and quantity of the output, generating a sustainable base for agricultural products, reducing harm to the environment, and raising the living standard of the human population. © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Carbon flux and land use/cover change in a Himalayan watershed			0
Carbon from above-ground biomass and litter accumulated in an Atlantic Forest fragment			This work aimed to quantify carbon (C) stocks from above-ground biomass (AGB) and accumulated litter in a fragment of the Atlantic Forest biome (edge and interior) in Northeastern Brazil. The study was carried out in areas with native vegetation, in a fragment of Atlantic tropical forest, municipality of Sirinhaém, Pernambuco, Brazil. AGB was quantified using the allometric equation proposed for tropical rainforests. The samples of plant material were dried at 60°C, weighed and ground, and then taken to the laboratory for analysis of organic C contents by dry combustion. AGB stocks were not different between the fragment edge and interior environments. The AGB stratification into diameter classes showed that large trees are important for the storage of biomass in trees. Litter biomass stocks also did not differ between edge and interior. The branch compartment showed higher levels of C. The C-AGB stocks were not different between edge and interior, similar to the C-litter. C stocks did not differ between interior and edge among tree species, except for Protium heptaphyllum, which had the highest C stocks at edges. With this study, we hope to contribute to improving C estimates in fragmented forests to support forest conservation policies, support REDD+ projects, and access to carbon credits. © 2022. Australian Journal of Crop Science. All Rights Reserved.
Carbon management practices and benefits in Conservation Agriculture systems: carbon sequestration rates			0
CARBON MITIGATION SCENARIOS FOR MEXICAN FORESTS - METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND RESULTS			This paper examines three future scenarios for carbon emissions and sequestration in Mexican forests. The first is a Reference scenario that incorporates low and high emission estimates derived from different assumptions of deforestation rates in Mexico; the second is a Policy scenario that incorporates seven carbon mitigation options for reducing future net car bon emissions from the forest sector; and the third is a Technical Potential scenario that shows the maximum technically-feasible carbon sequestration achievable in Mexican forests by the year 2030. A consistent method for estimating the net unit carbon sequestration associated with different carbon mitigation options in the forest sector provides the basis for estimating the carbon implications of the different scenarios. The study suggests that cumulative carbon sequestration ranges from 2.2 to 4.4 gigatons of cal bon (GtonC) by the year 2030, depending on the scenario. Realizing this carbon sequestration potential could significantly offset emissions from the energy sector. Management of native temperate and tropical forests, and restoration of degraded forest lands, particularly when linked to energy plantations, offer the most promising alternatives for carbon sequestration.
Carbon neutral? No change in mineral soil carbon stock under oil palm plantations derived from forest or non-forest in Indonesia			Sustainability criteria for palm oil production guide new planting toward non-forest land cover on mineral soil, avoiding carbon debts caused by forest and peat conversion. Effects on soil carbon stock (soil C-stock) of land use change trajectories from forest and non-forest to oil palm on mineral soils include initial decline and subsequent recovery, however modeling efforts and life-cycle accounting are constrained by lack of comprehensive data sets; only few case studies underpin current debate. We analyzed soil C-stock (Mg ha(-1)), soil bulk density (BD, g cm(-3)) and soil organic carbon concentration (C-org, %) from 155 plots in 20 oil palm plantations across the major production areas of Indonesia, identifying trends during a production cycle on 6 plantations with sufficient spread in plot age. Plots were sampled in four management zones: weeded circle (WC), interrow (IR), frond stacks (FS), and harvest paths (HP); three depth intervals 0-5, 5-15 and 15-30 cm were sampled in each zone. Compared to the initial condition, increases in Core (16.2%) and reduction in BD (8.9%) in the FS zone, was compensated by decrease in C-org (21.4%) and increase in BD (6.6%) in the HP zone, with intermediate results elsewhere. For a weighted average of the four management zones and after correction for equal mineral soil basis, the net temporal trend in soil C-stock in the top 30 cm of soil across all data was not significantly different from zero in both forest- and non-forest-derived oil palm plantations. Individual plantations experienced net decline, net increase or U-shaped trajectories. The 2% difference in mean soil C-stock in forest and non-forest derived oil palm plantations was statistically significant (p < 0.05). Unless soil management changes strongly from current practice, it is appropriate for C footprint calculations to assume soil C-stock neutrality on mineral soils used for oil palm cultivation. (C) 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Carbon offsets for conservation and development in Indonesia?			The logic of the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and other such 'carbon (C) offsets' rests on the notion that the opportunity cost of reducing C emissions is lower in developing countries, creating opportunities for mutually beneficial C trading. While the CDM may offer significant gross financial benefits, there has been little analysis of the opportunity costs of foregone resource exploitation and development opportunities. In addition to assessing the potential for net benefits, this paper also considers the practical implications for design and implementation of C offsets for forest conservation and agroforestation in Indonesia. Virtually nothing is known about these administrative factors, and their associated costs, which can also play a decisive role in feasibility of C offset schemes. Data are from field studies in the lowlands of the Indonesian island of Sumatra, where forests and derived land uses are broadly representative of the lowland humid tropical rainforest systems of insular South-East Asia. These data are the basis for assessing the trade-offs between natural forest protection for C sequestration and conversion to other land uses to meet national development objectives that directly affect people's livelihoods. Carbon stocks are analyzed in terms of 'time-averaged' C, an indicator developed for this project. Opportunity costs of land-use alternatives are estimated using standard techniques for economic assessment of investment projects in developing countries. The study finds that imputed timber values are a significant share of the opportunity costs of forest conservation, even for conservative estimates of timber prices. The question of compensating for these foregone values raises complex questions regarding the political economy of Indonesia, since property rights over these resources are highly contentious. These controversies over property rights are also examined within the context of recurrent smoke pollution from land fires in Indonesia, that (among other problems) contribute to greenhouse gas emissions. This smoke is symptomatic of deeper political and institutional problems that raise questions about the permanence of C storage through land-use practices in Indonesia. In comparison to forest conservation, C offsets through agroforestation seem more feasible in Indonesia because property rights over timber from planted trees would be easier to establish and enforce than property rights over timber from natural forests. Although results in this paper look promising, there is still much to be learned about implementation costs, even for the 'easier' case of agroforestation.
Carbon outcomes of major land-cover transitions in SE Asia: great uncertainties and REDD plus policy implications			Policy makers across the tropics propose that carbon finance could provide incentives for forest frontier communities to transition away from swidden agriculture (slash-and-burn or shifting cultivation) to other systems that potentially reduce emissions and/or increase carbon sequestration. However, there is little certainty regarding the carbon outcomes of many key land-use transitions at the center of current policy debates. Our meta-analysis of over 250 studies reporting above- and below-ground carbon estimates for different land-use types indicates great uncertainty in the net total ecosystem carbon changes that can be expected from many transitions, including the replacement of various types of swidden agriculture with oil palm, rubber, or some other types of agroforestry systems. These transitions are underway throughout Southeast Asia, and are at the heart of REDD+ debates. Exceptions of unambiguous carbon outcomes are the abandonment of any type of agriculture to allow forest regeneration (a certain positive carbon outcome) and expansion of agriculture into mature forest (a certain negative carbon outcome). With respect to swiddening, our meta-analysis supports a reassessment of policies that encourage land-cover conversion away from these [especially long-fallow] systems to other more cash-crop-oriented systems producing ambiguous carbon stock changes including oil palm and rubber. In some instances, lengthening fallow periods of an existing swidden system may produce substantial carbon benefits, as would conversion from intensely cultivated lands to high-biomass plantations and some other types of agroforestry. More field studies are needed to provide better data of above- and below-ground carbon stocks before informed recommendations or policy decisions can be made regarding which land-use regimes optimize or increase carbon sequestration. As some transitions may negatively impact other ecosystem services, food security, and local livelihoods, the entire carbon and noncarbon benefit stream should also be taken into account before prescribing transitions with ambiguous carbon benefits.
Carbon pools recover more quickly than plant biodiversity in tropical secondary forests			Although increasing efforts are being made to restore tropical forests, little information is available regarding the time scales required for carbon and plant biodiversity to recover to the values associated with undisturbed forests. To address this knowledge gap, we carried out a meta-analysis comparing data from more than 600 secondary tropical forest sites with nearby undisturbed reference forests. Above-ground biomass approached equivalence to reference values within 80 years since last disturbance, whereas below-ground biomass took longer to recover. Soil carbon content showed little relationship with time since disturbance. Tree species richness recovered after about 50 years. By contrast, epiphyte richness did not reach equivalence to undisturbed forests. The proportion of undisturbed forest trees and epiphyte species found in secondary forests was low and changed little over time. Our results indicate that carbon pools and biodiversity show different recovery rates under passive, secondary succession and that colonization by undisturbed forest plant species is slow. Initiatives such as the Convention on Biological Diversity and REDD{thorn} should therefore encourage active management to help to achieve their aims of restoring both carbon and biodiversity in tropical forests. © 2013 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society.
Carbon recovery in secondary forests: Insights from three West African countries			Despite the potential of secondary tropical forests to store and sequester substantial amounts of carbon, little is known about their above-ground carbon (AGC) stocks and the factors affecting them, especially in West Africa. This information is of key importance if the countries in this region want to achieve their forest restoration and climate mitigation commitments. To fill in this gap, we investigated how environmental and local management (e.g. remnant trees) factors influenced AGC and tree species richness in secondary forests at seven sites across Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia. We established 140 plots (20 x 50 m) in fallows <15 years (20 plots per site) and sampled all trees >= 10 cm diameter following standardised protocols. We found that AGC stocks and tree species richness increased with fallow age, but were highly variable across sites driven by both climatic and local management practices. While drought stress negatively affected AGC, remnant trees had a positive effect. AGC recovery rates ranged between 0.72 Mg C ha(-1) y(-1) (second driest site) and 13.76 Mg C ha(-1) y(-1) (wettest site). Given its low cost, our findings highlight the potential of passive restoration in secondary forests for carbon sequestration, particularly in wetter landscapes and areas with remnant trees from prior land use.
Carbon sequestration and biodiversity of re-growing miombo woodlands in Mozambique			Land management in tropical woodlands is being used to sequester carbon (C), alleviate poverty and protect biodiversity, among other benefits. Our objective was to determine how slash-and-burn agriculture affected vegetation and soil C stocks and biodiversity on an area of miombo woodland in Mozambique, and how C stocks and biodiversity responded once agriculture was abandoned. We sampled twenty-eight 0. 125 ha plots that had previously been cleared for subsistence agriculture and had been left to re-grow for 2 to similar to 25 years, and fourteen 0.25 ha plots of protected woodlands, recording stem diameter distributions and species, collecting wood for density determination, and soil from 0 to 0.3 m for determination of %C and bulk density. Clearance for agriculture reduced stem wood C stocks by 19.0 t C ha(-1). There were significant relationships between period of re-growth and basal area, stem numbers and stein biomass. During re-growth, wood C stocks accumulated at 0.7 t C ha(-1) year(-1). There was no significant difference in stem C stocks on woodlands and on abandoned farmland 20-30 years old. Soil C stocks in the top 0.3 m on abandoned land had a narrower range (21-74 t C ha(-1)) than stocks in woodland soils (18-140 t C ha(-1)). There was no discernible increase in soil C stocks with period of re-growth, suggesting that the rate of accumulation of organic matter in these soils was very slow. The re-growing plots did not contain the defining miombo species, and total stem numbers were significantly greater than in woodland plots, but species richness and diversity were similar in older abandonments and miombo woodlands. Wood C stocks on abandoned farmland were capable of recovery within 2-3 decades, but soil C stocks did not change on this time-scale. Woodland soils were capable of storing > 100 t C ha(-1), whereas no soil on a re-growing area exceeded 74 t C ha(-1), so there is a potential for C sequestration in soils on abandoned farmland. Management should focus on identifying C-rich soils, conserving remaining woodlands to protect soil C and preserve defining miombo species, and on investigating whether fire control on recovering woodland can stimulate accumulation of soil C and greater tree biomass, and restore defining miombo species. (c) 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Carbon sequestration and nutrient cycling in agroforestry systems on degraded soils of Eastern Amazon, Brazil			Land degradation and rural poverty are widespread in the Eastern Brazilian Amazon. Slash-and-burn agriculture is the main source of livelihood in small farms but also a driver of degradation. In this context, Agroforestry Systems (AFS) are an alternative for climate change mitigation and land restoration, allying food security and ecosystem services reestablishment. We evaluated the increment of carbon stock (aboveground biomass, necromass, and soil) and standing litter nutrients in AFS and compared with natural succession. Treatments were established in 30 x 30 m plots with six repetitions (randomized block design) on a very degraded soil at UEMA School farm, in Eastern Amazon. In AFS, the 17 planted tree species of local interest (for fruit, timber, N-fixing) were associated with agricultural species and fertilized according to local standards. Carbon stock was measured in 2012 before the experiment setup (baseline) and in 2018. Aboveground carbon increment (Mg ha(-1)) was higher in AFS (26.79 +/- 23.41) than in natural succession (1.13 +/- 1.5), because of tree and shrub cover as a result of planting efforts. We found very high variability in plant development and carbon sequestration between plots. Soil organic carbon did not present increment between 2012 and 2018, and no differences between treatments were found in 2018. Species choice plays a keyhole for carbon sequestration and nutrient cycling reestablishment. Areas under natural succession presented very low resilience, evidencing the need for active restoration. Diverse agroforestry systems are an efficient strategy to restore forest cover on degraded soils of Amazon allying ecosystem services reestablishment and production.
Carbon sequestration and turnover in semiarid savannas and dry forest			Data on carbon and biomass budgets under different land use in tropical savannas and some dry forests are reviewed. Global data show wide ranges of biomass carbon stocks (20-150 Mg C ha(-1)), net primary production (2-15 Mg C ha(-1)y(-1)) and litter production (2-10 Mg C ha(-1)y(-1)) for the semiarid tropics. Although ranges for soil carbon are also wide, an average figure for the top 20 cm is probably 10 g C kg(-1), or about 25 Mg C ha(-1). In order to arrive at a better understanding of C budgets and their controls, two regional reviews are presented for NE Brazil and W. Africa.In NE Brazil approximately 40% of the lands have "near-climax" native vegetation. Less than 10% of the area is planted annually, but about 3-4 times that area is affected by shifting cultivation which has an average cycle of 5 y arable use followed by 20 y or more recovery. Standing biomass of native caatinga shows nearly the full global range with 2-50 Mg C ha(-1), Litter fall around 1-2 Mg C ha(-1)y(-1) is partly decomposed and partly consumed by animals, resulting in low average soil C levels near 8 g kg(-1), or 20 Mg C ha(-1). Under cultivation, C sequestration is decreased, and soils lose approximately half their C stocks before being abandoned.In W. Africa between 50-70% of the land is under a management regime with minimal C returns to the soils. Overgrazing and over-exploitation for fuel wood has resulted in land degradation. Short fallow periods on cultivated lands have caused serious declines in soil C stocks. Both C sequestration and stocks are therefore lower in W. Africa than in NE Brazil.Improvements in the C sequestration in these semi arid regions depend on an increase in crop production under suitable rotations, improved fallow and animal husbandry, and a limitation on biomnass burning. Use of fertilizer is required for improved productivities but socioeconomic constraints largely prevent such improvements, resulting in a very limited scope for changes in soil C management.
Carbon Sequestration Benefits of the Makiling Forest Reserve, Philippines			This paper discusses carbon sequestration in Makiling Forest Reserve (MFR) and in the Philippines in general in relation to mitigating climate change. First, it estimates the values of carbon sequestration benefits for MFR and the Philippines. Then it reviews the policies and practices in the country pertaining to carbon sequestration. Then it determines the feasibility of different climate abatement projects, including reforestation, tree planting and agroforestry activities. The current carbon content in the biomass of the plant covers in MFR is estimated to be 109 tons per hectare. Accordingly, the total carbon content for the whole of MFR is 167,277 tons. The equivalent in terms of carbon dioxide removed from the atmosphere is 669,108 tons, amounting to a total sequestration value of P1.5 billion or US$ 3.8 million. The capitalized value derived from MFR carbon sequestration is P15.06 billion or US$1.13 billion. Conservation of existing forests reduces oxidized carbon releases into the atmosphere. Agroforestry systems also have the potential to replace destructive shifting agricultural practices. Other strategies for increasing the carbon sequestration capacity of forests is reforestation, and increasing the amount of carbon being stored in forest ecosystems. The latter involves planting of fast-growing species and high-timber-yielding varieties. The sustainable management of the forests in MFR would contribute significant greenhouse benefits by enhancing long-term storage of carbon in the ecosystem.
Carbon Sequestration by Tropical Trees and Crops: A Case Study of Oil Palm			Carbon sequestration by photosynthetic organisms is the principal mechanism for the absorption of atmospheric CO2. Since the 1950s, however, the global carbon cycle has been distorted as increased anthropogenic CO2 emissions have greatly outstripped rates of carbon sequestration, with a 50% increase in atmospheric CO2 levels in less than a century, leading to perturbation of global climate systems and threatening food production and social stability. In order to address the current imbalance in CO2 flux, it is important to both reduce net emissions and promote sequestration. To address the latter issue, we need to better understand the roles of systems, such as natural forests, coastal wetlands, and tropical croplands, in carbon sequestration and devise strategies to facilitate net CO2 uptake. Carbon sequestration by tropical trees and crops already removes in excess of 1000 million tonnes of atmospheric CO2 annually but is threatened by anthropogenic activities such as deforestation and the drainage of carbon-rich peatland. Improvements in carbon sequestration can be achieved by policies such as growing tropical crops as part of agroforestry systems, enforcing limitations on deforestation and the use of peatland, and auditing the carbon impact of major cropping systems in order to focus on those crops that deliver both high yields and carbon efficiency. As an initial step in this process, a detailed case study is presented on the tropical tree crop, the African oil palm, Elaeis guineensis. This analysis includes a comparison of the carbon sequestration potential of oil palm with that of tropical forests and other oil crops, the biomass sequestration potential of oil palm and current and future strategies aimed at achieving net-zero carbon targets for oil palm and related crops.
Carbon sequestration in freshwater wetlands in Costa Rica and Botswana			Tropical wetlands are typically productive ecosystems that can introduce large amounts of carbon into the soil. However, high temperatures and seasonal water availability can hinder the ability of wetland soils to sequester carbon efficiently. We determined the carbon sequestration rate of 12 wetland communities in four different tropical wetlands-an isolated depressional wetland in a rainforest, and a slow flowing rainforest swamp, a riverine flow-through wetland with a marked wet and dry season, a seasonal floodplain of an inland delta-with the intention of finding conditions that favor soil carbon accumulation in tropical wetlands. Triplicate soil cores were extracted in these communities and analyzed for total carbon content to determine the wetland soil carbon pool. We found that the humid tropic wetlands had greater carbon content (P ≤ 0.05) than the tropical dry ones (96.5 and 34.8 g C kg-1, respectively). While the dry tropic wetlands had similar sequestration rates (63 ± 10 g Cm-2 y-1 on average), the humid tropic ones differed significantly (P < 0.001), with high rates in a slow-flowing slough (306 ± 77 g Cm-2 y-1) and low rates in a tropical rain forest depressional wetland (84 ± 23 g Cm-2 y-1). The carbon accumulating in all of these wetlands was mostly organic (92-100%). These results suggest the importance of differentiating between types of wetland communities and their hydrology when estimating overall rates at which tropical wetlands sequester carbon, and the need to include tropical wetland carbon sequestration in global carbon budgets. © 2013 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht.
Carbon sequestration in rubber tree plantations established on former arable lands in Xishuangbanna, SW china			The ability for vegetation and soil organic matter (SOM) to sequester atmospheric CO2 has received a lot of attention recently. Two management options being considered for enhancing C sequestration from the atmosphere include tropical forest conservation and establishment of plantations; however, there is still considerable debate regarding the appropriateness of using plantations and the sequestration potential of tropical plantations. There are 1. 3 x 10(5) hm(2) of rubber trees (Hevea brasiliensis) plantations in Xishuangbanna, southwest China, which account for approximately 14% of the forest lands in this region. In this study, eleven plantations of different ages were selected to investigate C sequestration in the vegetation and soils following the establishment of rubber tree plantations on former arable lands. The results indicated that the average biomass growth rates of the rubber trees, calculated according to two different biomass growth equations, were 10.2 x 10(3) and 9.4 x 10(3) kg t . hm(-2) . a(-1). Soil C stocks in the top 40 cm and I in of soil increased at rates of 0.61 x 10(3) and 0.72 x 10(3) kg t C . hm(-2) . a(-1), respectively. In total, C sequestration was approximately 5.82 x 10(3) to 5.42 x 10(3) kg t C . hm(-2) . a(-1) in the vegetation and soil as calculated by the two biomass growth models. When comparing the two models, our results showed that the biomass calculated based on the equation of Tang et al. was higher than that based on the equation of Brown, especially in young- and middle-aged rubber tree plantations.
Carbon sequestration in the bio-edaphic ecosystem of National Highway-27 in Guwahati, Assam, India			Vehicular pollution in cities is engendering the need to enhance the sequestration of CO2 through bio-edaphic factors, such as trees and soil. Hence, this pioneering study aimed to analyze the interdependencies of the bioedaphic ecosystem during carbon sequestration on a national highway in Guwahati, Assam, India. To quantify the tree carbon stock, soil physicochemical properties, soil nutrients, bulk density, organic carbon, and soil carbon stock, trees with diameters at breast height (dbh) >= 2 cm and soil samples from different depths (0-15 cm, 15-30 cm, and 30-45 cm) were taken from six areas spread over 36 plots of equal size (2 >= 10 m) arranged in a zig-zag manner. The studied parameters were compared among the different areas. It was found that the tree and soil carbon stock, along with soil nutrients, were greater in the Garchuk-Lokhra area (sample area-4). A significantly strong correlation was observed between the soil carbon stock and the above and below-ground biomass of trees (AGB, r = 0.865; BGB, r = 0.847), which indicated the co-dependencies of the bio-edaphic ecosystem in accumulating carbon. Peltophorum ferrugineum (Decne.) Benth is recommended for planting because it has emerged as a tolerant species and has the greatest carbon storage potential. The bio-edaphic ecosystem of the national highway is now on a carbon-friendly trajectory that follows the UNFCCC guidelines and the REDD+ (reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation) strategy. However further research on carbon budgeting is required.
Carbon sequestration in tropical Asia: An assessment of technically suitable forest lands using geographic information systems analysis			Tropical forest lands hold the greatest promise for sequestering large quantities of carbon. In this study, an analysis was performed to produce a first order map of the technical suitability of present-day forest lands to sequester additional carbon in the continental part of tropical Asia. The analysis used a geographic information system (GIS) approach to assess the difference between 2 indices of potential and actual carbon sequestration of forests on a regional scale. This difference represents the degree to which forest biomass has been reduced (degraded) from its potential maximum caused by the long history of human impacts on the landscape. The difference indicates the relative amount of new biomass carbon which could be added to particular areas of land if they were protected, free from human disturbance, so that they could accumulate biomass up to their potential with no social, economic, or political constraints. A potential carbon sequestration index (PCSI) map was derived from a GIS model based on climatic and geomorphological factors. The actual carbon sequestration index map was derived via 2 methods: a degradation approach based on population densities and climate zones, and a remote sensing approach based on a 4 yr mean of the normalized difference global vegetation index derived from NOAA AVHRR satellite imagery. Despite limitations, the methods provided reasonable maps of regional technical suitability on which to build as data quality and methodologies improve. Areas of highest technical suitability included the lowland moist and lowland seasonal ecofloristic zones, closed forests, and Peninsular Malaysia and India. On average, the technically suitable present forest lands could sequester an additional ca 90 Mg C ha-1 in aboveground biomass.
Carbon sequestration in tropical forests and water: a critical look at the basis for commonly used generalizations			Tree planting in the tropics is conducted for a number of reasons including carbon sequestration, but often competes with increasingly scarce water resources. The basics of forest and water relations are frequently said to be well understood but there is a pressing need to better understand and predict the hydrological effects of land-use and climate change in the complex and dynamic landscapes of the tropics. This will remain elusive without the empirical data required to feed hydrological process models. It is argued that the current state of knowledge is confused by too broad a use of the terms 'forest' and '(af)forestation', as well as by a bias towards using data generated mostly outside the tropics and for nondegraded soil conditions. Definitions of forest, afforestation and reforestation as used in the climate change community and their application by land and water managers need to be reconciled.
Carbon sequestration potential in natural forests of Himachal Pradesh, India			Natural forests play a key role in the mitigation of atmospheric carbon dioxide by sequestering it in their biological system as well as in the soil. In the present study we have assessed the carbon sequestration potential of different natural forests of Bilaspur district, Himachal Pradesh, India, which were subjected to different levels of anthropogenic activities. Above-and below-ground carbon stock present in standing vegetation was analysed at six different forest sites of subtropical forests utilizing the non-destructive method. The stem density in the present study ranged from 474.75 to 799.75 trees/ha. The result shows that carbon stock was highest at site II (131.95 t C/ha) and lowest at site I (70.34 t C/ha), although highest tree density was observed at site I and lowest at site V. The average carbon stock of the study area was recorded as 107.35 t C/ha. The results suggest that tree density and carbon stock in these subtropical forests differ significantly and with proper management strategies and afforestation of the degraded areas, the potential of carbon storage can be enhanced further.
Carbon sequestration potential of Casuarina equisetifolia plantations at harvest age in tropical region of India			Studying the carbon stock of tree plantations is essential for mitigating climate change, as trees act as carbon dioxide sinks by fixing carbon during photosynthesis and storing excess carbon as biomass. With a significant emphasis on the role of carbon in global warming, Afforestation/Reforestation (A/R) activities have the potential to provide a “sink” for carbon from our atmosphere and act as a reservoir. In current study, the sequestered carbon dioxide from atmosphere by Casuarina plantations was calculated and converted into carbon by a particular plantation using the globally accepted formula developed by the IPCC. Simultaneously, the soil organic carbon of the particular Casuarina plantations was also estimated. Finally, the carbon stock of Casuarina equisetifolia plantations were estimated under different management practices. The various management practices like pruning, irrigation and fertilizer application also improves the carbon sink potential of the tree plantations. The mean carbon concentration ranged from 41% (leaf litter) to 46% (wood) in the different components of Casuarina equisetifolia. The plantations recorded a carbon accumulation of 9.12 Mt C ha-1 year-1 in biomass components alone at the harvest age of 3 years in the tropical region of Tamil Nadu, India. Proper management practices in tropical regions worldwide have the potential to further enhance carbon stocks in plantations. This data will be ready reckoner for future Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) projects for controlling global warming. © The Author(s).
Carbon sequestration potential of Indian forests			The forestry sector can not only sustain its carbon but also has the potential to absorb carbon from the atmosphere. India has maintained approximately 64 Mha of forest cover for the last decade. The rate of afforestation in India is one of the highest among the tropical countries, currently estimated to be 2 Mha per annum. The annual productivity has increased from 0.7 m(3) per hactare in 1985 to 1.37 m(3) per hectare in 1995. Increase in annual productivity directly indicates an increase in forest biomass and hence higher carbon sequestration potential. The carbon pool for the Indian forests is estimated to be 2026.72 Mt for the year 1995. Estimates of annual carbon uptake increment suggest that our forests and plantations have been able to remove at least 0.125 Gt of CO2 from the atmosphere in the year 1995. Assuming that the present forest cover in India will sustain itself with a marginal annual increase by 0.5 Mha in area of plantations, we can expect our forests to continue to act as a net carbon sink in future.
Carbon sequestration potential of second-growth forest regeneration in the Latin American tropics			Regrowth of tropical secondary forests following complete or nearly complete removal of forest vegetation actively stores carbon in aboveground biomass, partially counterbalancing carbon emissions from deforestation, forest degradation, burning of fossil fuels, and other anthropogenic sources. We estimate the age and spatial extent of lowland second-growth forests in the Latin American tropics and model their potential aboveground carbon accumulation over four decades. Our model shows that, in 2008, second-growth forests (1 to 60 years old) covered 2.4 million km(2) of land (28.1% of the total study area). Over 40 years, these lands can potentially accumulate a total aboveground carbon stock of 8.48 Pg C (petagrams of carbon) in aboveground biomass via low-cost natural regeneration or assisted regeneration, corresponding to a total CO2 sequestration of 31.09 Pg CO2. This total is equivalent to carbon emissions from fossil fuel use and industrial processes in all of Latin America and the Caribbean from 1993 to 2014. Ten countries account for 95% of this carbon storage potential, led by Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, and Venezuela. We model future land-use scenarios to guide national carbon mitigation policies. Permitting natural regeneration on 40% of lowland pastures potentially stores an additional 2.0 Pg C over 40 years. Our study provides information and maps to guide national-level forest-based carbon mitigation plans on the basis of estimated rates of natural regeneration and pasture abandonment. Coupled with avoided deforestation and sustainable forest management, natural regeneration of second-growth forests provides a low-cost mechanism that yields a high carbon sequestration potential with multiple benefits for biodiversity and ecosystem services.
Carbon Sequestration Potential of Trees in Kuvempu University Campus Forest Area, Western Ghats, Karnataka			Assessing carbon sequestration by measuring above ground and below ground biomass with non destructive method is globally acknowledged. The studies from forest ecosystem have made a significant contribution in quantifying carbon stock. This type of study has now gaining importance in urban ecosystems. Most of the institutions and universities have natural forest and manmade plantations are now assessing carbon stocks in India and elsewhere. In the present study Kuvempu university campus which is a part of Central Western Ghats was assessed. The total area of the campus covers 326.21 acres with dry deciduous forest of Bhadra tiger reserve. A total of 5596 individuals were recorded with a carbon stock of 457.0 t ha(-1) and the dominant Terminalia paniculata contributed a total of 13% of carbon stock. The storing capacity varies with species diversity, disturbance gradient and phenology. This pilot study has made an attempt in advertising the present area in global carbon stock assessment. Therefore, every educational institutions/universities can easily contribute to global CO2 mitigation by restoring the native species in their campus and even it supports biodiversity and helps in future long term monitoring.
Carbon Sequestration Potential of Tropical Fruit Trees			Carbon sequestration, a vital process in mitigating climate change involves the removal of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and its storage within ecosystems over time. This comprehensive review explores the carbon sequestration potential of tropical fruit trees focusing on key species such as Mango, Banana, Guava, Sapota and Avocado. Fruit trees, particularly in tropical regions, exhibit substantial carbon sequestration capabilities through the accumulation of biomass in various plant parts. Factors influencing carbon sequestration include solar energy, water availability, nutrient levels, thermal conditions, and atmospheric constituents. The review emphasizes the importance of understanding the physiological processes underlying carbon sequestration in fruit trees and their relevance to sustainable agriculture. Fruit orchards are highlighted as effective carbon sinks, contributing to climate change mitigation, environmental protection and sustainable agricultural practices. Various studies on individual fruit crops such as Mango, Banana, Guava, Sapota and Avocado provide insights into their unique carbon sequestration potentials and the factors influencing them. The assessment of carbon sequestration potential involves measurements of above-ground and below-ground biomass as well as soil organic carbon. The review concludes with recommendations for enhancing carbon sequestration potential, including agroforestry practices, soil management techniques and understanding the role of environmental factors.
Carbon sequestration potential of tropical pasture compared with afforestation in Panama			Tropical forest ecosystems play an important role in regulating the global climate, yet deforestation and land-use change mean that the tropical carbon sink is increasingly influenced by agroecosystems and pastures. Despite this, it is not yet fully understood how carbon cycling in the tropics responds to land-use change, particularly for pasture and afforestation. Thus, the objectives of our study were: (1) to elucidate the environmental controls and the impact of management on gross primary production (GPP), total ecosystem respiration (TER) and net ecosystem CO2 exchange (NEE); (2) to estimate the carbon sequestration potential of tropical pasture compared with afforestation; and (3) to compare eddy covariance-derived carbon budgets with biomass and soil inventory data. We performed comparative measurements of NEE in a tropical C-4 pasture and an adjacent afforestation with native tree species in Sardinilla (Panama) from 2007 to 2009. Pronounced seasonal variation in GPP, TER and NEE were closely related to radiation, soil moisture, and C-3 vs. C-4 plant physiology. The shallow rooting depth of grasses compared with trees resulted in a higher sensitivity of the pasture ecosystem to water limitation and seasonal drought. During 2008, substantial amounts of carbon were sequestered by the afforestation (-442 gCm(-2), negative values denote ecosystem carbon uptake), which was in agreement with biometric observations (-450 gCm(-2)). In contrast, the pasture ecosystem was a strong carbon source in 2008 and 2009 (261 gCm(-2)), associated with seasonal drought and overgrazing. In addition, soil carbon isotope data indicated rapid carbon turnover after conversion from C-4 pasture to C-3 afforestation. Our results clearly show the potential for considerable carbon sequestration of tropical afforestation and highlight the risk of carbon losses from pasture ecosystems in a seasonal tropical climate.
Carbon sequestration via wood burial.			To mitigate global climate change, a portfolio of strategies will be needed to keep the atmospheric CO2 concentration below a dangerous level. Here a carbon sequestration strategy is proposed in which certain dead or live trees are harvested via collection or selective cutting, then buried in trenches or stowed away in above-ground shelters. The largely anaerobic condition under a sufficiently thick layer of soil will prevent the decomposition of the buried wood. Because a large flux of CO2 is constantly being assimilated into the world's forests via photosynthesis, cutting off its return pathway to the atmosphere forms an effective carbon sink.It is estimated that a sustainable long-term carbon sequestration potential for wood burial is 10 +/- 5 GtC y-1, and currently about 65 GtC is on the world's forest floors in the form of coarse woody debris suitable for burial. The potential is largest in tropical forests (4.2 GtC y-1), followed by temperate (3.7 GtC y-1) and boreal forests (2.1 GtC y-1). Burying wood has other benefits including minimizing CO2 source from deforestation, extending the lifetime of reforestation carbon sink, and reducing fire danger. There are possible environmental impacts such as nutrient lock-up which nevertheless appears manageable, but other concerns and factors will likely set a limit so that only part of the full potential can be realized.Based on data from North American logging industry, the cost for wood burial is estimated to be $14/tCO2($50/tC), lower than the typical cost for power plant CO2 capture with geological storage. The cost for carbon sequestration with wood burial is low because CO2 is removed from the atmosphere by the natural process of photosynthesis at little cost. The technique is low tech, distributed, easy to monitor, safe, and reversible, thus an attractive option for large-scale implementation in a world-wide carbon market.
CARBON SEQUESTRATION, BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY, AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT - INTEGRATED FOREST MANAGEMENT			Tropical deforestation provides a significant contribution to anthropogenic increases in atmospheric CO2 concentration that may lead to global warming. Forestation and other forest management options to sequester CO2 in the tropical latitudes may fail unless they address local economic, social, environmental, and political needs of people in the developing world. Forest management is discussed in terms of three objectives: carbon sequestration, sustainable development, and biodiversity conservation. An integrated forest management strategy of land-use planning is proposed to achieve these objectives and is centered around: preservation of primary forest, intensified use of nontimber resources, agroforestry, and selective use of plantation forestry.
Carbon sink and source function of Eastern Himalayan forests: implications of change in climate and biotic variables			Forests serve as a sink and source of carbon and play a substantial role in regional and global carbon cycling. The Himalayan forests act as climate regulators of the Hindukush region, which is experiencing climate change at a high pace, and a proper understanding of these systems is necessary to mitigate this problem. We hypothesize that the variance of abiotic factors and vegetation will influence the carbon sink and source function of the different forest types of the Himalayas. Carbon sequestration was computed from the increment of carbon stocks estimated allometrically using Forest Survey of India equations, and soil CO2 flux was determined by the alkali absorption method. The carbon sequestration rate and CO2 flux by the different forests exhibited a negative relation. The carbon sequestration rate was highest with minimum emission in the temperate forest, while the tropical forest recorded the least sequestration and maximum carbon flux rate. The Pearson correlation test between carbon sequestration and tree species richness and diversity revealed a positive-significant influence but negative relation with climatic factors. An analysis of variance indicated significant seasonal differences between the rate of soil carbon emissions due to variations in the forest. A multivariate regression analysis of the monthly soil CO2 emission rate shows high variability (85%) due to fluctuations of climatic variables in the Eastern Himalayan forests. Results of the present study revealed that the carbon sink and source function of forests respond to changes in forest types, climatic variables, and edaphic factors. Tree species and soil nutrient content influenced carbon sequestration, while shifts in climatic factors influenced soil CO2 emission rate. Increased temperature and rainfall may further change the soil quality by enhancing soil CO2 emission and reducing soil organic carbon, thereby impacting this region's carbon sink and source function. Enhancing tree diversity in the forests of this region may be beneficial for retarding this impact.
Carbon sink for a century			0
Carbon Stabilisation in Tropical Ecosystem			Carbon (C) cycling and sequestration are two paradigms in global C stabilisation. On one part, continuous biogeochemical cycling of carbonaceous C (organic C) and C dioxide-C (CO2-C) are all vital and essential for life on the planet earth. There can be no life without C, in addition to hydrogen, oxygen and other elements known to science. The problem lies with excess CO2-C which remains in relative gaseous phase in the environment of soil, water and air. The global limit of CO2-C continues to rise in the era of agricultural, industrial and human civilisations that depend primarily on burning of fossil fuel, coupled with other anthropogenic activities like bush burning, deforestation, logging, gas flaring in crude oil exploration and wastes disposal. These have come with consequent environmental consequences, namely, global warming, climate change, melting of arctic ice, rise in sea level, flooding, tsunami, acidification, acid rain, desertification, pollution and habitat degradation/losses. To mitigate C excesses in the environment, scientists and researchers have tried several schemes/approaches in C sink, popularly referred to as “sequestration”. The rate of sequestration in atmosphere, lithosphere and hydrosphere depends on the available methods and resources. In atmosphere, C-sequestrations have involved reforestation or afforestation to securely capture CO2-C and store as nutrients in plant parts in the form of cellulose, hemicelluloses, starch, carbohydrate and glucose. In lithosphere, C-sequestrations have involved organic matter amendments/deposition, alley farming, silviculture and agroforestry. In hydrosphere, C-sequestrations have involved ocean fertigation with iron (Fe++) fillings required by phytoplankton as nutrients. The limitation for atmospheric sink lies on global deforestation/logging for agriculture and timber, while that of lithospheric sequestration lies on high-input agriculture that makes use of inorganic fertilisers, agrochemicals and agricultural mechanisation/processing/storage that depends on burning of fossil fuel, bush burning and bush clearing for land preparation/agricultural activities. The limitation of hydrospheric sequestration lies on cost, availability and affordability of Fe++ fillings. Whichever method of C sink, successes and failures come with global welcome as scientists, agriculturists and researchers strive to test, develop and adapt all local, regional, national and international options, including integrated approaches/methods/formulas. The chapter “Carbon stabilisation in tropical ecosystem” is geared towards highlighting the importance of carbon sink in our ecosystem. The methods and systems of C sink or storage vary from one location to another. But the idea remains that excess gaseous carbon dioxide-C in the environment is very inimical to environmental health, and all options required for their sink and stabilisation in the environment should be accelerated all over the world to avoid what this chapter likens to “carbon holocaust”. © Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021.
Carbon stock and its relationships with tree diversity and density in community forests in Nepal			Several forest management and conservation models exist throughout the world and Nepal is one of the pioneering countries to implement a community forestry programme. Studying the relationship between carbon stocks and biodiversity is important in understanding the trade-off between two major benefits of forest ecosystems, and working towards achieving the optimum balance between them. This study aims to: (i) estimate the biomass and total carbon stock in community forests, (ii) explore the relationship between carbon stocks and the diversity and density of trees, and (iii) examine that relationship in relation to the elevation of the community forest. The study covers all the components of forest carbon including above- and below-ground, and soil carbon. The biomass in the forest was found to be 299.20 tons/ha whereas the total carbon stock (including soil carbon) was found to be 162.95 tons/ha. Total carbon and biomass carbon were negatively related to the diversity and the density of trees. However, soil carbon was positively related to these factors. The results of the study can contribute to revising community forest management policies and helping to increase forest carbon and biodiversity.
Carbon stock and sequestration potential of agroforestry systems in smallholder agroecosystems of sub-Saharan Africa: Mechanisms for 'reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation' (REDD+)			The adoption of agroforestry technologies in the tropics stores high biomass for soil fertility replenishment and offers potential for carbon (C) storage. Household survey and biophysical data from central Malawi are modeled to test whether farm incentives would lead to more improved fallow adoption; and therefore an increase in carbon sequestered on farms. With data from 40 households representing 40 models, three C sequestration scenarios were simulated: (i) baseline scenario, (ii) agroforestry with a carbon credit incentive, and (iii) agroforestry with a carbon credit and a seed selling option. Results show that the baseline scenario would sequester on average 3.94MgCha -1. The overall annual mean amount of C sequestered is 103 Mg per year, of which 12% is from soil C. In the second scenario, the annual mean was 239Mg C translating to 3.92MgCha -1, of which 62% is contribution from agroforestry. In the third scenario, the annual mean C was 393Mg, translating to 4.17MgCha -1, of which agroforestry's contribution was 39%. Our results show that agroforestry can increase C sequestration on farms. We conclude that smallholder farmers can benefit from the REDD+ mechanism. © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
Carbon Stock and Sequestration Potential of an Agroforestry System in Sabah, Malaysia			Total aboveground carbon (TAC) and total soil carbon stock in the agroforestry system at the Balung River Plantation, Sabah, Malaysia were investigated to scientifically support the sustaining of natural forest for mitigating global warming via reducing carbon in the atmosphere. Agroforestry, monoculture, and natural tropical forests were investigated to calculate the carbon stock and sequestration based on three different combinations of oil palm and agarwood in agroforestry systems from 2014 to 2018. These combinations were oil palm (27 years) and agarwood (seven years), oil palm (20 years) and agarwood (seven years), and oil palm (17 years) and agarwood (five years). Monoculture oil palm (16 years), oil palm (six years), and natural tropical forest were set as the control. Three randomly selected plots for agroforestry and monoculture plantation were 0.25 ha (50 x 50 m), respectively, whereas for the natural tropical forest it was 0.09 ha (30 x 30 m). A nondestructive sampling method followed by the allometric equation determined the standing biomass. Organic and shrub layers collected in a square frame (1 x 1 m) were analyzed using the CHN628 series (LECO Corp., MI, USA) for carbon content. Soil bulk density of randomly selected points within the three different layers, that is, 0 to 5, 5 to 10, and 10 to 30 cm were used to determine the total ecosystem carbon (TEC) stock in each agroforestry system which was 79.13, 85.40, and 78.28 Mg C ha(-1), respectively. The TEC in the monoculture oil palm was 76.44 and 60.30 Mg C ha(-1), whereas natural tropical forest had the highest TEC of 287.29 Mg C ha(-1). The forest stand had the highest TEC capacity as compared with the agroforestry and monoculture systems. The impact of planting systems on the TEC showed a statistically significant difference at a 95% confidence interval for the various carbon pools among the agroforestry, monoculture, and natural tropical forests. Therefore, the forest must be sustained because of its higher capacity to store carbon in mitigating global warming.
Carbon stock corridors to mitigate climate change and promote biodiversity in the tropics			A key issue in global conservation is how biodiversity co-benefits can be incorporated into land use and climate change mitigation activities, particularly those being negotiated under the United Nations to reduce emissions from tropical deforestation and forest degradation(1,2). Protected areas have been the dominant strategy for tropical forest conservation and they have increased substantially in recent decades(3). Avoiding deforestation by preserving carbon stored in vegetation between protected areas provides an opportunity to mitigate the effects of land use and climate change on biodiversity by maintaining habitat connectivity across landscapes. Here we use a high-resolution data set of vegetation carbon stock to map corridors traversing areas of highest biomass between protected areas in the tropics. The derived corridors contain 15% of the total unprotected aboveground carbon in the tropical region. A large number of corridors have carbon densities that approach or exceed those of the protected areas they connect, suggesting these are suitable areas for achieving both habitat connectivity and climate change mitigation benefits. To further illustrate how economic and biological information can be used for corridor prioritization on a regional scale, we conducted a multicriteria analysis of corridors in the Legal Amazon, identifying corridors with high carbon, high species richness and endemism, and low economic opportunity costs. We also assessed the vulnerability of corridors to future deforestation threat.
Carbon stock dynamics in a disturbed tropical forest ecosystem of Central India: Strategies for achieving carbon neutrality			Anthropogenic land use changes in the vicinity of forest catchments are explicitly responsible for the deforestation and degradation of tropical forest thereby altering the carbon (C) balance under rising atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2). Thus, strategic mitigation measures are required to achieve climate neutrality by 2030. It becomes imperative to understand the impact of land cover conversion on the functioning of tropical forests and to determine the carbon dynamics. The present study examined the land cover changes (LUC) in dry tropical ecosystem of Central India during the last two decades and assessed its influence on the forest biomass, litter crop, and C stocks. Geospatial techniques coupled with ground measurements were employed in the study. The total biomass, vegetative C stocks and soil C were estimated as 64 to 338.3 Mg ha−1, 26.4 to 131.1 Mg C/ha and 24.6 to 50.2 Mg C/ha respectively. In the past decades (2000–2020), about 1851.8 ha of forest constituting 15.1% of the total area under study was lost (mainly to Agriculture) under open mixed forest, moderately mixed forest and mixed teak forest. The study demonstrated that forests of the studied region behave as a potential C source, which accounted for a net loss of 59 gigagram carbon (Gg C) equivalent to 216 Gg CO2eq. Besides, discussed three viable scenarios of restoration to offset C emissions and to achieve C neutral landscape by 2030. The conservation and restoration of 26–85% degraded forests (open mixed forest and moderately mixed dense forests), use of agroforestry on 1/5th of existing agricultural lands, or implementation of regenerative agricultural practices in 30% of the area will compensate for net losses, while attaining C neutrality. Further, the finding of this study helps to understand the climatic extremes as per the commitments of Paris Agreement, 2015 and Glasgow Pact, 2021. © 2023 The Author(s)
Carbon stock estimation by forest measurement contributing to sustainable forest management in cambodia			A simplified method for estimating CO2 emissions from deforestation is the calculation of carbon stock change by monitoring forest land and periodically summing up the land area and its averaged carbon stock for important forest types. As a feasibility study for applying this methodology to a tropical dry-land forest, we estimated carbon stock and its chronosequential change in 4 carbon pools (aboveground and belowground biomass, deadwood, and litter) of tropical dry-land natural forests in Cambodia. Carbon stock differed among forest types. Most of the carbon stock (84 ± 12% (SD)) existed in tree biomass. Growth of carbon stock has a positive relationship to the carbon stock itself. By moderately classifying forest types, determining averaged tree biomass of each forest type, and using land-area data on each forest type, a reasonably accurate estimation of carbon stock can be expected. However, considering that rapidly progressing deforestation and wood extraction may reduce the carbon stock in forests, systematic sampling with a sufficient number of extra plots and frequent updating of forest land area and averaged carbon stock data are vital for an accurate estimation of CO2 emissions from forests under pressure of land-use change and forestry activities.
Carbon stock in silvopastoral systems: A study in the Middle Sinu, Colombia			Introduction. Silvopastoral systems play an important role in livestock production, provide benefits to the animal and edaphic components, and offer environmental services such as atmospheric carbon sequestration in the soil and biomass. Objective. To evaluate the capacity of atmospheric carbon sequestration in three systems of different complexities focused on livestock production, in northern Colombia. Materials and methods. The study was carried out at the Turipana Research Center of the Corporacion Colombiana de Investigacion Agropecuaria between 2019 and 2021. The dasometric parameters of the tree/shrub component were evaluated. The aboveground (CBA) and belowground (CBR) biomass of these species were estimated with allometric models. The fallen litter biomass (CLIT) and soil organic carbon up to 30 cm, with readings every 10 cm, were quantified by the combustion method and total accumulated carbon. The design corresponded to complete randomized blocks, with three treatments and four repetitions. The treatments corresponded to two silvopastoral systems (SSP) of different complexity and a grass without trees (Pr). Results. Aerial biomass was higher in the SSP (2.18 +/- 1.13, 4.51 +/- 3.76 t ha-1 C) than in Pr (0.19 +/- 0.09 t ha-1 C). The highest accumulation of CBR (1.16 +/- 3.76 t ha-1 C) and CLIT (3.09 +/- 2.45 t ha-1 C) occurred in SSP2. The soil organic carbon accumulated (COS) values showed higher accumulation in the first stratum. The COS represented in the three systems more than 70 % of the total contribution in accumulated carbon contribution. Conclusion. Under the environmental conditions of the humid tropical dry forest, silvopastoral systems increased the stock of atmospheric carbon in the soil and biomass. The use of SSP is a strategy in the mitigation of greenhouse gases in the livestock production system.
Carbon Stock Potential and Ecosystem Services Provisioned by Major Land-UseSystems in Southern Assam, India: A Meta-Analysis			Tropical ecosystems are global centers of carbon (C) storage both in vegetation and soils. Storage of C in these pools plays a significant role in maintaining the atmospheric C balance. But anthropogenic land use (LU) conversions alter biodiversity and C balance, responsible for global warming and climate change (CC). In return, CC threatens our ecosystems and their flow of services. Therefore, recognizing C stock potentials under different LU systems can offer vital facts for predicting effects of various LU on C pools. This information on C stocks is crucial for implementation of the emission reduction mechanisms (e.g., REDD+). The present study focuses on the C stock stored in different pools under the dominant LU systems and their ecosystem service production at a landscape level in Barak valley, southern Assam, northeast India. Barak valley covers 6,922 km2 with representations of diverse major LU systems. Altogether six major LU have been studied viz. natural forest (NF), agricultural land (AG), plantation forest (PF), agroforestry systems (AF), herbaceous systems (HV) and grasslands (GL). Among these LU, NF, AG, and AF constitute the predominant systems in terms of spatial coverage, i.e., 3,364 km2, 2,164 km2, and 799 km2, respectively. Our meta-analysis revealed a greater stem density under NF (2,000 ha–1 to 4,000 ha–1) compared to PF and AF (1,000 ha–1 to 2,000 ha–1), implying more biomass in the NF. The scale of different major LU in terms of the biomass C and SOC stock exhibit more or less similar trends. The ecosystem services (ES) provided by the tree-based ecosystems, i.e., NF and AF were found higher compared to other LU for majority aspects under the four primary ES. We show the importance of tree-based ecosystems in carbon management, and higher levels of biodiversity under forest and agroforestry systems support higher ecosystem properties and provision of ecosystem services. © 2025 by Apple Academic Press, Inc.
Carbon stocks and accumulation rates in tropical secondary forests at the scale of community, landscape and forest type			Rapid increases of secondary forest areas in the tropics make understanding of their carbon dynamics critical to estimate net CO2 emissions and uptake. This understanding is needed for performance based mechanisms that aim to halt global warming (REDD+). Despite the importance of secondary forests to global C cycling, the impacts of recovering secondary vegetation on C dynamics are poorly understood. We present carbon stocks and accumulation rates in biomass and soil pools, using as a basis of analysis 87 sampling plots established along a secondary forest chronosequence derived from shifting cultivation. We test the influence of age, land-use intensity (prior land-use history) and two site quality indices on the size of the C stocks and C accumulation rates. Biomass and Total C pools were positively correlated with age and negatively with LU intensity, whereas C accumulation rates had opposite signs for both parameters. Soil C did not show any variation along the age gradient, but C in the upper 20 cm was positively correlated to both site quality indices. The LU-intensity influenced the tree C stock in the younger plots. We propose a nested approach in which detailed studies can be up-scaled to landscape and regional estimates of carbon pools in forest fallow and undisturbed forests and carbon accumulation rates in forest fallow. (C) 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Carbon stocks and greenhouse gas emissions (CH4 and N2O) in mangroves with different vegetation assemblies in the central coastal of Veracruz Mexico			The aim of this study was to quantify carbon stocks and the emission of the greenhouse gases (N2O and CH4) in mangrove forests with different vegetation assemblies in coastal lagoons of Veracruz Mexico. The vegetation included: black mangrove BM, dominated by Avicennia germinans, white mangrove WM, dominated by Laguncularia. racemose, red mangrove RM, dominated by Rhizophora mangle and mixed mangrove MM, dominated by the three species. Soil C stocks ranged 187-671 Mg C ha(-1) without significant (p = 0.149) differences among the mangroves with different vegetation. Significantly (p = 0.049) higher tree biomass C stock was observed in RM (127 Mg ha(-1)) than in MM (24.23 Mg ha(-1)). Methane emissions in RM (0.58-6.03 mg m-2 min-1) were significantly higher (p b 0.05) than in MM. (0.0035-0.07 mg m(-2) min(-1)), in WM (-0.0026-0.029 mg m(-2) min(-1)) and in BM (0.0054-0.0097 mg m(-2) min(-1)),during rainy, windy and dry season.RM had the longest period of inundation, the highest soil carbon concentration, and the lowest salinity. CH4 emissions showed a significantly positive correlation with soils carbon concentration, water level and water pH and, negative correlation with water salinity and Cl-1 concentration in soil and water. Emissions of N2O (0.04-3.25 mu g m(-2) min(-1)) were not significantly different among the mangroves with different vegetation, but they showed seasonal variations, with higher emissions during windy and dry seasons. N2O emissions showed significantly positive correlations with soil nitrate concentration and soil temperature. Results of this research are useful for mangrove conservation and restoration strategies to maximize carbon storage and mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. (c) 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Carbon stocks in above-ground biomass of monoculture plantations, mixed species plantations and environmental restoration plantings in north-east Australia			Summary: The emergence of carbon markets has provided a potential source of funding for reforestation projects. However, there is concern amongst ecologists that these markets will promote the establishment of monoculture plantations rather than more diverse restoration plantings, on the assumption that fast-growing monocultures are likely to store more carbon than restoration plantings. We examined the validity of this assumption for three predominantly rainforest plantation types established in the moist tropical uplands of north-east Australia: monoculture plantations of native rainforest conifers (n = 5, mean age 13 years); mixed species plantations of rainforest cabinet timber species, rainforest conifers and eucalypts (n = 5, mean age 13 years); and, environmental restoration plantings comprised mostly of a diverse range of rainforest trees (n = 10, mean age 14 years). We found that restoration plantings stored significantly more carbon in above-ground biomass than monoculture plantations of native conifers (on average, 106 t vs 62 t carbon per ha); and tended to store more carbon than mixed species timber plantations which were intermediate in value (86 t carbon per ha). Carbon stocks were higher in restoration plantings than in monoculture and mixed species plantations for three reasons. First, and most importantly, restoration plantings were more densely stocked than monoculture and mixed species plantations. Second, there were more large diameter trees in restoration plantings than monoculture plantations. Third, the trees used in restoration plantings had a higher average wood density than the conifers used in monoculture plantations. While, on average, wood density was higher in mixed species plantations than restoration plantings, the much higher stocking rate of restoration plantings meant they stored more carbon than mixed species plantations. We conclude that restoration plantings in the moist tropics of north-east Australia can accumulate relatively high amounts of carbon within two decades of establishment. Comparison with reference rainforest sites suggests that restoration plantings could maintain their high stocking rates (and therefore high biomass) as they develop in future decades. However, because restoration plantings are currently much more expensive to establish than monoculture plantations, restoration plantings are unlikely to be favoured by carbon markets. Novel reforestation techniques and designs are required if restoration plantings are to both provide habitat for rainforest biota and store carbon in biomass at a cost comparable to monoculture plantations. © 2010 Ecological Society of Australia.
Carbon stocks in biomass and soils of woody species fodder banks in the dry tropics of Mexico			Understanding carbon (C) dynamics of the silvopastoral systems can help mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. The aim of this study was to evaluate the C concentration and storage in above- and belowground tree biomass as well as in the soils of fodder banks of Leucaena leucocephala (Lam.) de Wit, Guazuma ulmifolia (Lam.) or a combination of the both species. The above- and belowground biomass was quantified by the destructive sampling. We also obtained samples from soil pits, 20-cm deep, and determined bulk density and organic carbon concentration. The mixed species banks produced more foliage dry matter (DM) (6.3 t DM/ha) than the pure fodder banks. The total living biomass stocks ranged from 31.5 to 33.5 t DM/ha and did not differ between fodder bank types. The tissue C concentration was greater in stems (45.1%) and roots (44.9%) compared to the foliage component (43.4%). Total soil carbon (TSC) in the 5–10 cm layer was greater in the fodder banks with legumes alone than in mixed species banks (35.7 vs. 30.8 t C/ha). TSC storage in the 15–20 cm layer was greater in the nonlegume fodder bank than in the legume fodder bank (39.8 vs. 34.5 t C/ha). However, to the 0–20 cm layer, TSC was similar for all fodder banks. Thus, the three types of fodder banks had similar total C storage in plant biomass and soil, but the production of foliage biomass was higher in the mixed species banks. © 2018 British Society of Soil Science
Carbon stocks in coffee agroforests and mixed dry tropical forests in the western highlands of Guatemala			Tree removal in Latin American coffee agroforestry systems has been widespread due to complex and interacting factors that include fluctuating international markets, government-supported agricultural policies, and climate change. Despite shade tree removal and land conversion risks, there is currently no widespread policy incentive encouraging the maintenance of shade trees for the benefit of carbon sequestration. In facilitation of such incentives, an understanding of the capacity of coffee agroforests to store carbon relative to tropical forests must be developed. Drawing on ecological inventories conducted in 2007 and 2010 in the Lake Atitlan region of Guatemala, this research examines the carbon pools of smallholder coffee agroforests (CAFs) as they compare to a mixed dry forest (MDF) system. Data from 61 plots, covering a total area of 2.24 ha, was used to assess the aboveground, coarse root, and soil carbon reservoirs of the two land-use systems. Results of this research demonstrate the total carbon stocks of CAFs to range from 74.0 to 259.0 Megagrams (Mg) C ha(-1) with a mean of 127.6 +/- A 6.6 (SE) Mg C ha(-)A(1). The average carbon stocks of CAFs was significantly lower than estimated for the MDF (198.7 +/- A 32.1 Mg C ha(-1)); however, individual tree and soil pools were not significantly different suggesting that agroforest shade trees play an important role in facilitating carbon sequestration and soil conservation. This research demonstrates the need for conservation-based initiatives which recognize the carbon sequestration benefits of coffee agroforests alongside natural forest systems.
Carbon stocks in mangrove forests of the Colombian Pacific			Mangrove forests occupy less than 1% of tropical forest areas, but they represent approximately 3% of worldwide tropical forest carbon capture. The present study quantified carbon stocks in mangrove forests in two bays in the Colombian Pacific, and evaluated the effect of forest structure on variations of carbon storage in the different ecosystem compartments. Significant differences were found in carbon stocks between the stations of Malaga Bay (a national marine park) and Buenaventura Bay (the main harbor area). Belowground biomass and sediment represented the greatest carbon stocks in the forest. Carbon reserves in mangroves in the Colombian Pacific were similar compared with other tropical mangrove areas. These results highlight the importance of evaluating carbon storage in these ecosystems and of formulating conservation and management strategies integrated with the mangrove forest in the Colombian Pacific.
Carbon Stocks in Silvopastoral Systems: A Study from Four Communities in Southeastern Ecuador			Agriculture, particularly pasture, is the second largest source of greenhouse gas emissions from tropical regions. Silvopastoral systems may increase carbon pools in pastures while maintaining productivity. Adding trees to pasture provides carbon sinks in woody biomass, and may improve degraded soils and increase the stability of soil carbon pools. In this study we quantified the biomass carbon stored in spontaneous silvopastoral systems in southeastern Ecuador. We compared the stem density, basal area, aboveground biomass, and organic carbon in the top 20 cm of soil in 100 pastures, ranging from 3 to 250 hectares, in four different communities. Aboveground live woody biomass, calculated using allometric equations and two different wood densities, varied from 10.99 to 66.1 Mg per hectare. Soil organic carbon pools ranged from 85.0 to 97.6 Mg per hectare. Stem density, basal area, and aboveground live biomass all positively correlated with pasture age. We found no relationship between pasture age or stem density and soil organic carbon pools. We measured live woody biomass carbon pools of 34-1070 Mg of carbon per farm in these silvopastoral systems. We found no effects on productivity of the herbaceous layer, suggesting that having a low density of trees in pastures could substantially increase the number of trees and the associated carbon sequestration without affecting cattle production.
Carbon stocks in tropical evergreen broadleaf forests in Central Highland, Vietnam			This is the first study on carbon stock estimation in the tropical evergreen broadleaf forests in Central Highland, Vietnam. As result of selective logging and shifting cultivation, remaining forests are silviculturally classified to five categories by governmental standard basing on standing volume (V), including very poor forest (V <= 10 m(3)/ha), poor forest (10 < V <= 100 m(3)/ha), medium forest (100 < V <= 200 m(3)/ha), rich (200 < V <= 300 m(3)/ha), and very rich forest (V > 300 m(3)/ha). Carbon stock of four pools including big trees (diameter at breast height/dbh >= 5 cm), short vegetation layer (dbh < 5 cm), necromass, and soil was measured by using 150 plots of 50 m x 50 m each. Soil carbon stock was assessed from soil samples taken to 30 cm depth. The results indicated total carbon stock increased from 75 tons C/ha in very poor forest to 199 tons C/ha in medium forest, and to 255 tons C/ha in very rich forest. Carbon stock in necromass was significant different (ANOVA; F-(4,F- 145) = 61.70, p < 0.001) among forest categories (from 4 to 8 tons C/ha). Meanwhile, there were no differences of carbon stock in soil and short vegetation layer among forest categories, which ranged 59-64 tons C/ha and 3-4 tons C/ha, respectively. There was a linear positive relationship between carbon in big trees and that in necromass (R-(149) = 0.61, p < 0.01). It is concluded that the degree of human disturbance had significant impacts on carbon sink in the present study forests.
Carbon stocks of above- and belowground tree biomass in Kibate Forest around Wonchi Crater Lake, Central Highland of Ethiopia			Forests play an important role in the global carbon (C) balance, but their biomass has decreased globally mainly because of deforestation and a reduction in forest cover. However, little is known about the C stock of tree biomass related to environmental factors in the remnant forest patches. Thus, the present study aimed at assessing the status of C stocks of tree biomass using an allometric equation in Kibate Forest (Ethiopia). Sixty-six plots (30x30 m) were laid out at 100 m interval distance along the altitudinal gradients in five transects. The results revealed that the highest C stocks (67.4%) per species were contributed by Juniperus procera, Ilex mitis var. mitis, Nuxia congesta, and Olea europaea subsp. cuspidata. The mean total tree biomass was 91.9 +/- 10.01 Mg ha(-1). The mean total C stock was 45.9 +/- 5.17 Mg ha(-1), out of which 38.3 +/- 4.31 and 7.7 +/- 0.91 Mg ha(-1) were stored in above- and belowground C pools, respectively. Anthropogenic factors were negatively associated with the C-stock distribution in the study area. Thus, the status of the C stock of tree biomass related to anthropogenic factors indicates that sustainable forest management practice is needed in the study area to conserve biodiversity and mitigate climate change.
Carbon stocks, emissions, and aboveground productivity in restored secondary tropical peat swamp forests			Tropical wetlands such as peat swamp forests (PSFs) have been known globally as one of the carbon (C)-rich ecosystems. However, there is still a lack of understanding on the C cycle in PSFs, especially in association with land use and cover changes (e.g., ecosystem degradation and restoration). This study presents the C stocks, removals, and emissions dataset, as well as the determining factors from an early restoration stage of secondary tropical PSFs in Central Kalimantan. We assessed various biophysical parameters such as forest structure, above- and belowground C-stocks, aboveground primary productivity, total and heterotrophic soil respirations, and groundwater level (GWL). We found that tree density varied from 1200 to 1825 trees per hectare (ha) across the plots, whereas the mean of stand basal area was 32.86 ± 4.72 m2 ha−1. Mean ecosystem C stocks in the study site was 1752 ± 401 Mg-C ha−1, of which 93% was stored in belowground organic peat soils. A mean aboveground litterfall production of 4.6 ± 0.5 Mg-C ha−1 year−1 and biomass C sequestration through tree diameter increment with 2.7 ± 0.5 Mg-C ha−1 year−1 was obtained. We observed slightly larger portion of annual mean total soil respiration with 14.2 ± 1.1 Mg-C ha−1 year−1 than heterotrophic respiration 11.1 ± 0.9 Mg-C ha−1 year−1, emphasizing the lower contribution of autotrophic respiration from the belowground rooting system. Findings imply that further conservation management efforts through ecosystem restoration may preserve C stored and enhance C input in PSFs substantially, and could be potentially included in national climate change mitigation strategies. © 2018, Springer Science+Business Media B.V., part of Springer Nature.
Carbon stocks, soil respiration and microbial biomass in fire-prone tropical grassland, woodland and forest ecosystems			A thorough understanding of the role of microbes in C cycling in relation to fire is important for estimation of C emissions and for development of guidelines for sustainable management of dry ecosystems. We investigated the seasonal changes and spatial distribution of soil total. dissolved organic C (DOC) and microbial biomass C during 18 months, quantified the soil CO2 emission in the beginning of the rainy season. and related these variables to the fire frequency in important dry vegetation types grassland, woodland and dry forest in Ethiopia. The soil C isotope ratios (delta C-13) reflected the 15-fold decrease in the grass biomass along the vegetation gradient and the 12-fold increase in woody biomass in the opposite direction. Changes in delta C-13 down the soil profiles also suggested that in two of the grass-dominated sites woody plants were more frequent in the past. The soil C stock ranged from being 2.5 (dry forest) to 48 times (grassland) higher than the C stock in the aboveground plant biomass. The influence of fire in frequently burnt wooded grassland was evident as an unchanged or increasing total C content down the soil profile. DOC and microbial biomass measured with the fumigation-extraction method (C-mic) reflected the vertical distribution of soil organic matter (SOM). However, although SOM was stable throughout the year, seasonal fluctuations in C-mic and substrate-induced respiration (SIR) were large. In woodland and woodland-wooded grassland C-mic and SIR increased in the dry season, and gradually decreased during the following rainy season, confirming previous suggestions that microbes may play an important role in nutrient retention in the dry season. However, in dry forest and two wooded grasslands C-mic and SIR was stable throughout the rainy season, or even increased in this period, which could lead to enhanced competition with plants for nutrients. Both the ran-e and the seasonal changes in soil microbial biomass C in dry tropical ecosystems may be wider than previously assumed. Neither SIR nor C-mic were good predictors of in situ soil respiration. The soil respiration was relatively high in infrequently burnt forest and woodland, while frequently burnt grasslands had lower rates, presumably because most C is released through dry season burning and not through decomposition in fire-prone systems. Shifts in the relative importance of the two pathways for C release from organic matter may have strong implications for C and nutrient cycling in seasonally dry tropical ecosystems. (C) 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Carbon storage and emissions offset potential in an African dry forest, the Arabuko-Sokoke Forest, Kenya			Concerns about rapid tropical deforestation, and its contribution to rising atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, increase the importance of monitoring terrestrial carbon storage in changing landscapes. Emerging markets for carbon emission offsets may offer developing nations needed incentives for reforestation, rehabilitation, and avoided deforestation. However, relatively little empirical data exists regarding carbon storage in African tropical forests, particularly for those in arid or semi-arid regions. Kenya's 416 km(2) Arabuko-Sokoke Forest (ASF) is the largest remaining fragment of East African coastal dry forest and is considered a global biodiversity hotspot (Myers et al. 2000), but has been significantly altered by past commercial logging and ongoing extraction. Forest carbon storage for ASF was estimated using allometric equations for tree biomass, destructive techniques for litter and herbaceous vegetation biomass, and spectroscopy for soils. Satellite imagery was used to assess land cover changes from 1992 to 2004. Forest and thicket types (Cynometra webberi dominated, Brachystegia spiciformis dominated, and mixed species forest) had carbon densities ranging from 58 to 94 Mg C/ha. The ASF area supported a 2.8-3.0 Tg C carbon stock. Although total forested area in ASF did not change over the analyzed time period, ongoing disturbances, quantified by the basal area of cut tree stumps per sample plot, correlated with decreased carbon densities. Madunguni Forest, an adjoining forest patch, lost 86% of its forest cover and at least 76% of its terrestrial carbon stock in the time period. Improved management of wood harvesting in ASF and rehabilitation of Madunguni Forest could substantially increase terrestrial carbon sequestration in the region.
Carbon Storage and Land-Use Strategies in Agricultural Landscapes across Three Continents			The loss of carbon stocks through agricultural landuse change is a key driver of greenhouse gas emissions [1-4], and the methods used to manage agricultural landwill havemajor impacts on the global climate in the 21 st century [4-9]. It remains unresolvedwhether carbon losses would be minimized by increasing farm yields and limiting the conversion of natural habitats (''landsparing''), ormaximizingon-farmcarbonstocks, even at the costof reduced yields andtherefore greater habitat clearance (''landsharing''). In thispaper, weuse field surveys of over 11,000 trees, in-depth interviews with farmers, and existing agricultural data, to evaluate the potential impacts of these contrastingapproaches, and plausible intermediate strategies, on aboveground carbon stocks across a diverse range of agricultural and natural systems. Our analyses include agroforestry and oil palm plantations in the humid tropics of Ghana; cattle ranching in dry tropical forest in Mexico; and arable cropping in temperate wetlands and forests in Poland. Strikingly, despite the range of systems investigated, land sparing consistently had a higher potential to sustain regional above-ground carbon stocks than any other strategy. This was the case in all three regions and at all plausible levels of food production, including falls in demand. However, if agricultural production increases to meet likely future demand levels, we project large decreases in aboveground carbon stocks, regardless of land-use strategy. Our results strongly suggest that maintaining above-ground carbon stocks will depend on both limiting future food demand and minimizing agricultural expansion through linking high-yield farming with conserving or restoring natural habitats.
Carbon storage and sequestration of re-growing montane forests in southern Ecuador			The storage and sequestration of carbon by tropical montane forests is poorly understood. We quantified the above-ground biomass (AGB) storage in secondary tropical montane forests in southern Ecuador. The AGB in older secondary (>40 years old) forest was found to be 158 +/- 38 Mg ha(-1) of land surface at 1000 m elevation and 104 +/- 25 Mg ha(-1) of land surface at 2250 m elevation. This is less than the storage reported in a recent synthesis of AGB observations in mature tropical montane forests, potentially due to a legacy of selective logging within our study sites. The slope angle resulted in AGB being 1.5-10% greater when reported on a planimetric compared to land surface area basis. We also quantified AGB in areas of abandoned pasture where grazing and fire had been excluded. Pasture that had been recently abandoned (12 years) stored 2-18 Mg ha(-1) of AGB with the higher values due to the presence of relict trees. Regrowing secondary forests, established through natural regeneration, accumulated AGB at a rate of 10 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1) at 1000 m elevation and 4 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1) at 2250 m elevation, for the first 5-7 years after pasture abandonment. After 12-15 years, accumulation of AGB slowed to 1-2 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1). Net biomass accumulation rates were similar to those observed in lowland humid tropical forests, suggesting that regenerating tropical montane forests provide an important carbon sequestration. In newly regenerating forests, small trees (DBH < 10 cm) contributed up to 50% of total AGB. In the older secondary forest at high elevation coarse dead wood contributed 34% of total AGB. (C) 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Carbon storage and sequestration rate assessment and allometric model development in young teak plantations of tropical moist deciduous forest, India			Carbon (C) sequestration through plantations is one of the important mitigation measures for rising levels of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. This study aimed to assess C stocks and their sequestration rate, and to develop allometric models for estimation of C stocking in age-series young teak (Tectona grandis) plantations (1, 5, 11, 18, 24 and 30 years) by using biomass and productivity estimation and regression, respectively. These plantations were raised in tropical moist deciduous forests of Kumaun Himalayan tarai. Total C stocks estimated for these plantations were 1.6, 15.8, 35.4, 39.0, 61.5 and 73.2 Mg ha(-1), respectively. Aboveground and belowground C storage increased with increasing plantation age; however, the range of their percentage contribution showed little variation (87.8-88.2 and 11.7-12.7 %, respectively). The rate of C sequestration for these respective plantations was 1.06, 6.95, 5.46, 5.42, 3.39 and 5.37 Mg ha(-1) a(-1). Forty percent of the aboveground annual storage was retained in the tree while 60 % was released in the form of foliage, twigs, and fruit litter. In the case of total (tree) annual production, 43 % was retained while 57 % was released as litter including root. C stock, C sequestration rate, accumulation ratio (1.4-18.1), root:shoot C ratio (0.61-0.13) and production efficiency (0.01-0.18) were comparable to some previous reports for other species and forests. These data could be useful in deciding the harvesting age for young teak with respect to C storage and sequestration rate. Four allometric models using linear regression equations were developed between biomass (twice the C stock) and diameter, girth, and height of the tree at different ages. The diameter model was found more suitable for C stock prediction in similar areas.
Carbon storage capacity of tropical peatlands in natural and artificial drainage networks			Tropical peatlands store over 75 gigatons of carbon as organic matter that is protected from decomposition and fire by waterlogging if left undrained. Over millennia, this organic matter builds up between channels or rivers into gently mounded shapes called peat domes. Measurements of peat accumulation and water flow suggest that tropical peat domes approach a steady state in which the peat surface morphology is described by a uniform curvature, setting a limit on the carbon that a peatland can store. We explored the maximum amount of carbon that can accumulate as water-saturated peat in natural and artificial drainage networks of northwest and southern Borneo. We find that the maximum volume of peat accumulation in a channel-bounded parcel is proportional to the square of the parcel area times a scale-independent factor describing the shape of the parcel boundary. Thus, carbon capacity per area scales roughly with mean parcel area in the peatland. Our analysis provides a tool that can be used to predict the long-term impacts of artificial drainage, and to devise optimal strategies for arresting fires and greenhouse gas emissions in tropical peatlands. © 2020 The Author(s). Published by IOP Publishing Ltd
Carbon storage in a peri-urban neotropical forest: Assessing its potential and patterns of change over half a century			Forest ecosystems are associated with environmental regulation services, such as carbon storage, which is an outstanding service. Carbon fluxes in cities are difficult to estimate due to the scale at which they are addressed, particularly at the local level. In this work, we were interested in determining the carbon stored in the aboveground biomass of the tropical montane cloud forest tree species located on the western periphery of the city of Xalapa, Veracruz, Mexico. With these data, we interpolated the storage and sequestration over five decades through image satellites and aerial photography of this unique forest. Additionally, to assess this potential as a basis for a biodiversity contribution to city resilience, we conducted phytosociological sampling. Native species such as Quercus xalapensis, Liquidambar styraciflua var. mexicana and Q. lancifolia showed the most significant values of 72.92, 58.79, and 49.14 Mg ha-1, respectively, of carbon. We used phytosociological sampling to better understand structural and functional features of urban forest biodiversity that can contribute to management practices for adaptation to climate change. In addition, the native species currently studied offer an opportunity for the city to implement better-targeted reforestation and ecological restoration programs for integrated landscaping in urban planning. Our results suggest that between 1966 and 2022, there was a forest recovery of 52.4 ha and an increase in urban areas of 63.4 ha, which is equivalent to an increase from 7,700.86 Mg ha-1 in 1966 to 12,620.00 Mg ha-1 in 2022. In this context, it is possible to both recover the vegetation cover and expand the city, thus avoiding part of the loss of ecosystem services that urbanization usually implies. This should be promoted among decision-makers and citizens in urban planning. Recovery processes can take place successfully in some cases even as urban areas expand. This possibility is relevant due to the many contributions that vegetation provides to citizens, including carbon storage. The opportunity to study five decades allows us to know the history, monitor the processes and make a projection to conserve the vegetation and improve management.
Carbon storage in a silvopastoral system compared to that in a deciduous dry forest in Michoacan, Mexico			Livestock production in the tropics contributes significantly to global greenhouse gas emissions, so better understanding the role of silvopastoral systems (SPS) in mitigating such emissions is necessary. The aim of this study was to evaluate the amounts of carbon stored in the biomass and soil organic carbon (SOC) components of a Leucaena leucocephala cum Panicum maximum silvopasture system (SPS) compared to a deciduous tropical forest (DTF), and a grass monoculture (GM) in Michoacan, Mexico. The above- and below-ground biomass were measured by destructive sampling in the SPS and GM, while previously reported allometric equations were used to quantify biomass stocks in the DTF. The SOC concentration up to 30cm was determined by dry combustion method. The SPS and DTF contained more aboveground biomass (41.8 +/- 3.30 and 36.7 +/- 5.72MgDMha(-1)) compared to GM (8.0 +/- 0.76MgDMha(-1)). However, the SPS exhibited greater belowground biomass (16.4 +/- 1.95MgDMha(-1)) than the other systems. The DTF had the highest SOC fraction in all depth classes with values ranging from 3.1 +/- 0.07% to 3.7 +/- 0.06%, respectively, compared to the other systems. The total carbon stocks in SPS was similar to DTF (120.7 +/- 10.97 vs. 120.9 +/- 6.38MgCha(-1)) but was significantly higher than GM (78.2 +/- 8.41MgCha(-1)). In dry tropical conditions, SPS displays enormous potential for increasing biomass and soil carbon stocks compared to the GM and can thus be used as a greenhouse gas mitigation strategy in livestock production systems.
Carbon Storage in Amazonian Peatlands: Distribution and Dynamics			This proposal aims to make a step change in the precision and accuracy of our knowledge of the distribution of peatlands in the tropics, and to develop a capacity to predict and monitor future changes to the carbon storage function of these peatlands.  Tropical forest ecosystems are important for carbon storage. The densest 'carbon hotspots' occur where peat underlies the vegetation. Peat is an organic soil formed by the accumulation of plant litter, often over thousands of years, usually under waterlogged conditions which limit micro-organism activity and inhibit litter decomposition.   Given that they store so much carbon per unit area, tropical peatlands should be priorities for conservation. Unfortunately, it is not currently known with certainty where peatlands occur. Even using satellite imagery, it is challenging to distinguish forest overlying peat from forest occurring on dry soil. Mapping peat deposits in the field by trial and error is impractical given the large areas of remote terrain involved.   This proposal builds on an extensive record of research into tropical peatlands by the research team. Our group has worked extensively in the Pastaza-Mara&ntilde;&oacute;n Foreland Basin (PMFB) in Peruvian Amazonia. Here, in one of the highest-rainfall regions of Amazonia, the existence of extensive bodies of peat was only revealed by a publication in 2009. Since then, we have undertaken extensive fieldwork and laboratory analyses, and have developed an algorithm that uses remotely-sensed (satellite) data to predict the distribution of vegetation types associated with peat in the PMFB. On this basis we estimate that there is more than 35,000 square km of peat in the PMFB, making it by far the largest known peatland complex in Amazonia.  Our results were used to build the science case for the first ever carbon-conservation project funded by the Green Climate Fund, a major, intergovernmental, UN- and UK-backed climate mitigation project. We now want to develop the science base further to enable similar projects throughout the scheme.  Our first aim is to substantially develop and improve our current method for inferring the distributions of vegetation, peat and carbon from satellite data, by addressing fundamental gaps in our understanding of the controls on these distributions and by testing a set of technical improvements. We will then test how well our model works on floodplains in other parts of Amazonia. Ultimately we want to know how widespread peat is across the whole of Amazonia.  Our second aim is to develop, for the first time, the ability to predict and monitor future changes to tropical peatland carbon stocks. It is already possible to predict carbon accumulation patterns in northern peatlands from climatic and topographic data, and hence to predict how carbon accumulation may change under future climate scenarios (e.g. climatic drying), but a lack of basic data has prevented similar modelling from being attempted in the tropics. Recent advances in fusing modelling and remotely-sensed data are also opening new possibilities for monitoring present-day changes to the carbon cycle.   In order to achieve our second aim, we will study the pattern of peatland carbon storage through the last several thousand years, measure the rates at which litter is added to the peat and removed by decomposition today, and determine how these rates are affected by variations in hydrological regimes. We will use this information to determine, using a process-based model of peat accumulation, the conditions required for peat to accumulate. By doing so we will be able to evaluate and refine two complementary, simpler process-based models of peat distribution and carbon cycling that are suited to prediction and monitoring on a pan-tropical scale.
Carbon storage of harvest-age teak (Tectona grandis) plantations, Panama			Reforestation is being considered as a mitigation option to reduce the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide and predicted climate change. Forestry-based carbon storage projects are being introduced in many tropical countries, and assessment of carbon storage potentials is made difficult by a lack of species-level information. We measured above- and belowground biomass and tissue carbon content of 20-year-old teak (Tectona grandis) trees in four Panamanian plantations to estimate carbon storage potential. A regression relating diameter at breast height (DBH) to total tree carbon storage was constructed and used to estimate plantation-level tree carbon storage, which averaged 120 t/ha. Litter, undergrowth and soil compartments were estimated to contain 3.4, 2.6 and 225 t C/ha, respectively. The soil carbon was a one-time measurement, not an estimate of soil C accumulation. We estimate carbon storage in Panamanian harvest-age teak plantations to be 351 t C/ha. Various methods of calculation of carbon storage in short-rotation plantations are discussed. (C) 2002 Published by Elsevier Science B.V.
Carbon storage potential of tropical wetland forests of South Asia: a case study from Bhitarkanika Wildlife Sanctuary, India			Mangroves are halophytic vegetation comprising the tropics. Bhitarkanika Wildlife Sanctuary, being a local hotspot of mangrove, acts as carbon sink for mitigating increased CO2 level in the atmosphere. The study estimated total biomass and total carbon in five selected stations of this Wildlife Sanctuary in reference to relevant ambient parameters of water (temperature, pH, and salinity) and soil (temperature, pH, electrical conductivity, bulk density, organic carbon, organic matter, and texture) seasonally. The average values for total biomass and total carbon measured in this study are 866.67 ± 166.10 t ha−1 and 444.68 ± 83.70 t ha−1, respectively. The average soil organic carbon recorded was 3.73 ± 2.10 t ha−1 and average litter carbon was 0.59 ± 0.20 t ha−1, respectively. Among the components, above-ground biomass constitutes 55–70% of total biomass and total carbon. Significant positive relationship between biomass (above-ground biomass, below-ground biomass, litter biomass, total biomass) and carbon (above-ground carbon, below-ground carbon, litter carbon, soil organic carbon, and total carbon) was obtained with respect to selected physico-chemical variables which proved the significant effect of change in biomass and carbon to changing parameters of the ambient media in the study area. The analysis of variance computed between season and station has also proved the above phenomenon. The study revealed the mangrove carbon storage potential of 21 mangrove species, which is at par with the biomass of South-east Asia and South west Pacific countries. Hence, mangrove conservation programs like REDD+ can be adopted in this wildlife sanctuary being the 2nd largest mangrove patch of India after Sundarbans. © 2019, Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
Carbon storage versus fossil fuel substitution: A climate change mitigation option for two different land use categories based on short and long rotation forestry in India			Short rotation bioenergy crops for energy production are considered an effective means to mitigate the greenhouse effect, mainly due to their ability to substitute fossil fuels. Alternatively, carbon can be sequestered and stored in the living biomass. This paper compares the two land use categories (forest land and non-forest land) for two management practices (short rotation vs. long rotation) to study mitigation potential of afforestation and fossil fuel substitution as compared to carbon storage. Significant carbon benefit can be obtained in the long run from using lands for growing short rotation energy crops and substituting fossil fuels by the biomass thus produced, as opposed to sequestering carbon in the biomass of the trees. When growth rates are high and harvest is used in a sustainable manner (i.e., replanting after every harvest), the opportunities for net carbon reductions appear to be fossil fuel substitution, rather than storage in ecosystem biomass. Our results suggest that at year 100 a total of 216 Mg C ha-1 is sequestered for afforestation/reforestation using long rotation sal (Shorea robusta Gaertn. f) species, as opposed to offset of 412 Mg C ha-1 for carbon storage and fossil fuel substitution for short rotation poplar (Populus Deltoides Marsh) plantations. The bioenergy option results in a continuous stream of about 3 Mg C ha-1 yr-1 of carbon benefits per year on forest land and 4 Mg C ha-1 yr-1 on non-forest land. Earlier studies have shown that in India waste land availability for establishing energy plantations is in the range of 9.6 to 36. 5 Mha. Thus, using the 758 Tg biomass per year generated from 9.6 Mha waste land gives a mitigation potential in the range of 227 to 303 Tg C per year for carbon storage and fossil fuel substitution from poplar plantation for substituting coal based power generation. Depending upon the land availability for plantation, the potential for energy generation is in the range of 11,370 PJ, possibly amounting to a bioenergy supply of 43% of the total projected energy consumption in 2015. Further studies are needed to estimate the mitigation potential of other species with different productivities for overall estimation of the economic feasibility and social acceptability in a tropical country like India. © The Author(s) 2010.
Carbon storage, mitigation and sequestration potential of Haldina cordifolia and Mitragyna parvifolia in tropical dry deciduous environment of Chhattisgarh, India			The current research explored the storage, mitigation, and sequestration of carbon in two age groups of Haldina cordifolia and Mitragyna parvifolia grown on entisols of tropical dry deciduous environment of Chhattisgarh, India. The random sampling technique was used for measuring the various ecological attributes of the stands. The average girth increment for both the species was more in site-I (6 year old plantation). H. cordifolia and M. parvifolia reflected increment of 2.3-5 cm yr- 1 and 2.5-5 cm yr-1, respectively. The NPP (net primary production) values for both the sites viz., site-I (6 year old plantation) and site-II (4 year old plantation) were 10.32 t ha-1 yr- 1 and 8.92 t ha-1 yr- 1, respectively for H. cordifolia plantation and 11.08 t ha- 1 yr- 1 and 9.63 t ha-1 yr-1 for M. parvifolia plantation. The carbon (C) storage, mitigation, and carbon sequestration (Cseq.) values for the two sites ranged from 19.22-24 t ha- 1, 70.54-88.08 t ha- 1, and 3.08-3.81 t ha-1 yr- 1, respectively. It is evident that site-I (6 year old plantation) and M. parvifolia perform better than site-II (4 year old plantation) and H. cordifolia, respectively. Both the species belong to family Rubiaceae and among both the species M. parvifolia reflected comparatively better growth traits over H. cordifolia. Thus, M. parvifolia can be effectively utilized for afforestation, reforestation, and other plantation programs in this region as well as other places with similar environmental conditions.
Carbon Trade-Offs Along Tropical Forest Margins: Lessons from ASB Partnership work in Cameroon			Changes in forest and tree cover can lead to rapid and substantial carbon emissions. Currently, about 7.3 million ha of forests are lost annually, releasing an estimated 5.8 gigatons of carbon dioxide (Gt CO2) per year into the atmosphere. This represents 12-17% of human-generated greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. On the other hand, forests have the capacity to act as sinks (the ability to absorb and hold CO2 for long periods). The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Third Assessment report puts the total potential for avoiding carbon emissions through aggressive forestry practice changes on 700 million ha of forest at about 60-80 billion tons, or about 12-25% of current fossil fuel emissions over a period of 50 years. As a corollary, forests and trees have been at the heart of strategies and negotiations for mitigating GHG emissions in the last few years. The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation (REDD+) are two key policy instruments that have emerged in the last few years to enable climate change mitigation through forests and trees. The CDM is a mechanism employed within the context of the Kyoto protocol to enable carbon sequestration through afforestation and reforestation (A/R), but has had little success so far in developing countries (Boyd et al. 2009). Meanwhile agreement was reached on the key principles for a REDD+ mechanism at the 16th Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Cancún. The REDD+ idea suggests a mechanism in which countries that reduce national level deforestation to below an agreed level would receive compensation or rewards. These countries may also make commitments to stabilize or further reduce deforestation in the future. Such reductions can be obtained through “reducing emissions from deforestation, " “reducing emissions from forest degradation, " “conservation of forest carbon stocks, " “sustainable management of forests, " and “enhancement of carbon stocks.” The reductions and rewards must contribute to sustainable development. The level of sustainable development benefits, costs and trade-offs to be expected from a REDD+ type of scheme remains a fundamental question, as very little evidence currently exists, but expectations of win-win situations are high. At what point, or when, will carbon represent a good proposition to land users seeking to put land into alternative livelihoods and biodiversity conservation uses? This chapter examines the trade-offs between carbon and alternative land uses in the southern forest zone of Cameroon. It uses evidence from long-term research by the Alternatives to Slash-and-Burn (ASB) Partnership for the Tropical Forest Margins (see also chapter by Gockowski and Van Asten). In line with current global forest and tree climate mitigation strategies, the ASB Partnership is conducting research on how to reduce deforestation along tropical forest margins without compromising agricultural productivity and the provision of environmental services. ASB was created in 1994 as a partnership between international and national research organizations and universities, and is currently working in a network of sites across the humid and sub-humid tropics. ASB research primarily focuses on the sustainability of impacts in terms of livelihoods, agricultural productivity, environmental services, and the trade-offs therein. Uniform indicators, methods and approaches have been applied to understand land use, carbon, biodiversity, agricultural productivity and livelihood impacts across more than 12 sites (Palm et al. 2005). This chapter focuses on trade-offs between carbon, profitability and biodiversity in order to provide insights into the potential for REDD+ and other mechanisms to meet the triple objectives of climate, development and conservation using Cameroon as an example. © 2012 ICRAF and CIAT, for the CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security.
Carbon, Fossil Fuel, and Biodiversity Mitigation With Wood and Forests			Life-cycle analyses, energy analyses, and a range of utilization efficiencies were developed to determine the carbon dioxide (CO2) and fossil fuel (FF) saved by various solid wood products, wood energy, and unharvested forests. Some products proved very efficient in CO2 and FF savings, while others did not. Not considering forest regrowth after harvest or burning if not harvested, efficient products save much more CO2 than the standing forest; but wood used only for energy generally saves slightly less. Avoided emissions (using wood in place of steel and concrete) contributes the most to CO2 and FF savings compared to the product and wood energy contributions. Burning parts of the harvested logs that are not used for products creates an additional CO2 and FF savings. Using wood substitutes could save 14 to 31% of global CO2 emissions and 12 to 19% of global FF consumption by using 34 to 100% of the world's sustainable wood growth. Maximizing forest CO2 sequestration may not be compatible with biodiversity. More CO2 can be sequestered synergistically in the products or wood energy and landscape together than in the unharvested landscape. Harvesting sustainably at an optimum stand age will sequester more carbon in the combined products, wood energy, and forest than harvesting sustainably at other ages.
Carbon–biodiversity relationships in a highly diverse subtropical forest			Carbon-focused climate mitigation strategies are becoming increasingly important in forests. However, with ongoing biodiversity declines we require better knowledge of how much such strategies account for biodiversity. We particularly lack information across multiple trophic levels and on established forests, where the interplay between carbon stocks, stand age, and tree diversity might influence carbon–biodiversity relationships. Using a large dataset (>4600 heterotrophic species of 23 taxonomic groups) from secondary, subtropical forests, we tested how multitrophic diversity and diversity within trophic groups relate to aboveground, belowground, and total carbon stocks at different levels of tree species richness and stand age. Our study revealed that aboveground carbon, the key component of climate-based management, was largely unrelated to multitrophic diversity. By contrast, total carbon stocks—that is, including belowground carbon—emerged as a significant predictor of multitrophic diversity. Relationships were nonlinear and strongest for lower trophic levels, but nonsignificant for higher trophic level diversity. Tree species richness and stand age moderated these relationships, suggesting long-term regeneration of forests may be particularly effective in reconciling carbon and biodiversity targets. Our findings highlight that biodiversity benefits of climate-oriented management need to be evaluated carefully, and only maximizing aboveground carbon may fail to account for biodiversity conservation requirements. © 2023 The Authors. Global Change Biology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Carbonated tiger-high above-ground biomass carbon stock in protected areas and corridors and its observed negative relationship with tiger population density and occupancy in the Terai Arc Landscape, Nepal			Healthy natural forests maintain and/or enhances carbon stock while also providing potential habitat and an array of services to wildlife including large carnivores such as the tiger. This study is the first of its kind in assessing relationships between above-ground biomass carbon stock, tiger density and occupancy probability and its status in protected areas, corridors, and forest connectivity blocks. The dataset used to assess the relationship were: (1) Converged posterior tiger density estimates from camera trap data derived from Bayesian- Spatially Explicit Capture-Recapture model from Chitwan National Park; (2) Site wise probability of tiger occupancy estimated across the Terai Arc Landscape and (3) Habitat wise above-ground biomass carbon stock estimated across the Terai Arc Landscape. Carbon stock maps were derived based on eight habitat classes and conservation units linking satellite (Landsat 7 ETM+) images and field collected sampling data. A significant negative relationship (r = -0.20, p<0.01) was observed between above-ground biomass carbon stock and tiger density in Chitwan National Park and with tiger occupancy (r = -0.24, p = 0.023) in the landscape. Within protected areas, we found highest mean above-ground biomass carbon stock in high density mixed forest (similar to 223 tC/ha) and low in degraded scrubland (similar to 73.2 tC/ha). Similarly, we found: (1) highest tiger density similar to 0.06 individuals per 0.33 km(2) in the riverine forest and lowest estimates (similar to 0.00) in degraded scrubland; and (2) predictive tiger density of 0.0135 individuals per 0.33 km(2) is equivalent to mean total of 43.7 tC/ha in Chitwan National Park. Comparatively, we found similar above-ground biomass carbon stock among corridors, large forest connectivity blocks (similar to 117 tC/ha), and within in tiger bearing protected areas (similar to 119 tC/ha). Carbon conservation through forest restoration particularly in riverine habitats (forest and grassland) and low transitional state forests (degraded scrubland) provides immense opportunities to generate win-win solutions, sequester more carbon and maintain habitat integrity for tigers and other large predators.
Case Studies in America on Carbon Management and Sequestration in Agriculture			Agriculture, energy, and the environment are interdependent dimensions essential for agro-ecosystem sustainability. This chapter focuses on biomass carbon (C)-based practices as the primary pathway to develop resilient, regenerative, proftable, and environmentally friendly production systems. It includes case studies on C balance with biomass-C inputs across production systems in South and North America. The case studies include no-till production systems in Brazil, diverse cropping practices in the western United States, and long-term crop rotation systems experiments in Uruguay. Adopting, expanding, and consolidating C management practices will be the most prominent challenge farmers will face in the coming years worldwide. These case studies provide the consistent message that C management and soil health-oriented practices are central to implementing transitions of farming systems to become both sustainable and carbon-neutral. Cutting-edge technologies enhancing C capture and greenhouse gas sequestration, providing ecosystem services, and maximizing soil-water storage contribute to climate change mitigation and improved food security.
Challenges and opportunities for large-scale reforestation in the Eastern Amazon using native species			Reforestation and forest restoration are recognized as an effective means of halting biodiversity loss and increasing the performance of ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration and the protection and maintenance of water resources. The objective of this review is to describe the main challenges and opportunities for large-scale forest restoration and reforestation using native species in the Amazon, focusing on Para state and the Itacaiunas watershed. Large-scale forest restoration and reforestation in the Eastern Amazon may contribute to meeting national and global restoration commitments and reducing/eliminating the actual forest deficit caused by noncompliance with the Brazilian Native Vegetation Protection Law, concomitantly mitigating impacts on climate change, enhancing ecosystem services (e.g., protection of water resources and reduction of soil erosion) and maintaining biodiversity. The selection of active and passive reforestation approaches depends on land-use history, landscape context and reforestation targets, and the promotion of natural regeneration reduces implementation costs. To measure the ecological and socioeconomic success of forest restoration and reforestation, a large number of on-the-ground and remote indicators are available, and the use of a combination of both methods can reduce the monitoring cost. The socioeconomic benefits of reforestation include financial gains from restoration and carbon programs; furthermore, the commercialization of timber and non-timber products and their use for subsistence may improve livelihoods and farm incomes. Nevertheless, implementation of large-scale reforestation in the Eastern Amazon requires research regarding the selection and the nutritional demands of native species and the development of adequate soil management strategies that promote the growth of native species and yields. The insufficient availability of seeds and seedlings is a major bottleneck for large-scale forest restoration and reforestation with native species. Thus, increasing the availability, diversity and quality of seedlings and seeds of native species to supply the demand for planting activities, as well as the registration of producers in the National Register of Seeds and Seedlings, is necessary to achieve compliance with national legislation and international commitments. Competition between reforestation and the expansion of agricultural and cattle ranching frontiers combined with a lack of markets for commercial products from restored areas constrains the socioeconomic viability of large-scale reforestation. To outweigh deforestation incentives, regulation and effective implementation of markets and programs such as REDD+, CDM and PES is thus paramount. To enhance the integration of human well-being, socioeconomic enhancements and ecological functionality, forest and landscape restoration concepts offer promising tools for the region.
Challenges of Forest Conservation			Forest conservation is entering a critical and challenging period due to a shifting mosaic of threats, policies, and actors. In this chapter we: (i) provide a brief summary of the history of forest conservation; (ii) identify the main threats to the preservation and biological integrity of the World's forests; and (iii) outline the key strategies that have been developed to address these challenges. We specifically highlight the development of macroeconomic mechanisms for forest conservation, many of which are a consequence of the recent alignment of forest conservation with the international agenda of climate change. Such approaches include market-based mechanisms such as the certification of forest products, payments for ecosystem services, carbon credits, clean development mechanisms, and REDD (Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation). Another promising financial tool for forest conservation is debt for nature swaps, which have enormous potential in much of the developing world. We conclude by identifying the key challenges for the conservation of forests in the 21st century, the most important of which will be to halt the continuing loss of habitat from the biodiverse tropical forests of the developing world.
Change in Land Use Affects Soil Organic Carbon Dynamics and Distribution in Tropical Systems			Anthropogenic land cover change is directly responsible for the deforestation and degradation of tropical forests. In this context, assessing soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks is key to understanding the impact of anthropogenic activities on SOC so that we can implement management practices that effectively reduce emissions or promote carbon sequestration. Our objective was to assess the effect of land-use change on the dynamics and distribution of SOC in three systems (agriculture, pasture and agroforestry) after 40 years of deforestation in a tropical dry forest in the central-eastern region of Honduras. For this purpose, the bulk density, percentage of coarse fragments (>2 mm) and soil organic carbon content were determined at three depths (0.00-0.10 m, 0.10-0.20 m and 0.20-0.30 m). The results showed an increase in bulk density for all new uses, although soil compaction had not yet occurred. In terms of total soil organic carbon (TOC) stocks, deforestation caused a decrease from 17% to 48% in agricultural and agroforestry soils, respectively; on the other hand, grasslands did not show significant differences compared to tropical dry forest, suggesting that they have a high potential as carbon sinks in deforested tropical areas. However, this did not imply a better state of the system, as the greatest increases in bulk density were found in pastures.
Change in soil carbon following afforestation			Quantifying changes in soil C may be an important consideration under large-scale afforestation or reforestation. We reviewed global data on changes in soil C following afforestation, available from 43 published or unpublished studies, encompassing 204 sites. Data were highly variable, with soil C either increasing or decreasing, particularly in young (<10-year) forest stands. Because studies varied in the number of years since forest establishment and the initial soil C content, we calculated change in soil C as a weighted-average (i.e. sum of C change divided by sum of years since forest establishment) relative to the soil C content under previous agricultural systems at <10, >10 and <30 cm sampling depths. On average, soil C in the <10 cm (or <30 cm) layers generally decreased by 3.46% per year (or 0.63% per year) relative to the initial soil C content during the first 5 years of afforestation, followed by a decrease in the rate of decline and eventually recovery to C contents found in agricultural soils at about age 30. In plantations older than 30 years, C content was similar to that under the previous agricultural systems within the surface 10 cm of soil, yet at other sampling depths, soil C had increased by between 0.50 and 0.86% per year. Amounts of C lost or gained by soil are generally small compared with accumulation of C in tree biomass.The most important factors affecting change in soil C were previous land use, climate and the type of forest established. Results suggest that most soil C was lost when softwoods, particularly Pinus radiata plantations, were established on ex-improved pastoral land in temperate regions. Accumulation of soil C was greatest when deciduous hardwoods, or N-2-fixing species (either as an understorey or as a plantation), were established on ex-cropped land in tropical or subtropical regions. Long-term management regimes (e.g. stocking, weed control, thinning, fertiliser application and fire management) may also influence accumulation of soil C. Accumulation is maximised by maintaining longer (20-50 years) forest rotations. Furthermore, inclusion of litter in calculations reversed the observed average decrease in soil C, so that amount of C in soil and litter layer was greater than under preceding pasture. (C) 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Change in termite communities along a chronosequence of mango tree orchards in the north of Cte d'Ivoire			Termites constitute the major component of the macrofauna of the soil, and influence the structure of the soil, in tropical regions. This study aimed to estimate their assemblages in a chronosequence of mango tree orchards in the north of Cte d'Ivoire and compare them with those in unmanaged savanna. Using a standardized method of rapid biodiversity estimation, termites were collected in seven age classes of mango tree orchards (class 1: < 5 years; class 2: 5-9 years; class 3: 10-14 years; class 4: 15-19 years; class 5: 20-24 years; class 6: 25-29 years; class 7: 30 years and over) and compared with termites collected from the savanna. Results show that the species richness was lowest in the young orchards of class 1 (9 species), and increased with the age of the orchards to reach its maximum in the old orchards of class 7 (28 species); these latter were comparable in richness with the savanna (26 species). The Shannon index (H') and the evenness (E) follow the same trend as the species richness. The orchards of classes 1 and 2 were more dissimilar to the savanna. In contrast, termites were well represented in the savanna and in the old orchard of classes 6 and 7. Rhinotermitinae and Cubitermitinae subfamilies, absent in the young orchards of classes 1 and 2, were very abundant in the old orchards (classes 6 and 7). Overall, the findings of this study show that only the old mango orchards sustain termite diversity that comes close to that of the savanna. In this region, the cessation of agricultural activities in mango orchards favors the reconstitution of termite communities and presumably the restoration of the ecosystem services provided by termites. Thus it would be possible to combine agriculture and the conservation soil biodiversity.
Changes in above- and belowground biomass in early successional tropical secondary forests after shifting cultivation in Sarawak, Malaysia			Uncertainties in the rate of biomass variation with forest ageing in tropical secondary forests, particularly in belowground components, limit the accuracy of carbon pool estimates in tropical regions. We monitored changes in above- and belowground biomass, leaf area index (LAI), and biomass allocation to the leaf component to determine the variation in carbon accumulation rate with forest age after shifting cultivation in Sarawak, Malaysia. Nine plots in a 4-year-old forest and fourteen plots in a 10-year-old forest were monitored for 5 and 7 years, respectively. Forest and plant part biomass were calculated from an allometric equation obtained from the same forest stands. Both above- and belowground biomass increased rapidly during the initial decade after abandonment. In contrast, a much slower rate of biomass accumulation was observed after the initial decade. LAI also increased by approximately double from the 4-year-old to 10-year-old forest, and then gently increased to the 17-year-old forest. We also found that allocation variation in leaf biomass and nitrogen was closely related to the rate of biomass accumulation as a forest aged. During the first decade after abandonment, a high biomass and nitrogen allocation to the leaf component may have allowed for a high rate of biomass accumulation. However, reduction in those allocations to leaf component after the initial decade may have helped to suppress the biomass accumulation rate in older secondary forests. Roots accounted for 14.0-16.1% of total biomass in the 4-17-year-old abandoned secondary forests. We also verified the model predicted values for belowground biomass by Cairns et al. (1997) and Mokany et al. (2006), although both models overestimated the values throughout our data sets by 45-50% in the 10-year-old forest. The low root:shoot ratio in the secondary forests may have caused this overestimation. Therefore, our results suggest that we should modify the models to estimate belowground biomass considering the low root:shoot ratio in tropical secondary forests. (C) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Changes in and driving forces of ecosystem services in tropical southwestern China			Tropical forests provide important ecosystem services and biodiversity for the world. With human activities and economic growth, tropical forests are becoming the primary sources of new plantations, making tropical regions hotspots of ecosystem service degenerations and biodiversity losses. Understanding the driving forces of ecological consequences is the key to local sustainable development and human well-being improvements. Therefore, we spatially quantified the changes in ecosystem services in tropical China in the past twenty years by remote sensing and InVEST model. The driving forces were further investigated by using Geodetector. We found that: 1) in the past twenty years, the area of evergreen broad-leaved forests, coniferous forests, and rubber forests have increased by 13.01%, 43.39%, and 101.23%, respectively. The shrublands and agricultural lands are the major contributors to these increased areas; 2) with the area increasing of forests, carbon storage and soil retention have increased by 9.40% and 0.30%, while nitrogen export and water yield have decreased by 43.30%, and 12.27%. This pattern of increase in carbon storage and soil retention was found in the highlands, while not in the lowlands, where large areas of evergreen broad-leaved forests have been converted to rubber forests; 3) NDVI was highly correlated to the carbon storage (q value = 0.201) and nitrogen export (q value = 0.109), while slope and precipitation mainly affected the soil retention (q value = 0.253) and water yield (q value = 0.073), respectively. This study provides a reference for ecological protection and management in tropical China. © 2023 The Author(s)
Changes in Brazil's Forest Code can erode the potential of riparian buffers to supply watershed services			In Brazil, the Forest Code requires landholders to maintain fixed-width buffers of native vegetation along watercourses - legally called Areas of Permanent Preservation (APPs). In 2012, agricultural activities started to be partially allowed in APPs, but only if best management practices on soil and water conservation are adopted and if a narrow buffer strip with native vegetation is restored adjacently to the watercourse. In this paper, we present a modeling framework to investigate the capacity of legal compliant APPs to supply watershed services (erosion control and stream bank stabilization) in a 2,200 ha watershed in Sao Paulo State, Brazil. Our results suggest that the narrower the riparian buffer the lower the control of soil erosion dynamic within APPs, and that riparian buffers smaller than 8 m can act as a source of sediments to streams. The adoption of best management practices can contribute to controlling soil erosion within APPs but the presence of native forests in the first 15 m is necessary to guarantee equivalent protection to streams when compared to APPs completely covered by forests. Moreover, we observed that forest restoration within APPs helped to reduce the average soil loss of the watershed by only 20 %, compared to a reduction of 55 % when best practices are implemented in all watershed agricultural areas. We conclude that (i) the reduced requirements for APP restoration may contribute to stream sedimentation, which will likely affect the supply of watershed services by stream ecosystems; (ii) the implementation of best management practices in APPs will not have the same effect as native forests to reduce stream sedimentation; and (iii) the adoption of best management practices in all agricultural production areas and not only within APPs as required by law - is the best strategy to promote the supply of watershed services to society.
Changes in carbon storage in fallow forests in the tropical lowlands of Borneo			The range of CO2 emissions to the atmosphere from tropical land-use change has long been debated. A major source of uncertainty is attributable to the fluxes of CO2 due to changes in tropical land use. For example, estimate is different depending on whether the biomass or carbon content of tropical forests is totally lost by burning or recovered by regrowth. To estimate CO2 absorption by fallow forests after shifting cultivation, we investigated the floristic composition and measured the biomass of fallow forests in East Kalimantan, Indonesia. Above-ground biomass of fallow forests were 8-10 t/ha at one-year-old stands and 45-56 t/ha at 10-12-year-old stands, regardless of the floristic composition. It seems reasonable to suppose that 7.4% of carbon released to the atmosphere by tropical rain forest destruction is reabsorbed and stored by fallow forests in Indonesia. If this is a universal trend in other tropical forests, a significant amount of CO2 is reabsorbed in fallow forests. We consider that fallow forests like the one studied here are substantial carbon sinks and help to offset the effects of anthropogenic CO2 emissions. (C) 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Changes in litter decomposition and soil organic carbon in a reforested tropical deciduous cover (India)			Soil organic carbon (SOC) up to 1 m depth originates from contemporary vegetation cover dating from past millennia. Deforestation and reforestation with economically important species is influencing soil carbon sequestration. An attempt has been made in this study to evaluate the impact of vegetation cover change (due to replacement of natural heterogeneous cover by teak and bamboo) on SOC using carbon isotopes (delta C-13, C-14) in a tropical system (India). A litter decomposition study was carried out to understand the impact of differences in vegetation characteristics (specifically of leaves) on decomposition. Both experiments were carried out to look at the impact of changes in vegetation characteristics (specifically of leaves) on litter decomposition, and how these influence near term litter decomposition rates (k values) and long-term SOC content of the soil system beneath. Leaves of teak, bamboo and eight other species were selected for this study. The proportion of structural carbohydrates (lignin and cellulose) in leaves significantly (at 5 % level) influenced k values. The SOC and carbon isotope data collected in this study indicate that C-3 vegetation cover in the study area could be contemporary and dominant for the past few centuries. This can be extended up to 2,200 years from the recorded C-14 values of teak cover. The study confirms that k values of leaf litter influence SOC present beneath the vegetation cover at the decadal/century time scale.
Changes in soil C and N stocks and nutrient dynamics 13 years after recovery of degraded land using leguminous nitrogen-fixing trees			In tropical forest areas with highly weathered soils, organic matter plays an important role in soil functioning and forest sustainability. When forests are clear-cut. the soil begins almost immediately to lose organic matter, triggering a series of soil degradation processes, the extent and intensity of which depends on soil management. Depending on the level of soil degradation, the rate at which the system can re-establish itself can be slow and may require the use of degraded land restoration techniques. This study aimed at evaluating the potential of pioneer leguminous nitrogen-fixing trees to recuperate degraded land. The area studied - located in the coastal town of Angra dos Reis in the State of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil - was planted with seven species of fast-growing leguminous nitrogen-fixing trees in 1991. The nutrient concentrations (Ca, Mg, P and K) and N and C stocks in the soil and litter were determined, in addition to the free- and occluded-light fractions of soil organic matter. Soil samples were also collected from two reference areas: (1) an area of undisturbed native forest; and (2) a deforested area spontaneously colonised by Guinea grass (Panicum maximum). The nutrient stocks in the litter of the restored area were similar to those found in native forest. The recuperation technique used was able to re-establish the soil C and N stocks after 13 years. C and N increased by 1.73 and 0.13 Mg ha(-1) year(-1), respectively. The free-light fraction was highest in the recuperated area and lowest in the deforested area. The occluded-light fraction of the recuperated area was higher than that of the native forest only in the 0-5 cm layer. Both the free-light and occluded fractions were higher in the native forest and recuperated areas than in the deforested area. Since the free-light and the occluded-light fractions are the result of litterfall and decomposition, these results - combined with the data of litter stocks and soil C and N stocks - indicate that the use of legume trees was efficient in re-establishing the nutrient cycling processes of the systems. These results also show that recovering degraded land with this technique is effective in sequestering carbon dioxide from the atmosphere at high rates. (C) 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Changes in soil carbon stocks across the Forest-Agroforest-Agriculture/Pasture continuum in various agroecological regions: A meta-analysis			The contribution of agroforestry systems (AFS) to enhance soil organic carbon (SOC) storage in soil layers due to the presence of deep tree roots are of interest in the context of promoting carbon sinks and greenhouse gas mitigation. To quantify the relative soil C contribution from trees in agroforestry systems (AFS), this study assessed the reported differences in SOC stocks under agroforestry systems in comparison with other land-use systems (Agriculture, Forestry, Pasture, or Uncultivated Land) in various soil-depth classes in four agroecological regions (arid and semiarid, ASA; lowland humid tropics, LHT; Mediterranean, MED; and temperate, TEM) around the world. Using mixed-effect models and a meta-analytical approach, we synthesized data from 78 peer-reviewed studies that generated 858 data points (sites) on SOC stock under various AFS practiced globally. Comparing Agroforest vs. Agriculture or Agroforest vs. Pasture, SOC stocks under AFS were higher by + 27% in the ASA region, + 26% in LHT, and + 5.8% in TEM, but -5.3% in the TEM in the 0-100 cm soil depth. The Agroforest aged between 10-20 years had higher SOC stock than newly established, as well as < 10-year-old systems across all soil-depth classes and agroecological regions. Overall, Agroforest vs. Agriculture land management practices resulted in positive SOC stock changes within AFS up to 100 cm soil depth, whereas SOC stock under AFS was lower than under Forest. The results suggest that a general pattern of Forest - Agroforest - Agriculture - Pasture continuum could be expected in SOC stock decline during land-use changes. Improvement of SOC stocks under AFS varied across agroecological regions, the highest being under arid and semiarid region, closely followed by the low humid tropics. The important outcome of this meta-analysis is worthy of emphasizing of the role of AFS in climate change adaptation and greenhouse gas mitigation strategies by promoting carbon sinks.
Changes in soil properties and carbon fluxes following afforestation and agriculture in tropical forest			Anthropogenic land use change (LUC) affects soil quality and the global carbon (C) pool. Such LUC is a potential threat for forest ecosystems because it can alter soil biome and increases the emission of greenhouse gasses (GHGs). Here, we investigated the changes in soil quality and CO2 emission following afforestation of reclaimed coal mine land and agriculture land created in a tropical dry deciduous forest of Jharkhand, India. Soil samples were collected from afforested mined soil (AMS), agriculture soils (AGS), and the natural forest soils (NFS) and analyzed for physicochemical and biological properties. Soil infiltration rate and CO2 efflux were recorded in situ, and C balance and emission coefficient (Ci) were calculated to determine soil C dynamics.Our results demonstrated significant alteration in soil quality parameters (decreases/increases based on the individual parameter) in converted land use. Compared to NFS, soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks decreased by 84% in AMS and 50% in AGS, soil CO2 efflux increased by 35% in AGS and decreased by 43% in AMS, attributed to differences in vegetation and microbial activities among sites. Principal component analysis showed soil infiltration rate, total nitrogen, and clay content were highly influenced by the LUC and explicitly indicate soil quality. The 4-year old AMS was C negative and had a greater Ci value than AGS and NFS, probably due to the lesser vegetation cover and adverse soil properties. We concluded that the conversion of tropical forests to different lands altered soil quality that can be assessed using indicator parameters like soil infiltration rate, total nitrogen, and clay content. Such LUC tends to switch the forest from a sink to a source of CO2 whether the end use is afforestation or agriculture. However, land degradation due to surface mining activities had a greater impact on soil quality and C sequestration potential than agriculture.
Changes in the carbon balance of tropical forests:: Evidence from long-term plots			The role of the world's forests as a "sink" for atmospheric carbon dioxide is the subject of active debate. Long-term monitoring of plots in mature humid tropical forests concentrated in South America revealed that biomass gain by tree growth exceeded Losses from tree death in 38 of 50 Neotropical sites. These forest plots have accumulated 0.71 ton, plus or minus 0.34 ton, of carbon per hectare per year in recent decades. The data suggest that Neotropical forests may be a significant carbon sink, reducing the rate of increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide.
Characterization of Canopy Gaps identified with spatial GLAS/ICESat data in the Bolo-Est Classified Forest (Southwest Côte d’Ivoire)			The study presents an analysis of using the Geoscience Laser Altimeter System of Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite (GLAS/ICESat) for the detection and characterization of canopy gaps in the Bolo-Est classified forest. This classified forest is located in southwest Côte d’Ivoire, a region facing increasing deforestation due to agriculture, in particular cocoa cultivation. The main objective of the study was to demonstrate the effectiveness of this Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) sensor for mapping canopy gaps, crucial for understanding the dynamics of tropical forest degradation. The methodology used integrates key steps: acquisition and pre-processing of GLAS/ICESat data, normalization of elevations to correspond to the World Geodetic System (WGS 84), calculation of canopy heights, detection of gaps via a thresholding process, and validation of results by field observations. The analysis revealed that 52% of the points analyzed corresponded to gaps, covering 19% of the study area, mainly caused by human activities such as agriculture and logging. The gaps identified vary in size from 50 m2 to 100 m2, indicating large canopy gap sizes in this forest. The results confirm that LiDAR GLAS/ICESat offers interesting accuracy and efficiency for detecting canopy gaps as a complement to traditional optical and radar remote sensing methods. The LiDAR approach thus provides a good understanding of degradation processes, offering useful data for environmental monitoring and sustainable forest management. This study demonstrates the potential of LiDAR remote sensing to support conservation initiatives such as the reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+), contributing to the accurate assessment of anthropogenic canopy gaps, and proves a promising tool for the sustainable management of tropical forests on a national scale. © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.
Characterization of soil ecosystems in Costa Rica using microbial community metrics			The goals of the research presented in this issue of Tropical Ecology were to demonstrate that differences in soil DNA-based microbial community characteristics, biomass, microbial activity, and C and N nutrient dynamics can be used as indicators of environmental change, specifically to show how land management, restoration strategies and climate change may be impacting the soil ecosystems of lowland forests and montane cloud forests of Costa Rica. In the studies conducted in lowland secondary forests, the bacterium Frankia was found to be critical for nitrogen-fixation in the soils associated with nitrogen-fixing tree Pentaclethra macroloba, but Frankia, Rhizobium, Archaea, and Type II methanotrophs were also collectively important in recuperation of the soil N and in enhancing microbial biomass C via more efficient use of organic C. These same secondary forest soils had greater levels of inorganic P and N, organic carbon, and microbial activity, and were more fungal-dominant soil ecosystem than grasslands of the same age. In. an adjacent,primary forest, the bromeliad Bromelia pinguin was found to demonstrate significant antifungal effects on the forest soil, resulting in decreases in fungal abundance, microbial biomass, and efficiency of organic C use. Lastly, in the Monteverde cloud forests, microbial metrics were used to show that habitats with the greatest soil moisture had more fungal-dominated soils, and unique fungal and bacterial population compositions. Given the importance of tropical soils in global C storage, their degradation, and current restoration efforts in these forests, as well as the very clear threat of decreases in precipitation due to climate change, belowground metrics should be considered as early indicators of the effects of forest restoration and/or further environmental disturbances. We hope that these articles will stimulate future studies in these important areas of Costa Rica.
Characterization of sudden and sustained base flow jump hydrologic behaviour in the humid seasonal tropics of the Panama Canal Watershed			Base flows are important for tropical regions with pronounced dry seasons, which are facing increasing water demands. Base flow generation, however, is one of the most challenging hydrological processes to characterize in the tropics. In many years during the May-December wet season in the Panama Canal Watershed (PCW), base flows in rivers abruptly increase. This increase persists until the start of the December-April dry season. Understanding this unusual base flow jump (BFJ) behaviour is critical to improve water provisioning in the seasonal tropics, especially during droughts and extended dry seasons. This study developed an integrated approach combining piecewise regression on cumulative average base flow and sensitivity analysis to calculate the timing and magnitude of BFJ. Rainfall, forest cover, mean land surface slope, catchment area, and estimated subsurface storage were tested as predictors for the occurrence and magnitude of the BFJs in seven subcatchments of the PCW. Sensitivity analysis on correlated predictors allowed ranking of predictor contributions due to isolated and cross-correlation effects. Correlations between observed BFJs and BFJs predicted by watershed and rainfall-related predictors were 0.92 and 0.65 for BFJ timing and magnitude, respectively. Forest cover was the second most significant predictor after cumulative rainfall for jump magnitude, owing to larger subsurface storage and groundwater recharge in forests than pastures. Catchments in the mountainous eastern PCW always generated larger jumps due to their higher rainfall and greater forest cover than the western PCW catchments. The cross-correlations between predictors contributed to more than 50% of the jump variances. The results demonstrate the importance of rainfall gradient and catchment characteristics in affecting the sudden and sustained BFJs, which can help inform land management decisions intended to enhance water supplies in the tropics. This study underscores the need for more research to further understand the hydrological processes involved in the BFJ phenomenon, including better BFJ models and field characterizations, to help improve tropical ecosystem services under a changing environment.
Characterizing degradation of palm swamp peatlands from space and on the ground: An exploratory study in the Peruvian Amazon			Peru has the fourth largest area of peatlands in the Tropics. Its most representative land cover on peat is a Mauritia flexuosa dominated palm swamp (thereafter called dense PS), which has been under human pressure over decades due to the high demand for the M. flexuosa fruit often collected by cutting down the entire palm. Degradation of these carbon dense forests can substantially affect emissions of greenhouse gases and contribute to climate change. The first objective of this research was to assess the impact of dense PS degradation on forest structure and biomass carbon stocks. The second one was to explore the potential of mapping the distribution of dense PS with different degradation levels using remote sensing data and methods. Biomass stocks were measured in 0.25 ha plots established in areas of dense PS with low (n = 2 plots), medium (n = 2) and high degradation (n = 4). We combined field and remote sensing data from the satellites Landsat TM and ALOS/PALSAR to discriminate between areas typifying dense PS with low, medium and high degradation and terra firme, restinga and mixed PS (not M. flexuosa dominated) forests. For this we used a Random Forest machine learning classification algorithm. Results suggest a shift in forest composition from palm to woody tree dominated forest following degradation. We also found that human intervention in dense PS translates into significant reductions in tree carbon stocks with initial (above and below-ground) biomass stocks (135.4 ± 4.8 Mg C ha−1) decreased by 11 and 17% following medium and high degradation. The remote sensing analysis indicates a high separability between dense PS with low degradation from all other categories. Dense PS with medium and high degradation were highly separable from most categories except for restinga forests and mixed PS. Results also showed that data from both active and passive remote sensing sensors are important for the mapping of dense PS degradation. Overall land cover classification accuracy was high (91%). Results from this pilot analysis are encouraging to further explore the use of remote sensing data and methods for monitoring dense PS degradation at broader scales in the Peruvian Amazon. Providing precise estimates on the spatial extent of dense PS degradation and on biomass and peat derived emissions is required for assessing national emissions from forest degradation in Peru and is essential for supporting initiatives aiming at reducing degradation activities. © 2017 The Authors
Characterizing forest disturbance dynamics in the humid tropics using optical and Lidar remotely sensed data sets			0
Characterizing seasonal dynamics of Amazonian wetlands for conservation and decision making			In many wetlands the timing and duration of inundation determine ecological characteristics and the provision of ecosystem services; however, wetland conservation decisions often rely on static maps of wetland boundaries that do not capture their dynamic hydrological variability and connectivity. The Amazon River basin contains some of the world's most extensive wetlands, many of which are floodplains where seasonal flood pulses result in a temporally varying inundation area and hydrological connectivity with river systems. This study classified Amazon wetlands according to the timing and duration (months per year) of inundation detected by remote sensing, and also investigated the contribution of precipitation regimes in affecting wetland distribution and hydrological dynamics. Permanently inundated wetlands account for the largest area and are mainly floodplains located in the lowlands of the catchment. Seasonally inundated wetlands varied greatly in the duration of inundation over the course of the year, ranging from 1 to 9 months. Distinct seasonal timing was detected among the large wetland complexes, reflecting rainfall regimes as well as time lags for drainage and drying. For example, inundation in the extensive Llanos de Moxos region of the southern Amazon was protracted and lasted well after the rainy season, compared with the Roraima region of the northern Amazon, where inundation was shorter and tracked the rainy season. The integration of inundation dynamics into wetland classification captures regional differences in timing and duration of inundation in the major wetlands of the basin that should be considered for conservation planning and other ecological applications. This information can aid regional wetland management and planning, especially with regards to minimizing the effects of dam and waterway construction that can directly affect the natural wetland dynamics. The use of global remotely sensed inundation data makes this approach easily transferable to other large tropical wetlands. © 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Chemical indicators of soil health in silvopastoral systems, restoration forest, and maize cultivation in a tropical dry forest			Annual crops and pastures in monoculture frequently have negative effects on ecosystem services due to soil and biodiversity losses. Silvopastoral systems (SSP) have been proposed as an alternative for livestock production systems; however, there are few studies that demonstrate their benefits on soil health. For that reason, this study was established to evaluate the effect of different land uses on soil health measured through chemical indicators. For this purpose, the following land uses managed for at least 19 years were evaluated: (i) intensive maize (Zea mays) production, (ii) a guinea (Megathyrsus maximus) and angleton (Dichantium aristatum) mixed pasture, (iii) SSP with grasses and shrubs of totumo (Cresentia cujete) and leucaena (Leucaena leucocephala), (iv) a multistrata SSP with the same grasses and shrubs plus tree fodder species: (Cassia grandis, Albizia saman and Guazuma ulmifolia); and (v) a secondary forest used as a reference. The evaluations were made in contrasting seasons (dry and rainy), in soils of the Middle Sinu river valley (Colombia), with a drainage gradient. In general, the soils of the SPS presented the highest values for MOS, total N, Mg, B, N-NO3 and CICE, the grass alone pasture presented the highest values in micronutrients: Mn, Fe, Cu, Zn and S and NH4, and lower values for pH, P and NO3, and the highest for Al; whereas, intermediate values for all chemical indicators were obtained in the secondary forest. In contrast, soils cultivated with corn presented the poorest chemical indicators. It is concluded that SSP improve the chemical indicators of soil health as compared to the grass alone pasture and corn monoculture.
Climate and socioeconomic drivers of biomass burning and carbon emissions from fires in tropical dry forests: A Pantropical analysis			Global burned area has declined by nearly one quarter between 1998 and 2015. Drylands contain a large proportion of these global fires but there are important differences within the drylands, for example, savannas and tropical dry forests (TDF). Savannas, a biome fire-prone and fire-adapted, have reduced the burned area, while the fire in the TDF is one of the most critical factors impacting biodiversity and carbon emissions. Moreover, under climate change scenarios TDF is expected to increase its current extent and raise the risk of fires. Despite regional and global scale effects, and the influence of this ecosystem on the global carbon cycle, little effort has been dedicated to studying the influence of climate (seasonality and extreme events) and socioeconomic conditions of fire regimen in TDF. Here we use the Global Fire Emissions Database and, climate and socioeconomic metrics to better understand long-term factors explaining the variation in burned area and biomass in TDF at Pantropical scale. On average, fires affected 1.4% of the total TDF' area (60,208 km(2)) and burned 24.4% (259.6 Tg) of the global burned biomass annually at Pantropical scales. Climate modulators largely influence local and regional fire regimes. Inter-annual variation in fire regime is shaped by El Nino and La Nina. During the El Nino and the forthcoming year of La Nina, there is an increment in extension (35.2% and 10.3%) and carbon emissions (42.9% and 10.6%). Socioeconomic indicators such as land-management and population were modulators of the size of both, burned area and carbon emissions. Moreover, fires may reduce the capability to reach the target of "half protected species" in the globe, that is, high-severity fires are recorded in ecoregions classified as nature could reach half protected. These observations may contribute to improving fire-management.
Climate change and deforestation: The evolution of an intersecting policy domain			Forests and climate change are increasingly dealt with as interconnected policy issues. Both the potential synergies and policy conflicts between forest conservation and restoration and climate change mitigation now receive sustained and high level attention from academic, policy analysis and practitioner communities across the globe. Arguably the most pronounced contemporary policy manifestation of this is the debate on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries (or REDD+) by which governments and private investors from developed countries may compensate actors in tropical forest countries for reducing forest loss beneath an agreed baseline. Problems of climate-forest policies implementation and governance, however, can also be found in countries such as Canada, the USA, the UK and Australia. The future of instruments like REDD+ is uncertain with growing critiques on payment and performance-based mechanisms and unresolved issues of governance, government and accountability. This paper, and the special issue it introduces, illustrates that in the REDD+ debate many contentious issues have resurfaced from past debates. These issues include the participation and rights of local communities in forest policy and management; the relationship between internationally agreed payment and performance-based programmes and formal democratic decision-making processes and structures; the complexities of rights to carbon versus tenure rights; and the ways in which - in spite of the high expectations of both developing and developed countries to combat carbon emissions from deforestation and forest degradation through the REDD+ mechanism - effective climate-focused forestry policies are seldom found in most tropical forest-rich countries. REDD+ is now very much the dominant discourse at the forest-climate interface, and one with a primary focus on measurability to communicate carbon mitigation results across various levels. However, this serves to disperse and displace, rather than resolve, policy-making on non-carbon values. © 2013 Elsevier Ltd.
Climate change and long-term fire management impacts on Australian savannas			Tropical savannas cover a large proportion of the Earth's land surface and many people are dependent on the ecosystem services that savannas supply. Their sustainable management is crucial. Owing to the complexity of savanna vegetation dynamics, climate change and land use impacts on savannas are highly uncertain. We used a dynamic vegetation model, the adaptive dynamic global vegetation model (aDGVM), to project how climate change and fire management might influence future vegetation in northern Australian savannas. Under future climate conditions, vegetation can store more carbon than under ambient conditions. Changes in rainfall seasonality influence future carbon storage but do not turn vegetation into a carbon source, suggesting that CO2 fertilization is the main driver of vegetation change. The application of prescribed fires with varying return intervals and burning season influences vegetation and fire impacts. Carbon sequestration is maximized with early dry season fires and long fire return intervals, while grass productivity is maximized with late dry season fires and intermediate fire return intervals. The study has implications for management policy across Australian savannas because it identifies how fire management strategies may influence grazing yield, carbon sequestration and greenhouse gas emissions. This knowledge is crucial to maintaining important ecosystem services of Australian savannas. © 2014 New Phytologist Trust.
Climate change and restoration of tropical forests.			Fossil fuel consumption and global deforestation are the two major sources of rising carbon dioxide concentration and this is an important cause of enhanced greenhouse effect with implications on Global Climate Change The paper reviews the crucial role global forests play in initiating the atmospheric carbon dioxide increase and highlight the potential to mitigate approximately 15% of the world's Green House Gas emission. Forests act as a carbon sink for mitigating the green house effect and forest preservation is the best solution for carbon fixing and that extending the rotation period, Conversion to more natural forest and new afforestation of former agriculture land will all contribute to increased carbon storage. Carbon sequestration potential of tropical forests in particular has been discussed in detail with along with potential areas and strategies for restoration in India, so as to achieve maximum ecological benefits.
Climate change mitigation policy in Ecuador: Effects of land-use competition and transaction costs			This paper develops an econometric model to estimate the economic determinants of forest land conversion in Esmeraldas, Ecuador and evaluates the effect that transaction costs have on incentive-based climate change mitigation activities. Using a logistic share model, the results show a high extent of competition for the use of land between agricultural production for palm oil processing and land-based carbon mitigation through avoided emissions from deforestation. Our results show that the current policy of introducing conservation payments in Ecuador is not sufficient to significantly reduce deforestation, but that payment levels based on a plausible international carbon price would make an appreciable difference in the net sequestration contribution of forests in northern Ecuador. Knowledge generated from this research can inform site-specific land use policy design aimed at addressing the opportunity costs of tropical forest conservation as an important component of climate mitigation strategies.
Climate change mitigation potential of Atlantic Forest reforestations			International agendas focus on limiting unchecked climate change through extensive mitigation. Worldwide, several reforestation initiatives strive to achieve ambitious goals and promote carbon sequestration on land. The greatest potential for reforestation lies within the tropics, and the Atlantic Forest is among the protagonists. However, little is known about the potential of these reforestations to mitigate climate change. Here, we assessed the carbon sequestration potential of Atlantic Forest reforestations, both in the field and in the available scientific literature. We demonstrate that the Atlantic Forest reforestations provide valuable contributions to climate change mitigation. Even at young age, reforestations have astonishing potential, with much higher carbon sequestration rates than un-assisted natural regeneration of later successional stages. Although with lesser potential, un-assisted natural regeneration remnants can also be a valuable strategy to aid climate mitigation, especially when close to reforestations or old-growth forests. We found far greater potential of sequestration in all types of forests inside protected areas than unprotected ones, highlighting the noteworthy benefits of conservation that buffers degradation. Climate action is urgent, and the Atlantic Forest certainly is a great contributor to the achievement of such ambitious goals.
Climate change mitigation: Should "avoided deforestation" be rewarded?			It is hotly debated today whether the reduction of tropical deforestation should be supported by a mechanism within the Convention for Climate Change. This mechanism, known as "avoided deforestation," would benefit developing countries that voluntarily reduce their deforestation rates, thereby generating at least two positive impacts: (a) an increase in the financial resources available to curb tropical deforestation, with expected positive side effects on biodiversity conservation, the environmental services provided by these forests, and sustainable development as a whole; and (b) a greater effectiveness of the global fight against climate change, because tropical deforestation contributes extensively to world carbon emissions. Several proposals were designed for such a mechanism, yet their implementation poses significant methodological problems: first, sophisticated tools available to measure the reduction of emissions might be ineffective when combined with baselines on a national level; secondly, baselines calculated ex ante lack accuracy because of insufficient knowledge concerning the direct and underlying causes of deforestation; thirdly, baselines calculated ex post lack legitimacy because they only refer to past trends; and fourthly, it is challenging to relate a reduction in deforestation rates to public policy options in the host country.Drawing lessons from our analysis of the methodological problems for the implementation of the mechanism, we recommend not promoting any mechanism based on financial rewards for an assumed voluntary reduction of national tropical deforestation rates. Two reasons justify our perspective: not only would the mechanism probably generate fake reductions ("hot air"), but undesirable side effects-detailed in this paper-would also appear. Instead, we encourage industrialized countries to better use already existing multi- and bilateral instruments, which focus on the correction of governance deficiencies in countries home to tropical forests. It is also necessary to focus on the suppression of "perverse incentives" from public policies in tropical countries. © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
Climate impact and adaptation to heat and drought stress of regional and global wheat production			Wheat (Triticum aestivum) is the most widely grown food crop in the world threatened by future climate change. In this study, we simulated climate change impacts and adaptation strategies for wheat globally using new crop genetic traits (CGT), including increased heat tolerance, early vigor to increase early crop water use, late flowering to reverse an earlier anthesis in warmer conditions, and the combined traits with additional nitrogen (N) fertilizer applications, as an option to maximize genetic gains. These simulations were completed using three wheat crop models and five Global Climate Models (GCM) for RCP 8.5 at mid-century. Crop simulations were compared with country, US state, and US county grain yield and production. Wheat yield and production from high-yielding and low-yielding countries were mostly captured by the model ensemble mean. However, US state and county yields and production were often poorly reproduced, with large variability in the models, which is likely due to poor soil and crop management input data at this scale. Climate change is projected to decrease global wheat production by -1.9% by mid-century. However, the most negative impacts are projected to affect developing countries in tropical regions. The model ensemble mean suggests large negative yield impacts for African and Southern Asian countries where food security is already a problem. Yields are predicted to decline by -15% in African countries and -16% in Southern Asian countries by 2050. Introducing CGT as an adaptation to climate change improved wheat yield in many regions, but due to poor nutrient management, many developing countries only benefited from adaptation from CGT when combined with additional N fertilizer. As growing conditions and the impact from climate change on wheat vary across the globe, region-specific adaptation strategies need to be explored to increase the possible benefits of adaptations to climate change in the future.
Climate policy and the forestry sector: The role of non-energy emissions			While it is broadly agreed that policies to reduce emissions from deforestation will be critical for fighting climate change, the linkage of international forestry and other land sectors to compliance markets for greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reductions remains a critical policy issue.1 Policies for Reducing Emissions from tropical Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD) offer the opportunity to mitigate a major share of global GHG emissions at low estimated costs based on existing technologies. Investments in REDD are also a potentially attractive ‘wooden bridge’ for reducing nearterm emissions while buying time to reengineer other sectors of the economy (Chomitz, 2006). A key policy question is how to balance funding of lowcost emission reductions from tropical forest conservation and other landbased activities that are available in the near-term with investments to drive technological innovation in energy, transport, and industrial sectors over a longer time period. While the framework for limiting greenhouse gases under the Kyoto Protocol excluded mechanisms to reduce deforestation, there is a growing consensus on including REDD as a critical element of a future global climate policy regime. The Copenhagen Accord of December 2009 calls for immediately establishing a mechanism to finance REDD and other forestry sequestration activities in developing countries (UNFCCC, 2009). The Accord specifically calls for exploring both public and private market-based financing approaches, but the details remain to be determined. Governments and other organisations have put forth multiple proposals for financing REDD activities, including market-based approaches with different degrees of fungibility between forest carbon credits and GHG reductions in other countries and sectors. Policymakers in the United States are also considering multiple means of financing international forest carbon activities within emerging regional compliance markets for GHG reductions as well as in recent legislative proposals for a cap-and-trade system at the Federal level. © Valentina Bosetti, Carlo Carraro, Emanuele Massetti and Massimo Tavoni 2014. All rights reserved.
Climate-growth relations of Aspidosperma pyrifolium; assessing future responses to climate change by use of tree rings			Understanding the effects of climate change on tropical tree growth and functioning is essential because of the importance of tropical forests in global biogeochemical cycles, carbon stocks, ecosystem service provision. Dendrochronological studies are becoming more common in tropical regions and several species have proven annual growth ring formation. In the Caatinga biome, Aspidosperma pyrifolium is a species with great potential for dendrochronological studies, as it forms annual rings and has a wide geographic distribution. This combination allows for tree-ring studies along gradients, allowing spatio-temporal evaluations of the effects of environmental factors on growth variability of the species. The objective of this study is to evaluate the relationship between interannual variability in environmental factors and tree growth of Aspidosperma pyrifolium over time in localities with contrasting climates and soils within the Caatinga biome. We will evaluate how interannual variation in ring width is influenced by interannual variability in local (precipitation and temperature) and global (El Niño events, ocean surface temperatures) climate variables. We will also assess how these responses are modulated by environmental gradients, seeking to understand how trees will respond to future climate change in the region. With these questions we hope to develop robust chronologies of past growth variability of the species. We also hope to improve our understanding of tree-growth responses to climate change over recent decades in the Caatinga, and how these responses are modulated by soil nutrients and climatic gradients.
Climate-growth relationships of Hymenaea courbaril in contrasting sites in the Amazon using tree rings			Climate change is an urgent reality that will affect global ecosystems. There is a crucial need to understand their long-term effects on tropical tree growth and function due to their importance in biogeochemical cycles, carbon stock dynamics and ecosystem service provision. In the last two decades dendrochronological studies are becoming more common in tropical regions, where several species produce annual growth rings, as is the case of Hymenaea courbaril (Fabaceae). This species has great potential for dendrochronological studies, in addition to having a wide geographic distribution allowing a study with rings in gradients addressing spatiotemporal evaluations of the effects of environmental factors on the growth of the species. Thus, the aim of this study is to evaluate the effect of environmental factors on the growth of Hymenaea courbaril trees over time and to reconstruct the previous climatic conditions in three Amazonian sites with contrasting climates and soils. The following questions will be addressed: 1. How interannual variation in growth (ring width) of Hymenaea courbaril is influenced by variation in local climate, eg. precipitation and temperature? 2. How do global climate phenomena (El Niño - ENSO, La Niña - NAO and SST anomalies) affect the local climate and the growth of Hymenaea courbaril? 3. How consistent are the interannual growth patterns of Hymenaea courbaril between contrasting locations in Amazonia? By investigating these questions, we hope to contribute robust timelines to reconstruct past climatic variations. It also improves understanding of the long-term responses induced by climate change, soil nutrients, and altitude and climate gradients to the conflicting demands related to forest growth, functioning and dynamics. (AU)
Climatic Benefits From the 2006-2017 Avoided Deforestation in Amazonian Brazil			Over three-fourths of Brazil's greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions originate from land-use/cover change (LUCC). Alarming rates of forest loss in the Amazon region gained international attention in the past, but deforestation declined substantially since 2004 (although the rate has trended upwards since 2012). This result conforms to the GHG emission reduction targets set by the National Climate Change Plan, originally divided into three phases: 2006-2009; 2010-2013; and 2014-2017. According to the plan, emission reductions are measured against a deforestation baseline, initially corresponding to the average forest loss observed from 1996 to 2005 (reference period). We used an artificial neural network (ANN) model to spatialize the plan's original three-phase baseline and compare (i) the simulated carbon emissions from the baseline scenario to (ii) the emissions from observed deforestation during 2006-2017. Baseline spatialization was performed at the state level and informed by the 2000-2004 deforestation patterns in each state, resulting in nine state-specific calibrated ANNs. Simulated (baseline) and observed deforestation were compared to five biomass-density maps in order to estimate Brazil's GHG emission reductions. Our results indicate that forest loss during the study period was 62,321 km(2) lower than the baseline and associated with 1.5 +/- 0.4 Pg of avoided CO2 emissions to the atmosphere. Virtually all emission reductions (93%) occurred in the states of Mato Grosso (74%) and Rondonia (19%). In contrast, Roraima, Amazonas, and Amapa states increased GHG emissions by 44.8, 36.7, and 14.7 Tg CO2, respectively. Lastly, we discuss the issue of attribution of deforestation reductions for results-based payments (REDD+) and the emission reduction certificates issued by the Amazon Fund.
Clonal diversity and genetic structure of Enhalus acoroides populations along Hainan Island, China			Seagrasses are monocotyledons that grow in intertidal and subtidal zones. Seagrass beds are among ecosystems with the highest ecosystem service value. However, seagrass beds are rapidly decline due to anthropogenic disturbances and global climate change. Enhalus acoroides, a monoecious perennial species, is the largest seagrass in stature. It distributes in tropical regions, with Hainan Island as its northern limits. Clonal diversity and genetic structure of E. acoroides populations in Hainan Island were studied to facilitate its conservation and restoration. We used four polymorphic microsatellites to genotype samples collected from four extant populations. We found low clonal and genetic diversities within populations, consistent with the expectations of genetic structure in edge populations. A large range of genetic differentiation was found between these four populations, probably due to the large range of geographic distances between them and genetic drift by local extinction and recolonization. We found no sign of recent bottlenecks in all the populations, probably due to the within. population genetic diversity being too low to show obvious reduction even after bottlenecks. We proposed suggestions on population conservation for those with high priority. Given that seagrass bed had experienced rapid decline in recent years, strengthened conservation and ecological restoration are urgently needed.
Close-to-nature management of tropical timber plantations is economically viable and provides biodiversity benefits			Reforestation of tropical forests is crucial to mitigate the climate crisis and restore ecosystems. However, past efforts have been criticized for establishing monoculture timber plantations with exotic tree species. Close-to-nature (CTN) practices aim to minimize negative forest management impacts on forests ecosystems by mimicking natural dynamics. So far, CTN management practices are rarely applied in tropical plantation forestry. This study evaluates the economic, carbon sequestration, and biodiversity potential of CTN management in tropical mixed-species plantations in Central America using a simulation-optimization approach. To our knowledge, this study is the first to assess the potential of tropical CTN-managed plantations on the basis of detailed process-based forest growth simulations. CTN practices such as selective harvesting, retention forestry, and shelterwood cutting of mixed-species stands were compared to even-aged mixtures and conventional monoculture practices. Results showed that CTN management was economically viable for certain species mixtures and management practices at an 8 % discount rate and had the potential to increase carbon storage and biodiversity in the modeled plantations. At current carbon prices, CTN-managed plantations may only become financially competitive with monocultures, if monocultures are excluded from carbon certification schemes that increasingly aim at co-producing non-carbon benefits like biodiversity conservation. If carbon prices increase, the sale of carbon credits could finance the transformation of monocultures to CTN-managed mixed-species stands. The competitiveness of CTN management could also be improved through performance-based biodiversity payments, such as the sale of biodiversity credits.
CO2 sequestration and transformation potential of agricultural system			Global climate change is one of the burning issues across the length and width of the globe. The increasing concentration of greenhouse gases (GHGs) is most responsible for the climate change phenomenon. The increasing temperature of the environment affects agricultural production systems and the production potential of natural resources. Among the GHGs, carbon dioxide (CO2) gas plays a vital role in ecosystem sustainability and maintaining ecological functioning. Agricultural systems hold great potential in terms of CO2 sequestration and transformation for mitigating the adverse effects of climate change. Plant dynamics and soil processes are affected by increasing temperature and CO2 concentration. In temperature-limited regions, crops yields have increased, but tropical regions have been adversely affected. The processes of respiration and photosynthesis are mediated by climate change. Soil ecosystem services are also being disturbed as demonstrated by modifications in soil microbial populations and diversity. Among ecosystems, the agricultural ecosystem is most affected by fractional changes in temperature and CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere. Climate mitigation options are needed, and forceful implementation and monitoring of environmental laws and regulations can help to minimize GHG emissions. Increasing the size of the green carpet, or afforestation, is an integral part of climate change mitigation options across the globe. Awareness among people regarding GHG emissions and their adverse effect on agricultural productivity is also a present demand. In this chapter, we will discuss various issues related to carbon sequestration, factors as well as climate change mitigation strategies, factors and CO2 potential and mitigation strategies. © Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019. All Rights Reserved.
Co-benefits and trade-offs of agroforestry for climate change mitigation and other sustainability goals in West Africa			Agroforestry is a land management practice where trees are grown around or among crops or pastureland. This integration of agriculture and forestry is frequently seen as an option that can secure food security and co-deliver a range of environmental benefits. However, quantitative studies simultaneously integrating multiple aspects of agroforestry are rare. Focusing on four sustainability goals, namely adaptation to climate change, biodiversity conservation, climate change mitigation and rural development, this study investigated co-benefits and adverse side-effects of shaded agroforests above cocoa, coffee, oil palm, banana and citrus plantations in tropical humid West Africa. Time series of remote sensing land cover datasets were used to quantify and map recent land cover transitions in the region, and a field study in 25 agroforestry plots in Togo provided biomass carbon measurements in over 3000 trees, in addition to local farmers interviews. Estimates of theoretical agroforestry expansion and associated carbon sequestration potential in the region were compared to regional emissions from fossil fuels and deforestation. We found that about 1.6 Mha of losses in evergreen forests occurred between 1992 and 2015 (corresponding to 17% of the forest area originally present in 1992), while agricultural areas increased by 2.4 Mha (+5% relative to 1992). On average, trees in the studied agroforestry plots store 83.7 +/- 7.0 t C/ha. We found synergies between rural development and adaptation benefits, no clear relationship between biodiversity and carbon storage, and a tradeoff between high carbon stocks and crop yields. This trade-off can be minimized with an optimal management of agroforestry by using a mix of tree species that store medium carbon stocks and can enhance yields, soil fertility and climate resilience. In general, plant functional diversity, i.e. a balanced mix of shade trees, fruit trees, palms and bananas, emerged as a key feature of successful agroforestry systems. Besides, agroforestry trees coproducts are reported as an additional, diversified source of income for local farmers. A large-scale deployment of agroforestry over seven countries in West Africa can sequester up to 135 Mt CO2/year over two decades, corresponding to about 166% of the carbon emissions from fossil fuels and deforestation in the region. Overall, agroforestry practices in tropical humid West Africa offer multiple-win solutions that are relevant to address major local and global environmental challenges. Increasing cooperation among local farmer communities, national authorities, and international organizations are instrumental to overcome the barriers for a future expansion of agroforestry systems in the region. (C) 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Co-benefits of biodiversity and carbon sequestration from regenerating secondary forests in the Philippine uplands: implications for forest landscape restoration			Shifting cultivation is a widespread practice in tropical forested areas that policy makers often regard as the major cause of forest degradation. Secondary fallow forests regrowing after shifting cultivation are generally not viewed as suitable for biodiversity conservation and carbon retention. Drawing upon our research in the Philippines and other relevant case studies, we compared the biodiversity and carbon sequestration in recovering secondary forests after shifting cultivation to other land uses that commonly follow shifting cultivation. Regenerating secondary forests had higher biodiversity than fast growing timber plantations and other restoration options available in the area. Some old plantations, however, provided carbon benefits comparable the old growth forest, although their biodiversity was less than that of the regenerating forests. Our study demonstrates that secondary forests regrowing after shifting cultivation have a high potential for biodiversity and carbon sequestration co-benefits, representing an effective strategy for forest management and restoration in countries where they are common and where the forest is an integral part of rural people's livelihoods. We discuss the issues and potential mechanisms through which such dynamic land use can be incorporated into development projects that are currently financing the sustainable management, conservation, and restoration of tropical forests.
Co-Benefits of Sustainable Forest Management in Biodiversity Conservation and Carbon Sequestration			Background: Sustainable forest management (SFM), which has been recently introduced to tropical natural production forests, is beneficial in maintaining timber resources, but information about the co-benefits for biodiversity conservation and carbon sequestration is currently lacking.Methodology/Principal Findings: We estimated the diversity of medium to large-bodied forest-dwelling vertebrates using a heat-sensor camera trapping system and the amount of above-ground, fine-roots, and soil organic carbon by a combination of ground surveys and aerial-imagery interpretations. This research was undertaken both in SFM applied as well as conventionally logged production forests in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo. Our carbon estimation revealed that the application of SFM resulted in a net gain of 54 Mg C ha(-1) on a landscape scale. Overall vertebrate diversity was greater in the SFM applied forest than in the conventionally logged forest. Specifically, several vertebrate species (6 out of recorded 36 species) showed higher frequency in the SFM applied forest than in the conventionally logged forest.Conclusions/Significance: The application of SFM to degraded natural production forests could result in greater diversity and abundance of vertebrate species as well as increasing carbon storage in the tropical rain forest ecosystems.
Coffee farmers willingness to accept payments for ecosystem services: Evidence from a choice experiment in Honduras			Coffee production in Central America provides a valuable yet volatile source of income for hundreds of thousands of small-scale farmers and employment for millions of workers. Expansion of coffee production into previously forested areas has caused the loss of a wide range of valuable ecosystem goods and services while contributing to global climate change and socioeconomic instability. Growth in carbon markets in agricultural settings and production of specialty coffees to meet consumer demands for products that support environmental and community outcomes suggests promise for favorable change. Yet, the incentives required to promote widespread transition toward sustainable coffee production are poorly understood, leaving policymakers with insufficient information to design scalable forest conservation initiatives. To fill this gap, we use a discrete choice experiment administered to coffee farmers in Honduras to understand farmers' willingness to conserve natural forest on farmlands in exchange for higher coffee prices and payments from carbon credits. Results suggest that payments for ecosystem services are a viable option for improving the sustainability of coffee production. However, coffee farmers may be reluctant to set aside significant percentages of the landscape for forest restoration. Low-income farmers appear more averse to forest conservation, suggesting the need for insurance against revenue losses.
Coffee, Farmers, and Trees-Shifting Rights Accelerates Changing Landscapes			Deforestation and biodiversity loss in agroecosystems are generally the result of rational choices, not of a lack of awareness or knowledge. Despite both scientific evidence and traditional knowledge that supports the value of diverse production systems for ecosystem services and resilience, a trend of agroecosystem intensification is apparent across tropical regions. These transitions happen in spite of policies that prohibit such transformations. We present a participatory modelling study run to (1) understand the drivers of landscape transition and (2) explore the livelihood and environmental impacts of tenure changes in the coffee agroforestry systems of Kodagu (India). The components of the system, key actors and resources, and their interactions were defined with stakeholders, following the companion modelling (ComMod) approach. The underlying ecological processes driving the system were validated through expert knowledge and scientific literature. The conceptual model was transformed into a role-playing game and validated by eight workshops with a total of 57 participants. Two scenarios were explored, a No Policy Change as baseline, and a Restitution of Rights where rights to cut the native trees are handed over to farmers. Our results suggest that the landscape transition is likely to continue unabated unless there is a change to the current policy framework. However, the Restitution of Rights risks speeding up the process rather than reversing it, as inter alia, the differential growth rate between exotic and native tree species, kick in.
Collaborative Research/LTREB Successional pathways and rates of change in tropical forests of Brazil, Costa Rica, and Mexico			This project focuses on the process of secondary forest regeneration following agricultural abandonment. Current independent studies conducted in Central Amazonia (Manaus, Brazil), northeastern Costa Rica, and Chiapas, Mexico reveal that observed vegetation changes within forests often deviate from predictions based on single-time studies of forests of different age since abandonment. This project unites four existing projects in wet tropical forests of Latin America. Coordinated annual vegetation censuses in long-term study plots will be conducted to test specific chronosequence predictions for a range of dependent variables including stem density, size distributions, basal area, biomass, species richness, species composition, and life-form composition. Observed rates of change in dependent variables will be compared with predicted rates from chronosequence studies within each region, based on the best-fit statistical models. By understanding how stand-level dynamics conform to or deviate from overall chronosequence patterns within each of these regions, we will identify key ecological factors, processes, and mechanisms that influence successional pathways. The long-term data gathered will provide essential information to guide forest restoration, carbon sequestration, and biodiversity conservation in the Neotropics. Ultimately, our results will enable development of more predictive and more widely applied models of successional vegetation dynamics in today's complex tropical landscapes.
Collaborative Research: Links Between Long-Term Soil Carbon Storage and Canopy Properties in Tropical Forests			Atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) has been increasing, leading to changes in Earth's climate, but it is unclear how much of that CO2 can be drawn back down by the planet's ecosystems and stored in soils and plants. This project focuses on understanding that CO2 draw-down and storage process with particular focus on tropical forests, which are one of the most carbon-rich ecosystems on Earth. New space technologies have recently improved the ability to measure plant carbon storage using satellite remote sensing. However, a large proportion of carbon storage occurs in soils, where dead plant material can be stored for much longer periods than in live plants. This study uses new remote sensing technologies and field-based measurements to link plant and soil carbon storage. The project integrates these two types of measurements through a new predictive framework to broaden understanding across space and time. Broader impacts for this project include the training of several undergraduate students and a graduate student (UCLA) in cutting-edge geographic and ecological technologies, and creation of a Field Technician Training Program for Latin American college students and community members to expand the work force in science and technology. At the broad scale, this research will also improve predictability of carbon storage across tropical forest ecosystems, providing insights for management of carbon sequestration.Soil carbon (C) dynamics present one of the largest sources of uncertainty in global C cycle models, with tropical forest soils containing some of the largest terrestrial C stocks. The interactions between aboveground C uptake by plants, transfer of this C to the forest floor, and subsequent loss or storage of this C in soils must be better understood to predict how climate change may alter large-scale and long-term soil C storage. This research will advance understanding of humid and seasonal tropical biomes through the intersection of modeling, remote sensing, and in situ field measurements across geological and rainfall gradients, focusing on the links between canopy and soil properties. The research will include measures of the total fluxes of C into forests using remote sensing measures of canopy fluorescence, and use these measures, together with knowledge of geology and soil nutrients, to predict soil C storage. The central hypothesis is that: Spatial variation in canopy properties, which reflect geology and the availability of scarce soil nutrients, are directly linked to landscape-scale patterns of long-term soil C storage in tropical forests. Soil phosphorus, rainfall, and canopy species composition will be assessed for their roles in driving soil C storage. The approach spans scales from nanometer organo-mineral associations in soils, to 3 km2 measures of forest plant growth. The study will be conducted in a variety of tropical forests in Panama in collaboration with the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute. To better understand how tropical forests around the world store carbon, beyond the spatial and temporal scales of the field study, measures will also be integrated into an existing ecosystem model.
Combining Climber Cutting and Tree Seedling Planting Improves Structural Attributes of a Seasonal Semideciduous Forest in Southeastern Brazil			Management of degraded tropical forest fragments is usually done by cutting climbers (cutting). However, it is still necessary to understand the outcomes of cutting in combination with planting native tree species' seedlings (cutting + planting), especially on the edges of fragments, which are subject to higher disturbance than the forest interior. We tested whether cutting + planting is the restoration strategy that most improves structural attributes of a degraded edge of a tropical seasonal semideciduous forest fragment in southeastern Brazil, relative to cutting and the absence of management (control). Linear mixed models revealed that, after an eight-year period, cutting + planting resulted in the highest decrease in the density and basal area of climbers longer than 1 m, and in the highest increase in the density of large living trees (diameter at breast height, DBH, >= 4.8 cm). Although cutting + planting decreased the percentage of large dead trees and increased tree sapling (DBH < 4.8 cm and total height >= 50 cm) richness, these variables were more affected by cutting. Management had no effect on the basal area of large living trees and tree sapling density. Because most structural attributes of the degraded edge studied were improved by cutting + planting, we advocate that it is the best strategy tested here for restoring tropical seasonal forests. We hypothesize that seedling planting improves forest conditions and stimulates recruitment, facilitating the regeneration of tree species. Thus, an interesting future avenue is to elucidate the mechanisms by which seedling planting affects regeneration and its long-lasting effects on forest structural attributes.
Combining high biodiversity with high yields in tropical agroforests			Local and landscape-scale agricultural intensification is a major driver of global biodiversity loss. Controversially discussed solutions include wildlife-friendly farming or combining high-intensity farming with land-sparing for nature. Here, we integrate biodiversity and crop productivity data for smallholder cacao in Indonesia to exemplify for tropical agroforests that there is little relationship between yield and biodiversity under current management, opening substantial opportunities for wildlife-friendly management. Species richness of trees, fungi, invertebrates, and vertebrates did not decrease with yield. Moderate shade, adequate labor, and input level can be combined with a complex habitat structure to provide high biodiversity as well as high yields. Although livelihood impacts are held up as a major obstacle for wildlife-friendly farming in the tropics, our results suggest that in some situations, agroforests can be designed to optimize both biodiversity and crop production benefits without adding pressure to convert natural habitat to farmland.
Combining mechanical control and tree planting to restore montane Atlantic forests dominated by the Neotropical bracken (Pteridium arachnoideum)			Climate and land-use changes have driven the dominance of native herbaceous plants in degraded tropical forests, leading to losses in biodiversity and ecosystem services. However, controlling these super-dominant species to promote forest regeneration is often ineffective and may favour undesirable species. Native clonal ferns from the Pteridium genus often dominate degraded tropical forests subjected to repeated fires. Although many ways of controlling these species have been proposed, the efficiency of different combinations of strategies and their effect on forest recovery remain unknown. Here, we assessed to what extent removing the aboveground biomass of the shade-intolerant Pteridium arachnoideum and planting trees contributed to the control of this fern and the recovery of montane Atlantic forests in south-east Brazil. In four sites dominated by P. arachnoideum we applied five treatments in adjacent plots: (1) control without interference, (2) cutting twice per year, (3) cutting twice per year plus tree planting, (4) cutting three times per year, and (5) cutting three times per year plus tree planting. Over two consecutive years we repeated the treatments and monitored P. arachnoideum height, rhizome and above-ground biomass, as well as the composition of the established vegetation and soil seed bank. We also assessed the survival and growth of the planted trees. Tree planting accounted for over half of the treatment costs, whereas increasing the cutting frequency only increased costs by 15 %. After two years, the three times per year cutting treatment caused the largest decrease in above-ground biomass (1 to 0.1 kg/m2) and abundance (80 to 15 %) of P. arachnoideum. Planted trees exhibited low survival (47 %) rates and growth (30 cm/year), and hence had no effect on the dominance of P. arachnoideum. Treatments did not affect rhizome biomass, suggesting that P. arachnoideum could regain its dominance if cutting treatments were discontinued. Although two annual cuts slightly favoured tree regeneration, trees were rare in both the established vegetation (less than 10 %) and seed bank (less than 0.3 seeds/dm3). Conversely, under three annual cuts the African grass M. minutiflora became more abundant in both the established vegetation (5 to 25 %) and seed bank (1 to 4 seeds/dm3). Our findings show that intensive mechanical removal decreases the dominance of P. arachnoideum in Atlantic forests. However, its benefits to forest recovery seem to be limited by lack of tree regeneration, impoverished seed banks and invasive grasses. Therefore, planting fast-growing and drought-tolerant tree species may be essential to the recovery of these degraded Neotropical forests.
Commentary Transforming the tropical timber industry could be the key to realizing the potential of forests and forest products			We provide an inter-industry perspective that illuminates why and how sustainable forest management is so elusive in the tropics. We offer a novel, integrated industrial system that would enable a paradigm shift for tropical forestry, so that increasing demands for forest products can drive positive outcomes for people, nature, and climate.
Committed to restoring tropical forests: an overview of Brazil's and Indonesia's restoration targets and policies			The restoration of tropical forests has become a popular nature-based solution for climate change mitigation, protection of biodiversity, and improving the livelihoods of local populations. The Bonn Challenge and the UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration underscore the international momentum of the restoration movement, with many countries committing to restore millions of hectares of deforested and degraded land in the next decade. Brazil and Indonesia are among the ones with the most ambitious restoration commitments globally. Since both their economies are highly dependent on the export of agricultural commodities, reconciling economic growth with environmental sustainability will be a major policy challenge. In this paper, we (a) identify the main restoration targets and the policies supporting their implementation in both countries, (b) provide a descriptive overview of these restoration-supportive policies, and (c) discuss the main challenges that Brazil and Indonesia face in the implementation of their restoration commitments. We find that Brazil has an explicit and dedicated strategy to achieve its restoration target, but that recent political developments have weakened environmental governance in the country, affecting the implementation of its restoration commitment. In the case of Indonesia, we find that the government has rather focused and progressed on the restoration of peatlands and mangroves, whereas its commitment to restore forestlands has yet to benefit from a dedicated plan that allows to coordinate policies and agencies' efforts towards the achievement of its restoration target.
Communities' Adaptation and Vulnerability to Climate Change: Implications for Achieving a Climate-Smart Landscape			Rural landscapes in many parts of Indonesia are rapidly being transformed, due to the expansion of agrocommodity plantations-oil palm in particular. At the same time, communities in those landscapes face declining crop yields and ecosystem degradation as a result of both climate and non-climate factors. We assessed local perceptions on climate stressors, adaptation and vulnerability using focus group discussions in Ketapang, West Kalimantan. We found that the main perceived climatic stressors were extreme and unpredictable seasons, fires, and saltwater intrusion, affecting ecosystem services and agricultural production. Land clearing and forest loss were mentioned as exacerbating non-climatic stressors. Respondents indicated willingness to adapt to these changes by investing in long-term measures, such as tree-planting. To adapt to yield declines, respondents indicated that many farmers shifted from rubber to oil palm. Such adaptation actions benefit households in the short term but may be at odds with long-term adaptation objectives at the landscape level. Finally, we found that perceptions about vulnerability differed between landscapes, and between communities at the landscape level and stakeholders at the district level. This stresses the importance of participatory and inclusive planning and multi-stakeholder processes towards context-based climate action planning to accommodate the differences in contexts and scale, and to reconcile the differences in perceptions.
Community Assembly Processes of Deadwood Mycobiome in a Tropical Forest Revealed by Long-Read Third-Generation Sequencing			Despite the importance of wood-inhabiting fungi on nutrient cycling and ecosystem functions, their ecology, especially related to their community assembly, is still highly unexplored. In this study, we analyzed the wood-inhabiting fungal richness, community composition, and phylogenetics using PacBio sequencing. Opposite to what has been expected that deterministic processes especially environmental filtering through wood-physicochemical properties controls the community assembly of wood-inhabiting fungal communities, here we showed that both deterministic and stochastic processes can highly contribute to the community assembly processes of wood-inhabiting fungi in this tropical forest. We demonstrated that the dynamics of stochastic and deterministic processes varied with wood decomposition stages. The initial stage was mainly governed by a deterministic process (homogenous selection), whereas the early and later decomposition stages were governed by the stochastic processes (ecological drift). Deterministic processes were highly contributed by wood physicochemical properties (especially macronutrients and hemicellulose) rather than soil physicochemical factors. We elucidated that fine-scale fungal-fungal interactions, especially the network topology, modularity, and keystone taxa of wood-inhabiting fungal communities, strongly differed in an initial and decomposing deadwood. This current study contributes to a better understanding of the ecological processes of wood-inhabiting fungi in tropical regions where the knowledge of wood-inhabiting fungi is highly limited.
Community forest governance and synergies among carbon, biodiversity and livelihoods			Forest landscape restoration has emerged as a key strategy to sequester atmospheric carbon and conserve biodiversity while providing livelihood co-benefits for indigenous peoples and local communities. Using a dataset of 314 forest commons in human-dominated landscapes in 15 tropical countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America, we examine the relationships among carbon sequestered in above-ground woody biomass, tree species richness and forest livelihoods. We find five distinct clusters of forest commons, with co-benefits and trade-offs on multiple dimensions. The presence of a formal community management association and local participation in rule-making are consistent predictors of multiple positive outcomes. These findings, drawn from a range of contexts globally, suggest that empowered local forest governance may support multiple objectives of forest restoration. Our analysis advances understanding of institutional aspects of restoration while underscoring the importance of analysing the interconnections among multiple forest benefits to inform effective interventions for multifunctional tropical forests.Forest restoration is emerging as a key climate mitigation strategy. In this study, the authors find that formalized local control and substantive involvement in rule-making are associated with synergies for carbon sequestration, biodiversity and rural livelihoods.
COMMUNITY FOREST MANAGEMENT AND CARBON SEQUESTRATION - A FEASIBILITY STUDY FROM CHIAPAS, MEXICO			Although forestry and agroforestry are recognized as promising land-use alternatives for reducing the increasing levels of global atmospheric carbon, the viability of carbon sequestration projects at the land-user level has rarely been evaluated We present the results of a feasibility study to: (1) evaluate the interest of local communities in a carbon sequestration project and how they would organize themselves for the proposed forestry project; (2) identify the Carbon sequestration potential of the agroforestry/forestry systems that are both ecologically viable and preferred by local farmers (3) determine the social constraints of and potential for, such projects; and (4) assess the economic potential of the carbon offsets estimated for such systems. This project was carried out by an interdisciplinary team of scientists and farmers in two ecological regions: the Tojolabal and Tzeltal zones of Chiapas, Mexico.Five systems with high carbon sequestration potential were considered technically and socially viable for each region. Initially, all participants will plant trees on an individual basis in their coffee plantation, fallow, and pasture lands, or in their maize fields. The estimated amount of carbon sequestered ranged from 46.7 to 236.7 tons of carbon per hectare (tC/ha). Net income benefits due to converting fields from maize cultivation to farm forestry ranged from $500-1000/ha depending on the value assigned to the sequestered carbon.(1)Forests and farm woodlands that are sustainably managed have substantial economic and carbon sequestration potential. The principal barrier to communal forest management appears to be sociopolitical rather than economic. Because forest management requires longterm investments, good planning is essential and includes community control of projects, selection of appropriate tree species, and management techniques that are specific to the ecological and social conditions of the area.
Community forest management and forest cover change in Lampung, Indonesia			Community-based forestry (CBF) is often cited as a way for improving livelihood of local communities while conserving biodiversity and mitigating climate change. However, empirical assessments of CBF outcomes are still lacking, especially for their biophysical conditions. This study investigates the extent to which a type of CBF practices in Indonesia, Community Forest (HKM), managed to maintain forest cover. We applied a propensity scoring approach to empirically measure the rates of deforestation between 2007 and 2016 for Conservation Forests and Protection Forests with and without HKM concessions. Our finding is that HKMs are less effective than Conservation Forests (e.g. National Parks) in reducing forest cover loss, but more effective than other similar forests without CBF management. This is a promising starting point for expanding CBF in Indonesia. We recommend: 1) explicit consideration of biophysical characteristics of CBF locations in designating future sites; 2) providing site-specific financial and technical supports for local communities; 3) utilizing remotely sensed data and propensity scoring for monitoring conservation outcomes.
Community forest monitoring for the carbon market: Opportunities under REDD			Recent developments in international policy on Reduced Emissions from Deforestation in Developing countries (REDD) open the way for crediting of carbon saved by rural communities through management of the forests in their vicinity. Since the annual changes in forest carbon stock under this kind of management are relatively small and often under the canopy, they cannot easily be assessed using remote sensing, so ground-level data collection is likely to be essential over large areas of forests. The potential role of communities in measuring, monitoring and reporting carbon stock changes in their forests has been explicitly mentioned in UNFCCC documentation on methodology for REDD+, the extended form of REDD that includes forest enhancement, sustainable forest management and forest conservation. This book presents practical methods by which communities can do it. These methods were developed and tested with communities in villages in Africa and Asia under a six-year research programme. The reliability of the data gathered by the community is shown to be equivalent to that of professional forest inventories while the costs are much lower. Involvement of local communities in collection of this data may be the most cost-effective solution for national REDD+ programmes. Moreover, it could provide the basis for a transparent system for distribution of the financial rewards from REDD+ and the carbon market. The book first presents the policy context, concepts, methods and general results, which include estimates of typical carbon savings resulting from community management in different types of tropical forests. It also looks at the governance issues that may be involved and a variety of ways in which incentive schemes might be designed to encourage communities to participate. The second half of the book is devoted to case studies from the countries involved in the research. These provide both ideas and practical experience to enable agencies to engage with local communities to monitor carbon stock changes. © Margaret M. Skutsch, 2011. All rights reserved.
Community forest monitoring in REDD+: the 'M' in MRV?			Transparent, accountable, and sustainable monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) systems are essential for any REDD+ framework. With the prospect of a global agreement on forest preservation on the horizon, establishing functional MRV systems is one of the major goals of so called 'REDD Readiness'. However, due to the ambitious, worldwide scale of the prospective REDD+ framework, financial sustainability is a central issue. MRV of tropical forests has historically been an expensive, expert led process, carried out by external consultants in conjunction with the local population. This professional model of forest monitoring is not viable for a global scale programme, and so attention is turning to the potential of community/locally based monitoring to fulfil the 'M' in REDD+ MRV.This desk-based study attempts to lend support to the above assertion by providing an up to date review of the still relatively limited literature on locally based natural resource monitoring, looking at the inherent advantages it has over professional monitoring. It then picks out key practical lessons from a variety of international case studies, before assessing how locally based monitoring could fit into a REDD+ MRV framework.The investigation shows locally based monitoring to be advantageous in terms of lower costs, enhanced local ownership, greater cultural relevance and improved institutional strength at the community level, while not compromising on accuracy of information produced - there is a growing consensus amongst practitioners in the field that adequately trained local monitors can produce data comparable to that derived from professionals. As REDD+ requires ground-based monitoring to complement remote sensing of forest condition, locally based monitoring can fulfil this role while also creating employment. The author highlights the need to develop a community MRV protocol that maximises the involvement of local people in forest monitoring, while also corresponding to the forest monitoring requirements made by the UN for the prospective REDD+ framework. (C) 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Community perceptions of ecosystem services and disservices linked to urban tree plantings			The planting of trees in streets and parks is critical for urban greening efforts that seek to improve climate-change resilience in cities around the world. Ecosystem services provided by urban trees range from mitigating urban heat island effects to enhancing human well-being and conserving native biodiversity. At the same time, such tree services trade off with disservices that include risk to human safety from falling branches and infrastructure damage from root growth. Here, we performed a survey of residents of a sub-tropical region in eastern Australia to determine community perceptions of the ecosystem services and disservices linked to urban tree plantings. Our aim was to better understand the diverse perceptions of the community, prior to on-the-ground implementation of urban greening, to help guide planting programs in streets and parklands that are vulnerable to UHI effects in the region. We found strong evidence for a high level of public awareness about the beneficial ecosystem services that urban trees can provide. A broad spectrum of beneficial tree services were valued highly by the community in their urban environment including the planting of native trees that can attract and provide food for preferred wildlife; provide shade and reduce heat; allow for a strong connection with nature; have the potential to store carbon to mitigate climate change; provide a level of protection from bushfires; have aesthetically pleasing properties; and produce food for people. At the same time, however, community concerns about tree disservices were concentrated primarily on root damage to infrastructure as well as property damage and injury from falling branches. Our elicitation of community attitudes to tree services and disservices will allow for residents' most important values and strongest concerns about trees to be explicitly taken into account when establishing a community-inclusive approach to urban tree planting.
Comparative analysis for changes in the provision of ecosystem services and well-being in Brazilian hotspots (Atlantic Forest and Cerrado) in the São Paulo State			Brazil has a rich variety of ecosystems and harbor ~30% of the world's tropical forest . As such, a wide variety of land use policies have been in place to deal with the impact of land use change in ecosystem services and social wellbeing mainly from agro-industrial development. Although Brazil has experiencing an impressive economic growth, in some regions (like hotspots) livelihood options have not change significantly. There is lack of substantial evaluation to what extent does these policies itself combined with the several market incentives for agricultural (commodities) have impacted ecosystem services and improved wellbeing. In hotspots, population is still highly dependant on ecosystems for livelihood and small scale agricultural but are faced with strong land use dynamics are at play: the development of unifunctional landscapes for commodity production and establishment of protected areas that have been increasing. Unifunctional landscapes are catalysed by the international market interest on agricultural commodities, and are central to the country's economy. Yet, they may also undermine the provision of a wide range of ecosystem services (ES) mainly to the local communities and small farmers undermining an opportunity to value natural capital, with erosion and export of ES. On the other hand, in protected areas livelihood options are limited with strong dependence on State programme and incentives. The challenge is still to create development that boosts economic growth without further marginalising the local communities who depend on ES for livelihood. This work sets out to understand how this might be possible in a changing climate. We will look for evidence of non-linearities in the relationship between ES and rural wellbeing in Atlantic Forest and Cerrado at the Sao Paulo State. We will understand the impact and to what extent increased expansion of agro-business and establishment of protected areas have contributed to rural wellbeing and ES protection. We will adapt the methodology of (Fisher, 2013) and (Rodrigues et al., 2009) to explore patterns of changes in wellbeing along the three major land use change gradients in three watersheds: forest degradation , forest regeneration and protection and landscape multi-functionality. We will investigate whether: There exists non-linear relationships and potential for changes in ES provision and wellbeing of the local communities, as: (a) natural capital is reduced by forest degradation; (b) natural capital increases in protected areas and (c) as landscape multi-functionality decreases by the establishment of commercial agriculture. H0: Wellbeing and degradation, wellbeing and protected areas as well multifunctionality landscapes are not related. The evidence generated will provide a platform to the understanding of these dynamics for commercial agriculture, protected areas impacting ES and rural development accounting climatic variability that can be applied to other regions in Brazil, like Amazon frontiers and countries like Moçambique undergoing similar trajectories. It will contribute to robust social and ecological policy by engaging with co-production of knowledge among different stackeholders for regional sustainability in the context of climate change. (AU)
Comparative Analysis of Aboveground Monitoring Tools to Support Greenhouse Gas Reporting: A Belize Case Study			0
Comparative analysis of carbon stock and litter nutrient concentration in tropical forests along the ecological gradient in Kenya			The study determined the carbon stocks and litter nutrient concentration in tropical forests along the ecological gradient in Kenya. This could help understand the potential of mitigating climate change using tropical forest ecosystems in different ecological zones, which are being affected by climate change to a level that they are becoming carbon sources instead of sinks. Stratified sampling technique was used to categorize tropical forests into rain, moist deciduous and dry zone forests depending on the average annual rainfall received. Simple random sampling technique was used to select three tropical forests in each category. Modified consistent sampling technique was used to develop 10 main 20 m × 100 m plots in each forest, with 20 2 m × 50 m sub-plots in each plot. Systematic random sampling technique was used in selecting 10 sub-plots from each main plot for inventory study. Non-destructive approach based on allometric equations using trees’ diameter at breast height (DBH), total height and species’ wood specific gravity were used in estimating tree carbon stock in each forest. Soil organic carbon (SOC) and litter nutrient concentration (total phosphorus and nitrogen) were determined in each forest based on standard laboratory procedures. The results indicated that, whilst trees in rain forests recorded a significantly higher (p < 0.001) DBH (20.36 cm) and total tree height (12.1 m), trees in dry zone forests recorded a significantly higher (p < 0.001) specific gravity (0.67 kg m−3). Dry zone tropical forests stored a significantly lower amount of total tree carbon of 73 Mg ha−1, compared to tropical rain forests (439.5 Mg ha−1) and moist deciduous tropical forests (449 Mg ha−1). The SOC content was significantly higher in tropical rainforests (3.9%), compared to soils from moist deciduous (2.9%) and dry zone forests (1.8%). While litter from tropical rain forests recorded a significantly higher amount of total nitrogen (3.4%), litter from dry zone forests recorded a significantly higher concentration of total phosphorus (0.27%). In conclusion, ecological gradient that is dictated by the prevailing temperatures and precipitation affects the tropical forests carbon stock potential and litter nutrient concentration. This implies that, the changing climate is having a serious implication on the ecosystem services such as carbon stock and nutrients cycling in tropical forests. © Crown 2025.
Comparative Analysis of Soil Quality in Natural, Logged, and Plantation Forests in Kuala Kubu Bharu, Malaysia			Tropical forests provide critical ecosystem services, yet anthropogenic disturbances, particularly selective logging and land conversion, threaten soil quality and forest productivity. However, the exact impacts of this study on soil quality has not been adequately explored in tropical forests. Thus, this study evaluated topsoil (0-20 cm) physical and chemical properties and overall soil quality using the Tropical Soil Quality Index (TSQI) in natural forests, logged forests, and forest plantations in Kuala Kubu Bharu, Malaysia. A stratified random sampling approach was employed, with composite soil samples collected from 18 plots (six per forest type). Soil analyses included measurements of bulk density, coarse fragment content, pH, organic carbon, total nitrogen, and nutrient availability. Results revealed that natural forests maintained significantly better soil conditions, evidenced by lower bulk density (0.95 +/- 0.05 g/cm3), higher organic carbon (2.44 +/- 0.17%), and robust nutrient retention (CEC: 10.75 +/- 0.11 cmol/kg) culminating in a TSQI of 60%. In contrast, logged forests exhibited severe degradation, with increased bulk density (1.55 +/- 0.18 g/cm3), elevated coarse fragment content (58 +/- 3.4%), and diminished nutrient levels, reflected by a TSQI of 13.33%. Forest plantations demonstrated intermediate characteristics with a TSQI of 46.67%. These findings underscore the need for sustainable forest management practices, including reduced-impact logging, targeted post-logging restoration, and improved silvicultural strategies in plantations. Future research should focus on refining the TSQI and incorporating seasonal and spatial variability to further inform adaptive management and optimal economic cut decisions in tropical forest ecosystems.
Comparative effectiveness of silvicultural interventions for increasing timber production and sustaining conservation values in natural tropical production forests. A systematic review protocol			Background: Currently, about 400 million hectares of tropical moist forests worldwide are designated production forests, about a quarter of which are managed by rural communities and indigenous peoples. There has been a gradual impoverishment of forest resources inside selectively logged forests in which the volume of timber extracted over the first cutting cycle was mostly from large, old trees that matured over a century or more and grew in the absence of strong anthropological pressures. In forests now being logged for a second and third time, that volume has not been reconstituted due in part to the lack of implementation of post-logging silvicultural treatments. This depletion of timber stocks renders the degraded forests prone to conversion to other land uses. Although it is essential to preserve undisturbed primary forests through the creation of protected areas, these areas alone will not be able to ensure the conservation of all species on a pan-tropical scale, for social, economic and political reasons. The conservation of tropical forests of tomorrow will mostly take place within human-modified (logged, domesticated) forests. In this context, silvicultural interventions are considered by many tropical foresters and forest ecologists as tools capable of effectively conserving tropical forest biodiversity and ecosystem services while stimulating forest production. This systematic review aims to assess past and current evidence of the impact of silviculture on tropical forests and to identify silvicultural practices appropriate for the current conditions in the forests and forestry sectors of the Congo Basin, Amazonia and Southeast Asia.Methods: This systematic review will undertake an extensive search of literature to assess the relative effectiveness of different silvicultural interventions on timber production and the conservation value of forests, and to determine whether there is a relationship between sustainability of timber harvesting and the maintenance/conservation of other ecosystem services and biodiversity in production forests. Data will be extracted for meta-analysis of at least sub-sets of the review questions. Findings are expected to help inform policy and develop evidence-based practice guidelines on silvicultural practices in tropical forests.
Comparative study of forest biomass and carbon stocks of Margalla Hills National Park, Pakistan			Forests can play an important role in climate change mitigation. However, limited information is available worldwide regarding forest carbon and biomass stocks. Financial mechanisms such as 'reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation of forest carbon, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks' (REDD+) also emphasize the quantification of forest biomass and carbon. This study aimed to estimate the forest biomass in two forests of Margalla Hills National Park (MHNP): Sub-tropical Chir Pine Forest (SCPF) and Sub-tropical Broadleaved Evergreen Forest (SBEF). For this, circular sampling plots of a 20 m radius were used for the collection of the variables, "diameter at breast height (DBH) and height". Statistical analysis was done for exploring regression relationships between the variables. We found a mean Aboveground Carbon (AGC) of 73.36 +/- 32.55 Mg C ha(-1) in SCPF and a mean AGC of 16.88 +/- 25.81 Mg C ha(-1) in SBEF. The mean Aboveground Biomass (AGB) for SCPF was recorded as 146.73 +/- 65.11 Mg ha(-1), while for SBEF it was 33.77 +/- 51.63 Mg ha(-1). It was therefore concluded that the SCPF had higher mean AGB and mean AGC than the SBEF. Similar differences were also noticed in the structural characteristics of the two forests. These could be valuable information while designing sustainable management plans and afforestation programmes for the future and also for accessing nature-based funding such as REDD+.
Comparing above-ground biomass among forest types in the Wet Tropics: Small stems and plantation types matter in carbon accounting			Revenue from carbon credits from rainforest stands could encourage reforestation for biodiversity conservation on private land in north-eastern Queensland, Australia. Current models and allometrics for estimating carbon, however, are not calibrated against sites in the region and underestimate carbon stocks. We assess the accuracy of the two accepted methods to estimate carbon stocks in Australian rainforests: FullCAM and the Keith et al. (2000) allometric. We also assess the effect of FullCAM's discounting of small stems (2.5-10cm) to carbon stocks, and compare the carbon benefits of the three reforestation methods in the region to identify planting configurations with the best carbon sequestration potential. We sampled 27 rainforest stands in north-eastern Queensland. Using these data we calculated above-ground biomass (AGB) using the Keith allometric and derived the above-ground carbon (AGC). We compared our estimates across three reforestation methods with the FullCAM modelled estimates for the same sites, and with estimates derived from two global rainforest allometrics (Brown, 1997; Chave et al., 2005). The Keith allometric estimated that planted forests yielded on average 20Mg of tradable carbon ha -1y -1 (i.e. CO 2-equivalent), with no differences between plantation forests and environmental plantings, although the former had more large diameter stems. Small stems (<10cm) accounted for 15.1% of AGB in plantings <20years old. However, even excluding these, the estimates using the Keith allometric were 19.5% greater than those of FullCAM; the Chave allometric 40.4% greater; and the Brown allometric 54.9% greater. More thorough forest mensuration using actual tree volumes and densities is required to determine a biomass allometric function for rainforests in the region. Until then, we recommend the Chave allometric function. It provides intermediate values, is based on the widest range of tropical trees and has been shown to be accurate away from the sites used for its development. This study demonstrates the inadequacy of current methods for estimating carbon stocks in rainforest plantings in north-eastern Queensland. A tailored allometric and the re-parameterisation of FullCAM is needed to reflect both the region's environmental characteristics and the vegetation structure of young reforestation stands. Current estimates deprive landholders of financial incentives and underestimate the national greenhouse gas benefits of tree planting in the Wet Tropics. © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
Comparing carbon sequestration and stand structure of monoculture and mixed mangrove plantations of Sonneratia caseolaris and S. apetala in Southern China			Mangroves are one of the most carbon-rich tropical ecosystems. Two fast-growing mangrove species of the genus Sonneratia, the native S. caseolaris and non-native S. apetala, have been widely used for mangrove reforestation in China; however their ability to sequester carbon is still unclear. The present study aimed to estimate the growth, carbon accumulation in biomass and carbon sequestration in sediments of these two species, in both mixed (50% S. caseolaris: 50% S. apetala) and monoculture plantations, in the intertidal zones of Shenzhen Bay, Guangdong Province, China. Twenty-five months of observation showed strong competition between the two species in the mixed plantation, with the native S. caseolaris outcompeting the non-native S. apetala due to a faster growth rate. Although S. caseolaris in the mixed plantation had lower carbon storage in biomass than in monoculture, carbon accumulation in sediment was higher in the mixed plantation. Thus, the relative advantage of the mixed plantation was in sequestering more carbon in sediment, as opposed to high carbon accumulation to biomass. These results indicated that the mixed plantation could be a good option for mangrove restoration and carbon sequestration of sediment. However, the two and a half years of this study may not indicate long-term trends, so more research on long-term species performance is essential for successful mangrove reforestation. (C) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Comparing forest structure and biodiversity on private and public land: secondary tropical dry forests in Costa Rica			Secondary forests constitute a substantial proportion of tropical forestlands. These forests occur on both public and private lands and different underlying environmental variables and management regimes may affect post-abandonment successional processes and resultant forest structure and biodiversity. We examined whether differences in ownership led to differences in forest structure, tree diversity, and tree species composition across a gradient of soil fertility and forest age. We collected soil samples and surveyed all trees in 82 public and 66 private 0.1-ha forest plots arrayed across forest age and soil gradients in Guanacaste, Costa Rica. We found that soil fertility appeared to drive the spatial structure of public vs. private ownership; public conservation lands appeared to be non-randomly located on areas of lower soil fertility. On private lands, areas of crops/pasture appeared to be non-randomly located on higher soil fertility areas while forests occupied areas of lower soil fertility. We found that forest structure and tree species diversity did not differ significantly between public and private ownership. However, public and private forests differed in tree species composition: 11 percent were more prevalent in public forest and 7 percent were more prevalent in private forest. Swietenia macrophylla, Cedrela odorata, and Astronium graveolens were more prevalent in public forests likely because public forests provide stronger protection for these highly prized timber species. Guazuma ulmifolia was the most abundant tree in private forests likely because this species is widely consumed and dispersed by cattle. Furthermore, some compositional differences appear to result from soil fertility differences due to non-random placement of public and private land holdings with respect to soil fertility. Land ownership creates a distinctive species composition signature that is likely the result of differences in soil fertility and management between the ownership types. Both biophysical and social variables should be considered to advance understanding of tropical secondary forest structure and biodiversity.Resumen Los bosques secundarios constituyen una proporcion importante de las tierras forestales tropicales. Dichos bosques se encuentran en tierras de propiedad publica y privada, las cuales son sujetas a diferentes formas de manejo, afectando asi el proceso de sucesion de los bosques. Este proceso ocurre durante un periodo posterior al abandonado de las tierras y afecta la estructura forestal y biodiversidad resultante. Examinamos si las diferencias en cuanto a posesion y manejo de tierras, generan desigualdad en la estructura del bosque, biodiversidad y composicion a traves de un gradiente de fertilidad en el suelo y de edad del bosque. Colectamos muestras de suelo e hicimos un estudio de todos los arboles con un diametro a la altura del pecho a 10cm en 66 parcelas forestales privadas de 0.1-ha, colocadas a lo largo de areas con diferentes edades de bosque y gradientes de fertilidad de suelo, con la finalidad de comparar los datos colectados en este estudio con la base de datos existente de 82 parceles forestales de tierras publicas en bosques secos forestales en Guanacaste, Costa Rica. Nuestros hallazgos sugieren que la fertilidad del suelo parece dirigir la estructura espacial de bosques de propiedad publica vs. privada; las tierras destinadas a la conservacion que son de propiedad publica, parecen localizarse de forma no aleatoria en suelos menos fertiles. En tierras de propiedad privada, las areas destinadas al pastoreo y cultivo parecen localizarse de forma no aleatoria en suelos mas fertiles, mientras que los bosques ocupan tierras menos fertiles. Encontramos que la estructura metrica integrada de los bosques y la biodiversidad no difieren significativamente entre las tierras publicas y privadas. Sin embargo, los bosques publicos y privados difieren en su composicion de especies de arboles. De un total de166 especies, 11 por ciento fueron mas prevalentes en bosques publicos, 7 por ciento mas prevalentes en bosques privados, 32 por ciento no exhibieron parcialidad en cuanto a su distribucion, y 49 por ciento eran muy raras como para ser clasificadas. Las especies de madera popular Swietenia macrophylla, Cedrela odorata, y Astronium graveolens fueron mas prevalentes en bosques publicos, mientras que Guazuma ulmifolia, una especie ampliamente consumida y dispersada por ganado, fue mas abundante en los bosques privados. Sugerimos que la diferencia en cuanto abundancia de la madera popular y G. ulmifolia puedo haber sido el resultado de la tala selectiva y dispersion por ganado. Ademas, algunas diferencias en composicion floral parecen ser el producto de disimilitud en cuanto a la fertilidad del suelo, debido a una seleccion no aleatoria de fertilidad del suelo en tierras publicas y privadas. Existen pocas comparaciones entre bosques secundarios tropicales de propiedad publica y privada. Sin embargo, el entendimiento de estas diferencias es clave: la extension de los bosques secundarios esta incrementandose sistematicamente en conjunto con la disminucion de los bosques maduros, y los bosques secundarios usualmente se regeneran en pastizales o tierras agricolas de propiedad privada.
Comparing Global Spatial Data on Deforestation for Institutional Analysis in Africa			Accurate spatial data on deforestation are critical for social science research, for the assessment of ecosystem services, and for environmental policy such as REDD. + programs. In the last few years a number of sources of big spatial data about tree and forest cover and cover change estimates for the last decade have been made publicly available. These data provide an excellent basis for continental and global-scale analyses of drivers and solutions for deforestation, which were not possible in the past due to the incomparability of data elaborated by different agencies and for different regions. In this article, I compare subcountry tree and forest cover and deforestation rates computed from these datasets at a continental extent for Africa. I illustrate the application of these data by exploring the relation of deforestation with precolonial institutions, protected areas, and road density, timely examples that highlight the relevance of encountering discrepant data sources. I compare statistically the tabular results of deforestation obtained from each data source. The estimates from the three sources are consistent at the cover level, but remarkably divergent at the cover change level. I discuss the implications of these differences and suggest potential causes for divergence. © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Comparing the potential reproductive phenology between restored areas and native tropical forest fragments in Southeastern Brazil			Plant phenology is rarely considered when selecting species used in restoration actions. However, considering the potential flowering and fruiting phenologies of species is a key point to: (1) evaluate the capacity of restoration actions in reestablishing ecological interactions (pollination and seed dispersal) and ecosystem functions (early germination and plant establishment to reduce soil erosion); (2) determine which species are most suitable to the target site, and (3) identify when and where locally adapted seeds can be harvested and purchased. Here, we evaluate the potential reproductive phenology of species occurring in restored and forest fragments in Southeastern Brazil. We asked whether flowering and fruiting phenological patterns differed among type areas. For such, we compared 14 restored areas and 18 nearby forest fragments and compiled phenological data from the literature for 267 species (84% of species sampled). Despite their low floristic similarity, restored and forest fragments showed close similarity of general potential flowering and fruiting periods year-round, peaking in the dry-to-rainy season. There were only slight differences in seasonality of two out of the eight parameters evaluated. Nonzoochorous species' fruiting was seasonal, while zoochorous species fruiting onset occurred year-round but was slightly seasonal in forest fragments. Comparing potential phenological patterns between restored and forest fragments using a compilation from secondary sources are unprecedented in Brazil at this scale. Our results highlight that applying phenological information, even from literature, is essential to improve the science and practice of future restoration actions, enhancing the likelihood of successful restoration of ecosystem functions and species interactions.
Comparing the success of active and passive restoration in a tropical cloud forest landscape: A multi-taxa fauna approach			Tropical forest restoration initiatives are becoming more frequent worldwide in an effort to mitigate biodiversity loss and ecosystems degradation. However, there is little consensus on whether an active or a passive restoration strategy is more successful for recovering biodiversity because few studies make adequate comparisons. Furthermore, studies on animal responses to restoration are scarce compared to those on plants, and those that assess faunal recovery often focus on a single taxon, limiting the generalization of results. We assessed the success of active (native mixed-species plantations) and passive (natural regeneration) tropical cloud forest restoration strategies based on the responses of three animal taxa: amphibians, ants, and dung beetles. We compared community attributes of these three taxa in a 23-year-old active restoration forest, a 23-year-old passive restoration forest, a cattle pasture, and a mature forest, with emphasis on forest-specialist species. We also evaluated the relationship between faunal recovery and environmental variables. For all taxa, we found that recovery of species richness and composition were similar in active and passive restoration sites. However, recovery of forest specialists was enhanced through active restoration. For both forests under restoration, similarity in species composition of all faunal groups was 60-70% with respect to the reference ecosystem due to a replacement of generalist species by forest-specialist species. The recovery of faunal communities was mainly associated with canopy and leaf litter covers. We recommend implementing active restoration using mixed plantations of native tree species and, whenever possible, selecting sites close to mature forest to accelerate the recovery of tropical cloud forest biodiversity. As active restoration is more expensive than passive restoration, both strategies might be used in a complementary manner at the landscape level to compensate for high implementation costs.
Comparison of effectively measured relative changes (%) of mixed inputs (always a biochar mixed with a compost prior to application) with the theoretically expected weighted averaged changes (%) of sole inputs after application to control Anthroposol, Ferralsol and Vertisol for a) water-holding c...			#VALUE!
Comparison of the coexistence pattern of mangrove macrobenthos between natural and artificial reforestation			The abandoned pond-to-mangrove restoration project provides greater advantages than tidal flats afforestation in restoring mangrove ecosystem services and will be the primary method for mangrove restoration in the future. The existing methods for abandoned pond-to-mangrove restoration include artificial restoration through 'dike-breaking, filling with imported soil and tree planting' and natural restoration through 'dike-breaking and natural succession'. However, little is known about which restoration strategy (natural or artificial restoration) provides more benefits to the biodiversity of mangrove macrobethos. Given a prevailing view suggested that artificial restoration should be the preferred approach for accelerating recovery of biodiversity and vegetation structure in tropical regions, we hypothesised higher macrobenthic biodiversity and more complex community structure in artificial restoration than in natural restoration. To test this hypothesis, macrobenthic biodiversity and ecological processes were monitored in a typical abandoned pond-to-mangrove area of Dongzhaigang Bay, China, where artificial and natural restoration methods were used concurrently. Differences in macrobenthic biodiversity, community structure and ecological processes were compared using diversity indices, complex network analysis and null models. Similar species composition and ecological niche overlap and width among macrobenthos were observed at artificial and natural restoration sites. The biotic heterogeneity and interaction among macrobenthos were higher at the natural restoration sites than at the artificial restoration sites. Macrobenthos community assembly at natural and artificial restoration sites was both determined by deterministic processes, with environmental filtering dominating, which explained 52% and 54% of the variations in macrobenthic community structures respectively. Although our findings did not validate the research hypothesis, higher biotic heterogeneity and species interaction among macrobenthos could support natural restoration as the primary method for abandoned pond-to-mangrove projects, because it is a nature-based solution for mangrove restoration.
Comparison of the total interest and skepticism of farmers cultivating Anthroposols, Ferralsols and Vertisols towards biochar and compost technologies, the importance of selected soil quality criteria (water, nutrients and fertility) rated by farmers and the relative changes (%) of the water-hold...			#VALUE!
Comperative study of aboveground biomass and carbon storage between Tembawang and conventional rubber agroforestry in West Kalimantan Indonesia			In the era of intensive oil palm and rubber plantations in Kalimantan, some local communities of Dayak’s tribe in West Kalimantan preserved the traditional agroforestry system “Tembawang”. In the last two decades, rubber has been planted traditionally by local communities since the expansion of rubber industries. This study aimed to compare tree above ground biomass (AGB) distribution and carbon storage in different DBH (diameter at breast height) classes between Tembawang and conventional rubber plantation in West Kalimantan, Indonesia. Vegetation transect analysis was carried out on two types of traditional agroforestry namely Tembawang and conventional rubber. AGB estimation was based on the existing allometric, carbon storage was estimated from the percentage of biomass. Total AGB of Tembawang was higher than conventional rubber plantation and significantly different (p < 0.01). The highest AGB accumulation both Tembawang and conventional rubber was found at above 50 cm diameter class. The aboveground carbon storage from Tembawang and conventional rubber plantation were 90.26 and 42.01 Mg C ha-1, respectively. The highest contribution to carbon storage was found at above 50 cm diameter class, estimated 62.58 % from Tembawang and 49.24 % from conventional rubber. AGB and carbon storage at traditional agroforestry in West Kalimantan were greater than varied different agroforestry system, also the estimated value was closed to tropical secondary forests. Tembawang agroforestry has good potential contribution to carbon storage and conservation of native fruit trees of Kalimantan. © 2021 The Authors Water Supply.
Competing effects of soil fertility and toxicity on tropical greening			Tropical forests are expected to green up with increasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations, but primary productivity may be limited by soil nutrient availability. However, rarely have canopy-scale measurements been assessed against soil measurements in the tropics. Here, we sought to assess remotely sensed canopy greenness against steep soil nutrient gradients across 50 1-ha mature forest plots in Panama. Contrary to expectations, increases in in situ extractable soil phosphorus (P) and base cations (K, Mg) corresponded to declines in remotely sensed mean annual canopy greenness (r(2)=0.77-0.85; p<0.1), controlling for precipitation. The reason for this inverse relationship appears to be that litterfall also increased with increasing soil P and cation availability (r(2)=0.88-0.98; p<0.1), resulting in a decline in greenness with increasing annual litterfall (r(2)=0.94; p<0.1). As such, greater soil nutrient availability corresponded to greater leaf turnover, resulting in decreased greenness. However, these decreases in greenness with increasing soil P and cations were countered by increases in greenness with increasing soil nitrogen (N) (r(2)=0.14; p<0.1), which had no significant relationship with litterfall, likely reflecting a direct effect of soil N on leaf chlorophyll content, but not on litterfall rates. In addition, greenness increased with extractable soil aluminum (Al) (r(2)=0.97; p<0.1), but Al had no significant relationship with litterfall, suggesting a physiological adaptation of plants to high levels of toxic metals. Thus, spatial gradients in canopy greenness are not necessarily positive indicators of soil nutrient scarcity. Using a novel remote sensing index of canopy greenness limitation, we assessed how observed greenness compares with potential greenness. We found a strong relationship with soil N only (r(2)=0.65; p<0.1), suggesting that tropical canopy greenness in Panama is predominantly limited by soil N, even if plant productivity (e.g., litterfall) responds to rock-derived nutrients. Moreover, greenness limitation was also significantly correlated with fine root biomass and soil carbon stocks (r(2)=0.62-0.71; p<0.1), suggesting a feedback from soil N to canopy greenness to soil carbon storage. Overall, these data point to the potential utility of a remote sensing product for assessing belowground properties in tropical ecosystems.
Complementary ecosystem services from multiple land uses highlight the importance of tropical mosaic landscapes			Tropical agricultural landscapes often consist of a mosaic of different land uses, yet little is known about the spectrum of ecosystem service bundles and materials they provide to rural households. We interviewed 320 households on the different benefits received from prevalent land-use types in north-eastern Madagascar (old-growth forests, forest fragments, vanilla agroforests, woody fallows, herbaceous fallows, and rice paddies) in terms of ecosystem services and plant uses. Old-growth forests and forest fragments were reported as important for regulating services (e.g. water regulation), whilst fallow lands and vanilla agroforests as important for provisioning services (food, medicine, fodder). Households reported the usage of 285 plant species (56% non-endemics) and collected plants from woody fallows for varying purposes, whilst plants from forest fragments, predominantly endemics, were used for construction and weaving. Multiple land-use types are thus complementary for providing ecosystem services, with fallow lands being particularly important. Hence, balancing societal needs and conservation goals should be based on diversified and comprehensive land management. © 2023, The Author(s).
Compliance with sustainable forest management guidelines in three timber concessions in the Venezuelan Guayana: Analysis and implications			After more than 40 years of natural forest management (NFM) in Venezuela, out of 16 million ha of production forests only 10% located in the Guayana region is currently being managed with some consideration of sustainability. A recent survey of three private concessions in the Imataca Forest Reserve, based on partial consideration of criteria and indicators for the sustainable management of tropical forests, revealed that a new form of management is needed. Compliance with reduced impact logging was very low, with poor planning in logging operations detected in all cases, highly affecting forest stands and biomass recovery. A limited capacity for monitoring was also found. Social assessments showed that local communities in all cases demanded more participation in wood production benefits and tended to value provision services such as timber, food and water above other important regulations and cultural services. Here, three strategies are proposed as an effective way to partially modify NFM into a more integrated approach: 1) strengthening of institutional cooperation between private and public sectors and capacity building in the process of monitoring; 2) creation of a training framework for reduced impact logging techniques 3) a review of current legal structures and national policies related to NFM in order to favour small-scale operations. (C) 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Concentration and stock of carbon in the soils affected by land uses and climates in the western Himalaya, India			Soils are the third biggest sink of carbon on the earth. Hence, suitable land uses for a climatic condition are expected to sequester optimum atmospheric carbon in soils. But, information on how climatic conditions and land uses influence carbon accumulation in the soils on the Himalayan Mountains is not known. This study reports the impact of four climatic conditions (sub-tropical, altitude: 500-1200 m; temperate 1200-2000 m; lower alpine 2000-3000 m; upper alpine, 3000-3500 m) and four land uses (forest, grassland, horticulture, agriculture) on the concentrations and stocks of soil organic carbon (SOC) in upper (0-30 cm) and deeper (30-100 cm) soil depths on the western Himalayan Mountains of India. The study also explored the drivers which influenced the SOC stock build up on the mountains. Rainfall and soil moisture showed quadratic relations, whereas temperature declined linearly with the altitude. SOC stock as well as concentration was the highest (101.8 Mg ha(-1) in 0-30 cm, 227.97 Mg ha(-1) in 0-100 cm) in temperate and the lowest in subtropical climate (37 Mg ha(-1) in 0-30 cm, 107.04 Mg ha(-1) in 0-100 cm). Pattern of SOC stock build up across the altitude was: temperate>lower alpine>upper alpine>sub-tropical. SOC stocks in all land uses across the climatic conditions, except agriculture in lower alpine, was higher (0.7 to 41.6%) in the deeper than upper soil depth. SOC stocks in both the depths showed quadratic relations with soil temperature and soil moisture. Other factors like fine soil particles, land-use factor and altitude influenced positively whereas slope and pH, negatively to the SOC stocks. In all climatic conditions, other than temperate, SOC stocks were greater in natural ecosystems like forests and pastures (112.5 to 247.5 Mg ha(-1)) than agriculture (63 to 120.4 Mg ha(-1)). In temperate climate, SOC stock in agriculture (253.6 Mg ha(-1)) on well formed terraces was a little higher than forest (231.3 Mg ha(-1)) on natural slope. These observations, suggest that land uses on temperate climate may be treated as potential sinks for sequestration of the atmospheric carbon. However, agriculture in subtropical climate need to be pursued with due SOC protection measures like the temperate climate for greater sequestration of the atmospheric carbon. (C) 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Conceptual Links between Landscape Diversity and Diet Diversity: A Roadmap for Transdisciplinary Research			Malnutrition linked to poor quality diets affects at least 2 billion people. Forests, as well as agricultural systems linked to trees, are key sources of dietary diversity in rural settings. In the present article, we develop conceptual links between diet diversity and forested landscape mosaics within the rural tropics. First, we summarize the state of knowledge regarding diets obtained from forests, trees, and agroforests. We then hypothesize how disturbed secondary forests, edge habitats, forest access, and landscape diversity can function in bolstering dietary diversity. Taken together, these ideas help us build a framework illuminating four pathways (direct, agroecological, energy, and market pathways) connecting forested landscapes to diet diversity. Finally, we offer recommendations to fill remaining knowledge gaps related to diet and forest cover monitoring. We argue that better evaluation of the role of land cover complexity will help avoid overly simplistic views of food security and, instead, uncover nutritional synergies with forest conservation and restoration.
Conditions associated with protected area success in conservation and poverty reduction			Protected areas are the dominant approach to protecting biodiversity and the supply of ecosystem services. Because these protected areas are often placed in regions with widespread poverty and because they can limit agricultural development and exploitation of natural resources, concerns have been raised about their potential to create or reinforce poverty traps. Previous studies suggest that the protected area systems in Costa Rica and Thailand, on average, reduced deforestation and alleviated poverty. We examine these results in more detail by characterizing the heterogeneity of responses to protection conditional on observable characteristics. We find no evidence that protected areas trap historically poorer areas in poverty. In fact, we find that poorer areas at baseline seem to have the greatest levels of poverty reduction as a result of protection. However, we do find that the spatial characteristics associated with the most poverty alleviation are not necessarily the characteristics associated with the most avoided deforestation. We show how an understanding of these spatially heterogeneous responses to protection can be used to generate suitability maps that identify locations in which both environmental and poverty alleviation goals are most likely to be achieved.
Confronting sustainable intensification with uncertainty and extreme values on smallholder tropical farms			Sustainable intensification of agricultural lands might reconcile the conservation of tropical forest with food production, but in-depth assessments considering uncertainty and extreme values are missing. Uncertainty prohibits mapping probabilities to potential future states or ranking these states in terms of their likelihood. This in turn hampers the assessment of possible decision outcomes. Here, we use simulations to investigate how uncertainty may influence the social acceptability of alternative land-use strategies to halt tropical deforestation (including sustainable intensification), based on indicators representing farmer satisfaction. The results show how extreme values (worst values) for indicators of farmer satisfaction may undermine the adoption of sustainable intensification. We demonstrate that a pure forest conservation strategy leads to lower food production, but outperforms a sustainable intensification strategy that maintains food security. Pure forest conservation performed better, i.e., could secure higher farmer satisfaction, than sustainable intensification across a range of indicator groups. This suggests strong barriers to achieving sustainable intensification. Using agricultural subsidies breaks the dominance of pure forest conservation by enhancing the economic returns of sustainable intensification. We discuss the importance of access to labor and farmers' preferences for the use of already cleared lands, which achieved the worst values under sustainable intensification and conclude that any assessment of land-use strategies requires careful consideration of uncertainty and extreme values.
Congo basin forest cover change estimate for 1990, 2000 and 2005 by landsat interpretation using an automated object-based processing chain			Central Africa contains the second largest area of contiguous moist tropical forest of the world. In the framework of the Observatory of Forests in Central Africa (OFAC) and the Forest Resources Assessment (FRA-2010) led by Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO), each country is invited to provide an estimation of forest cover change for years 1990-2000-2005 (and later 2010). In this context, developing efficient methods to detect forest changes by processing remote sensing data is more than ever a challenging need. At the moment, only satellite images can provide enough information on processes such as deforestation at the scale of Congo basin. An automatic method has been designed to map and quantify forest change in Central Africa. 1168 subsets of 20 × 20 km of 30 m resolution Landsat or Aster are required to cover the different countries. The different steps of the method are a (1) multi-date segmentation, applied on each extracts triplet (1990-2000 and 2005), (2) an unsupervised classification and an (3) automatic pre-labeling. (4) Change is detected by a statistical object-based method. (5) The involvement of national experts is an essential part of the intepretation process. The OFAC team together with Joint Research Centre (JRC-EU) and FAO invited in Kinshasa (September 2009) 13 national experts from the 6 countries of the Congo Basin to validate the land cover mapping and change maps. National experts check, and change if needed, the pre-interpretation of each sample using an object-based validation tool developed by the JRC. This unique exercise estimates not only deforestation and reforestation but also degradation and regeneration which are particularly important in Central Africa. These results are expected to contribute to the discussion on the reduction of CO2 emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (UN-REDD).
Consequences of actor level livelihood heterogeneity for additionality in a tropical forest payment for environmental services programme with an undifferentiated reward structure			Primary tropical forests provide crucial environmental services, including carbon storage and hydrological regulation. Options for promoting forest conservation include payments for environmental services (PES) programmes that provide financial incentives to local actors, in exchange for reduced forest clearance. The success of voluntary PES (defined in terms of avoided primary forest conversion) is contingent upon behavioural changes in enrolled actors. As both the degree of enrolment and likelihood of sustained behavioural change depend upon how PES compensation structures interact with existing actor economies, local heterogeneity in livelihood strategies may play a strong role in the ultimate success of PES programmes, particularly when compensation is not differentiated with respect to opportunity costs. We examined the influence of livelihood heterogeneity on the potential success of a deforestation-reduction PES with an undifferentiated reward structure. We collected socioeconomic and demographic data at the household and community levels across two large Amazonian extractive reserves where a spatially extensive PES programme (Bolsa Floresta) operates. We show that demographic and socioeconomic status varies widely across households and communities, and found that both households and communities that are most and least likely to convert primary forest receive similar financial incentives. Those households most engaged in manioc agriculture (the primary driver of local primary forest conversion) both benefitted from the highest annual incomes and incurred the greatest opportunity costs. We show that avoided primary forest conversion could be greatly increased with differentiated payment structures adjusted for local differences in opportunity costs and livelihood strategies, and present two metrics that could help to achieve that goal. (C) 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Conservation and conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo: The impacts of warfare, mining, and protected areas on deforestation			Tropical forests provide critical ecosystem services worldwide. Nonetheless, ongoing agricultural expansion, timber extraction, and mining continue to jeopardize important forest resources. In addition, many tropical forests reside in countries that have experienced violent conflict in recent decades, posing an additional, yet poorly understood threat. Conflict may decrease or increase deforestation depending on the relationship between conflict and other causes of land use change, such as mining expansion or protected area establishment. The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), home of the second largest tropical forest in the world, has experienced 20 years of violent conflict, resulting in the death of over 100,000 combatants and up to 5 million civilians. Expanding mining concessions also threaten the DRC's forest, even though nearly 12% of it is under some form of protection. In this study, we used spatially-explicit data on conflict, mining, and protected areas, along with a host of control variables, to estimate the impacts of these factors on forest cover loss from 1990 to 2010. Through a panel instrumental variables approach we found that: i) conflict increased forest cover loss, ii) mining concessions increased forest cover loss, but in times of conflict this impact was lessened, and iii) protected areas reduced forest cover loss, even in high conflict regions. Our results thus suggest that policy interventions designed to reduce violent conflict may have the co-benefit of reducing deforestation, especially in areas with low mining potential. Likewise, protected areas can be effective even in times of war. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Conservation and sequestration of carbon. The potential of forest and agroforest management practices			Forests play a major role In Earth's carbon cycle through assimilation, storage, and emission of CO2. Establishment and management of boreal, temperate, and tropical forest and agroforest systems could potentially enhance sequestration of carbon in the terrestrial biosphere. A biological and economic analysis of forest establishment and management options from 94 nations revealed that forestation, agroforestry, and silviculture could be employed to conserve and sequester one Petagram (Pg) of carbon annually over a 50-year period. The marginal cost of implementing these options to sequester 55 Pg of carbon would be approximately $10/Mg. © 1993.
Conservation of Tropical Forests in the Anthropocene			If current trends continue, the tropical forests of the Anthropocene will be much smaller, simpler, steeper and emptier than they are today. They will be more diminished in size and heavily fragmented (especially in lowland wet forests), have reduced structural and species complexity, be increasingly restricted to steeper, less accessible areas, and be missing many heavily hunted species. These changes, in turn, will greatly reduce the quality and quantity of ecosystem services that tropical forests can provide. Driving these changes will be continued clearance for farming and monoculture forest plantations, unsustainable selective logging, over-hunting, and, increasingly, climate change. Concerted action by local and indigenous communities, environmental groups, governments, and corporations can reverse these trends and, if successful, provide future generations with a tropical forest estate that includes a network of primary forest reserves robustly defended from threats, recovering logged and secondary forests, and resilient community forests managed for the needs of local people. Realizing this better future for tropical forests and people will require formalisation of land tenure for local and indigenous communities, better-enforced environmental laws, the widescale roll-out of payments for ecosystem service schemes, and sustainable intensification of under-yielding farmland, as well as global-scale societal changes, including reduced consumerism, meat consumption, fossil fuel reliance, and population growth. But the time to act is now, while the opportunity remains to protect a semblance of intact, hyperdiverse tropical forests.
Conservation payments and perceptions of equity: Experimental evidence from Indonesia, Peru, and Tanzania			While monetary incentives may be a promising tool for encouraging tropical forest conservation in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the equity implications of such incentives are drawing scrutiny. Furthermore, little is known about how program design shapes perceptions of fairness and equity among program participants, and it remains unclear whether devolving the decision power over the distribution of payments to local leaders helps or harms local perceptions of equity. We implemented a 'lab-in-the-field' experiment with 448 participants in rural villages in Indonesia, Peru, and Tanzania, framed around two versions of a collective payments for ecosystem services (PES) program. Participants perceived the program as less equitable when the collective payment was distributed according to the discretion of a locally chosen leader, compared to when the payment was distributed perfectly equally by design. The negative effect is only seen among participants who were given a low share of the payment, which suggests that it is not the involvement of a leader per se that leads to lower perceptions of equity, but the inegalitarian distribution of the payment that sometimes occurs when a leader has the discretion to choose how the payment is distributed. The results highlight the importance of designing conservation incentive programs that give opportunities for local involvement while still encouraging equitable local decisions.
Conservation set-asides improve carbon storage and support associated plant diversity in certified sustainable oil palm plantations			Maintaining forest conservation set-asides is a key criterion of sustainability certification of many crops that drive tropical deforestation, but their value for carbon storage and associated biodiversity is unclear. We conducted vegetation measurements to examine the benefits of set-asides for aboveground carbon stocks (AGC) in certified oil palm plantations on Borneo, and whether their AGC is positively associated with plant diversity. The mean estimated AGC of live trees and palms >= 10 cm diameter in set-asides in certified oil palm plantations (52.8 Mg ha(-1)) was > 1.5-times that of oil palm (30.3 Mg ha(-1)), with some plots supporting similar AGC to primary forest. For lowland Borneo, we estimate that the average AGC of oil palm plantations with 10% coverage of set-asides is up to 20% greater than the average AGC of oil palm plantations without set-asides, newly demonstrating carbon storage as a benefit of conservation set-asides. We found positive relationships between AGC and plant diversity, highlighting the carbon-biodiversity co-benefits of set-asides. However, set-asides had a lower density of tree seedlings than continuous primary forest, indicating potential suppression of future tree regeneration and AGC. Our findings support the application of zero-deforestation during agricultural development to conserve areas of remaining forest with high AGC and high biodiversity. We recommend management practices that boost regeneration in existing set-asides (e.g. enrichment planting), which would be most effective in larger set-asides, and could substantially increase the AGC of agricultural landscapes without removing land from production, and help conserve forest-dependent biodiversity.
Consistent cooling benefits of silvopasture in the tropics			Agroforestry systems have the potential to sequester carbon and offer numerous benefits to rural communities, but their capacity to offer valuable cooling services has not been quantified on continental scales. Here, we find that trees in pasturelands (“silvopasture”) across Latin America and Africa can offer substantial cooling benefits. These cooling benefits increase linearly by −0.32 °C to −2.4 °C per 10 metric tons of woody carbon per hectare, and importantly do not depend on the spatial extent of the silvopasture systems. Thus, even smallholders can reap important cooling services from intensifying their silvopasture practices. We then map where realistic (but ambitious) silvopasture expansion could counteract a substantial fraction of the local projected warming in 2050 due to climate change. Our findings indicate where and to what extent silvopasture systems can counteract local temperature increases from global climate change and help vulnerable communities adapt to a warming world. © 2022, The Author(s).
Constraints on carbon accumulation rate and net primary production in the Lopingian (Late Permian) tropical peatland in SW China			During the Permian, peatland, as represented in extensive coal deposits, was a major component of the global carbon cycle. Carbon storage in peatland is a balance between decay and net primary production (NPP), which in turn are sensitive to variations in the concentration of atmospheric CO2 and O2. To evaluate peatland carbon storage and NPP during the Lopingian, a period thought to be characterised by higher atmospheric O2 and CO2 than modern levels, spectral analyses of geophysical data from a 15.1m thick Lopingian (Upper Permian) coal in southwestern China were conducted to define the time frame of temporal carbon accumulation in tropical peatland. The result shows that the mineral matter content (ash yield) of the coal was possibly influenced by 123ka (eccentricity), 35.6ka (obliquity) and 21.2ka (precession) Milankovitch periodicities. Using this timeframe and an understanding of carbon loss during coalification, the Lopingian tropical peatland carbon accumulation rate is calculated to be 61.1-73.0gC/m2/yr which is expected to correspond to a NPP of 611-1460gC/m2/yr respectively. A comparison between the predicted Pennsylvanian (Late Carboniferous) NPP and modern values indicates that the Permian NPP calculated is consistent with geochemical and paleobotanical models, supporting a proposal that productivity was mainly controlled by temporal atmospheric O2 and CO2 levels. © 2010 Elsevier B.V.
Contrasting phenology of Eucalyptus grandis fine roots in upper and very deep soil layers in Brazil			While the role of deep roots in major ecosystem services has been shown for tropical forests, there have been few direct measurements of fine root dynamics at depths of more than 2 m. The factors influencing root phenology remain poorly understood, creating a gap in the knowledge required for predicting the effects of climate change. We set out to gain an insight into the fine root phenology of fast-growing trees in deep tropical soils.Fine root growth and mortality of Eucalyptus grandis trees were observed fortnightly using minirhizotrons down to a soil depth of 6 m, from 2 to 4 years after planting.In the topsoil, the highest live root length production was during the rainy summer (20 cm m(-2) d(-1)) whereas, below 2 m deep, it was at the end of the dry winter (51 cm m(-2) d(-1)). The maximum root elongation rates increased with soil depth to 3.6 cm d(-1) in the 5-6 m soil layer.Our study shows that the effect of the soil depth on the seasonal variations in fine root growth should be taken into account when modelling the carbon, water and nutrient cycles in forests growing on deep tropical soils.
Contribution of glomalin to dissolve organic carbon under different land uses and seasonality in dry tropics			Glomalin related soil protein (GRSP) is a hydrophobic glycoprotein that is significant for soil organic carbon (SOC) persistence and sequestration, owing to its large contribution to SOC pool and long turnover time. However, the contribution of GRSP to dissolve OC (DOC) leach from soil is not yet comprehensively explored, though it could have implication in understanding SOC dynamics. We, therefore, aim to measure the contribution of GRSP to DOC, in a range of land uses and climatic seasons in the dry tropical ecosystem. Our results demonstrated that a significant proportion of GRSP (water soluble GRSP; WS-GRSP) leached with DOC (7.9-21.9 mg kg(-1)), which accounts for 0.2-0.23% of soils total GRSP (T-GRSP). Forest exhibited significantly higher WS-GRSP and DOC leaching than fallow and agriculture. WS-GRSP and DOC accumulations were higher in the dry season (summer and winter) than in rainy. The extent of seasonal variations was higher in forest than in other two land uses, indicating the role of vegetation and biological activity in soil dissolve organic matter (DOM) dynamics. The regression analysis among WS-GRSP, T-GRSP, DOC and SOC prove that the accumulations and leaching of GRSP and other soil OM (SOM) depend on similar factors. The ratio of WS-GRSP-C to DOC was higher in agriculture soil than in forest and fallow, likely a consequence of altered soil chemistry, and organic matter quantity and quality due to soil management practices. Multivariate analysis reflects a strong linkage among GRSP and SOC storage and leaching, soil nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus) and other important soil properties (pH and bulk density), suggesting that improving GRSP and other SOM status is an urgent need for the both SOC sequestration and soil health in dry tropical agro-ecosystems. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Contribution of legume tree residues and macrofauna to the improvement of abiotic soil properties in the eastern Amazon			The potential advantages of positive interactions between the functional group components of the soil macrofauna and soil residue cover may increase the sustainability and efficiency of tropical agrosystems. The objective of this study was to link the ecological requirements of soil macrofauna with their impacts on the principal chemical and physical indicators of a hardsetting soil from a humid tropical region. The soil of a no-tillage system covered with legumes tree residues was subjected to the following treatments: Leucaena + Clitoria (L + C); Leucaena + Gliricidia (L + G); Leucaena + Acacia (L + A); Gliricidia + Clitoria (G + C); Gliricidia + Acacia (G + A); and a control with bare soil (BS) and no legumes. The application of leguminous tree residue with a high C/N ratio (G + A) extended essential ecosystem functions in the no-tillage agrosystem due to the favoring abundant functional groups, including soil engineers, predators and litter transformers. Litter transformers are associated with mulching effects that enhance multiple attributes, such as water infiltration, soil porosity, soil density, the litter carbon stock, the free light fraction (FLF) and total organic C. The use of fast-growing leguminous trees can increase soil acidity and decrease soil macrofauna diversity, but the harmful effects of leguminous tree cover are minor relative to the environmental benefits. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Contribution of mangroves to coastal carbon cycling in low latitude seas			The contribution of mangrove carbon to the coastal ocean in low latitudes was evaluated. Mangrove forests occupy only 2% of the world's coastal ocean area yet they account for about 5% of net primary production, 12% of ecosystem respiration and about 30% of carbon burial on all continental margins in subtropical and tropical seas. Mangroves also account for nearly one-third of all riverine DIC discharging into low latitude coastal waters. Mangrove forests fix, release and sequester more carbon by area than all other coastal ecosystem types, except perhaps for subtropical and tropical seagrass meadows for which data are lacking. Globally, mangrove waters release to the atmosphere more than 2.5 times (-42.8 Tg Cy-1) the amount of CO2 emitted from all other subtropical and tropical coastal waters. The global destruction of the large carbon stocks (956 Mg C ha(-1)) of mangroves at the current annual rate of about 1% results in an additional annual release of roughly 133 Tg C y(-1) to the atmosphere. Mangroves account for only 0.7% of tropical forest area globally, but their destruction currently adds another 10% to global CO2 release from tropical deforestation. Despite considerable uncertainty upscaling small numbers of measurements with large coefficents of variation, our calculations suggest that mangroves are a globally significant contributor to the carbon cycle in low latitude seas, and to greenhouse emissions resulting from tropical deforestation. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Contribution of terrestrial ecosystems to carbon sequestration.			Contribution of terrestrial ecosystems to carbon sequestration. This article focuses on the contribution of natural ecosystems (forests, grasslands) and agrosystems to carbon sequestration either in biomass or in soil. Carbon stocks are important (650 Gt in biomass, 1500 to 2000 Gt in soils as compared with 750 for atmospheric CO2), and also fluxes that led to CO2 emissions in the past (due to deforestation or cultivation) and which now turn to carbon sequestration (2 Gt(C)/year). This article shows great spatial variations in stocks and fluxes and great measurement difficulties, especially for stock variations. Anthropic actions such as reforestation (mainly in the North), changes in land use or in crop management, can increase carbon sequestration in biomass or soil, with a residence time of several decades, which is not insignificant with respect to the Kyoto protocol and which also has other environmental (C) 2003 Academie des sciences. Publie par Editions scientifiques et medicales Elsevier SAS.
Contribution of the land sector to a 1.5 °C world			The Paris Agreement introduced an ambitious goal of limiting warming to 1.5 degrees C above pre-industrial levels. Here we combine a review of modelled pathways and literature on mitigation strategies, and develop a land-sector roadmap of priority measures and regions that can help to achieve the 1.5 degrees C temperature goal. Transforming the land sector and deploying measures in agriculture, forestry, wetlands and bioenergy could feasibly and sustainably contribute about 30%, or 15 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (GtCO(2)e) per year, of the global mitigation needed in 2050 to deliver on the 1.5 degrees C target, but it will require substantially more effort than the 2 degrees C target. Risks and barriers must be addressed and incentives will be necessary to scale up mitigation while maximizing sustainable development, food security and environmental co-benefits.
Contribution of trees to the conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services in agricultural landscapes			The production of sufficient food for an increasing global population while conserving natural capital is a major challenge to humanity. Tree-mediated ecosystem services are recognized as key features of more sustainable agroecosystems but the strategic management of tree attributes for ecosystem service provision is poorly understood. Six agroforestry and tree cover transition studies, spanning tropical/subtropical forest zones in three continents, were synthesized to assess the contribution of tree cover to the conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services. Loss of native earthworm populations resulted in 76% lower soil macroporosity when shade trees were absent in coffee agriculture. Increased tree cover contributed to 53% increase in tea crop yield, maintained 93% of crop pollinators found in the natural forest and, in combination with nearby forest fragments, contributed to as much as 86% lower incidence for coffee berry borer. In certain contexts, shade trees contributed to negative effects resulting from increases in abundance of white stem borer and lacebugs and resulted in 60% reduction of endangered tree species compared to forest. Managing trees for ecosystem services requires understanding which tree species to include and how to manage them for different socio-ecological contexts. This knowledge needs to be shared and translated into viable options with farming communities.
Contribution of vegetation restoration to carbon sequestration driven by ex-situ poverty alleviation and relocation in ecologically fragile areas-Taking Guizhou, China, as a case			Vegetation restoration in ecologically fragile areas has a significant carbon sequestration (CS) effect. However, it is usually difficult to achieve quantitative assessment at the regional scale for this part of human activity intervention. The Chinese government's ex-situ poverty alleviation and relocation (EPAR) project has relocated approximately 10 million people from areas with a fragile ecological environment to urban centralized resettlement, which is a typical case of weakened environmental intervention by human activities (Guizhou Province accounting for approximately 20% of the total relocated population in China). The CS model of vegetation photosynthesis and spatial analysis of geographic information were used to quantify the contribution of human activities to the natural restoration of vegetation CS, based on the data of net primary productivity (NPP) of vegetation from 2000 to 2020. The results show that the implementation of the EPAR project acts as an external force to drive vegetation restoration and CS, which increases the slope of the carbon density change trend (from k = 30.9 to k = 57.41), resulting in an overall carbon density increase of 26.51 tCkm(-2). The regional spatial analysis showed that the correlation coefficients between carbon density and relocation intensity in the 5-year and 10-year change were r = 0.976 (p < 0.01) and r = 0.949 (p < 0.05), respectively, indicating a significant positive correlation. Based on this, the CS contribution of vegetation in 84 districts in Guizhou Province that implemented EPAR projects was calculated, showing that 79 districts contributed positively, accounting for 94%. The average contribution of CS by vegetation restoration in each district was 0.0556 Tg, and offset CO2 emissions were 0.2059 Tg. The other five districts with a negative contribution to CS were distributed in regions with relatively stable ecosystems and mature forests. This shows that human intervention in the environment changes more significantly in fragile ecological areas.
Contribution of woody habitat islands to the conservation of birds and their potential ecosystem services in an extensive Colombian rangeland			In agricultural landscapes, patches of natural or semi-natural habitat are crucial for the survival of plant and animal populations, which in turn are essential to maintain ecosystem functioning. Species composition and diversity of trees and birds among woody habitat islands were compared in a Colombian rangeland to assess how habitat characteristics influence bird community composition, bird species traits and their potential ecosystem services. Bird and tree diversity was higher in gallery forest fragments compared to hedgerows and isolated tree islands within rangelands. Forest fragments shared over 50% of their bird and tree species with tree islands and hedgerows, yet communities differed markedly. Tree islands and hedgerows had relatively more endozoochorous and small-seeded tree species and hosted birds of forest, savanna and shrubland, while forest fragments had more synzoochorous and large-seeded tree species and primarily hosted forest birds. Hedges and tree islands contribute to the conservation of forest bird and tree biodiversity in rangeland, but gallery forests are essential for the conservation of less tolerant forest species. The savanna rangeland acts as an ecological filter between the gallery forests and the hedges and tree islands, which in turn facilitate the spillover of tolerant forest birds and their ecological functions, including tree seed dispersal, into the rangeland, and thus support regional forest conservation and restoration. (C) 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Contributions of a global network of tree diversity experiments to sustainable forest plantations			The area of forest plantations is increasing worldwide helping to meet timber demand and protect natural forests. However, with global change, monospecific plantations are increasingly vulnerable to abiotic and biotic disturbances. As an adaption measure we need to move to plantations that are more diverse in genotypes, species, and structure, with a design underpinned by science. TreeDivNet, a global network of tree diversity experiments, responds to this need by assessing the advantages and disadvantages of mixed species plantations. The network currently consists of 18 experiments, distributed over 36 sites and five ecoregions. With plantations 1-15 years old, TreeDivNet can already provide relevant data for forest policy and management. In this paper, we highlight some early results on the carbon sequestration and pest resistance potential of more diverse plantations. Finally, suggestions are made for new, innovative experiments in understudied regions to complement the existing network.
Contributions of mangrove conservation and restoration to climate change mitigation in Indonesia			Mangrove forests are important carbon sinks, and this is especially true for Indonesia where about 24% of the world's mangroves exist. Unfortunately, vast expanses of these mangroves have been deforested, degraded or converted to other uses resulting in significant greenhouse gas emissions. The objective of this study was to quantify the climate change mitigation potential of mangrove conservation and restoration in Indonesia. We calculated the emission factors from the dominant land uses in mangroves, determined mangrove deforestation rates and quantified the total emissions and the potential emission reductions that could be achieved from mangrove conservation and restoration. Based on our analysis of the carbon stocks and emissions from land use in mangroves we found: (1) Indonesia's mangrove ecosystem carbon stocks are among the highest of any tropical forest type; (2) mangrove deforestation results in greenhouse gas emissions that far exceed that of upland tropical deforestation; (3) in the last decade the rates of deforestation in Indonesian mangroves have remained high; and (4) conservation and restoration of mangroves promise to sequester significant quantities of carbon. While mangroves comprise only approximate to 2.6% of Indonesia's total forest area, their degradation and deforestation accounted for approximate to 10% of total greenhouse gas emissions arising from the forestry sector. The large source of greenhouse gas emissions from a relatively small proportion of the forest area underscores the value for inclusion of mangroves as a natural climate solution. Mangrove conservation is far more effective than mangrove restoration in carbon emissions reductions and an efficient pathway to achieve Indonesia's nationally determined contribution (NDC) targets. The potential emission reduction from halting deforestation of primary and secondary mangroves coupled with restoration activities could result in an emission reduction equivalent to 8% of Indonesia's 2030 NDC emission reduction targets from the forestry sector.
Contributions of native forest protection to local water supplies in East Maui			Tropical forests provide a suite of benefits including biodiversity, cultural value, and a range of ecosystem services. Globally, there is increasing interest in incentivizing native forest protection as a multi-benefit natural infrastructure strategy to secure dean and ample water supplies. In addition to conversion to agriculture and other non-forest land uses, non-native species invasion represents a major threat to these systems, particularly on islands. Whereas several recent efforts have quantified the benefits of reforestation or avoided agricultural expansion in tropical forest areas, the hydrologic and associated economic benefits of avoided invasion have received less attention. To address this gap, we quantified the benefits of protecting native forest from conversion to non-native forest in East Maui, Hawai'i in terms of groundwater recharge, a highly valued hydrologic ecosystem service that water utilities increasingly seek to co-finance. Compared with two counterfactual invasion scenarios, the groundwater recharge benefits of planned conservation activities reached 40.9 to 146.3 million cubic meters over 100 years depending on invasion rate assumptions. This translated to 2.70 to 137.6 million dollars of cost savings to the water utility in present value terms (achieved through reducing reliance on more expensive water alternatives) under a range of discount rates and water scarcity assumptions. Our results suggest that investing in native forest conservation provides an important hydrologic ecosystem service benefit that complements the range of benefits provided by these ecosystems. These findings demonstrate that cofinancing native forest conservation represents an important supply side option in water resources planning. (C) 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Control soil water-holding capacity (WHC), total carbon and nitrogen (TC and TN) contents, C:N ratio and pH of the Anthroposol, Ferralsol and Vertisol.			Values are means (n = 3)  one standard deviation (in parentheses). Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Conversion of land use land cover and its impact on ecosystem services in a tropical forest			The tropical forest ecosystem provides society-wide range of ecosystem services, but increasing human activity changes the land use/land cover dynamics (LULC) with significant change of the ecosystem services values. The present study is considered to evaluate and monitoring of LULC change along with the ecosystem services of a tropical forest region in Jhargram block West Bengal in India during 1972–2019. LANDSAT satellite imageries (1972, 1987, 1992, 2002, 2012, and 2019) have been analyzed to identify the LULC change and to determine the ecosystem service values using the value transfer method. Based on the Maximum likelihood algorithm image classification techniques using Arc-GIS software v.10.3, the study area is divided into eight land use land cover (LULC) categories like forest, cultivated land, grassland, water bodies, settlement/built-up land, barren land, and sand. We found that forest land continuously decreased by 42.3% between 1972 and 2019 and cultivated land is also decreased by 31.6% from 1972 to 2019. Settlement and Barren land are increased progressively 1209.6%, 394.3% respectively between 1972 and 2019 respectively. The total ecosystem services in Jhargram block have been calculated as $30.52, $29.69, $27.03, $34.1, $29.2, and $21 million in the year of 1972, 1987, 1992, 2002, 2012 and 2019 respectively. The total ecosystem services have reduced by 31.2% due to deforestation. Variations can also be seen in the value of individual ecosystem service functions viz. food production, raw material, erosion control, nutrient cycling, recreation, and climate regulation, which are important contributions in total ecosystem services. The sensitivity analysis indicates that our estimated ecosystem service value for our present study is reasonable and robustness concerning the value coefficient. This information will be helpful for sustainable land use management strategies and policy-making processes in the tropical forest region. © 2021, The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
Conversion of tropical moist forest into cacao agroforest: consequences for carbon pools and annual C sequestration			Tropical forests store a large part of the terrestrial carbon and play a key role in the global carbon (C) cycle. In parts of Southeast Asia, conversion of natural forest to cacao agroforestry systems is an important driver of deforestation, resulting in C losses from biomass and soil to the atmosphere. This case study from Sulawesi, Indonesia, compares natural forest with nearby shaded cacao agroforests for all major above and belowground biomass C pools (n = 6 plots) and net primary production (n = 3 plots). Total biomass (above- and belowground to 250 cm soil depth) in the forest (approx. 150 Mg C ha(-1)) was more than eight times higher than in the agroforest (19 Mg C ha(-1)). Total net primary production (NPP, above- and belowground) was larger in the forest than in the agroforest (approx. 29 vs. 20 Mg dry matter (DM) ha(-1) year(-1)), while wood increment was twice as high in the forest (approx. 6 vs. 3 Mg DM ha(-1) year(-1)). The SOC pools to 250 cm depth amounted to 134 and 78 Mg C ha(-1) in the forest and agroforest stands, respectively. Replacement of tropical moist forest by cacao agroforest reduces the biomass C pool by approximately 130 Mg C ha(-1); another 50 Mg C ha(-1) may be released from the soil. Further, the replacement of forest by cacao agroforest also results in a 70-80 % decrease of the annual C sequestration potential due to a significantly smaller stem increment.
Converting Forests to Farms: The Economic Benefits of Clearing Forests in Agricultural Settlements in the Amazon			Agricultural expansion into tropical forests is believed to bring local economic benefits at the expense of global environmental costs. The resulting tension is reflected in Brazilian government policy. The national agrarian reform program has settled farm families in the Amazon region since the 1970s, with the expectation that they will clear forests in order to farm the land. On the other hand, recent Brazilian policy initiatives seek to reduce deforestation to mitigate climate change. We contribute to the policy debate that surrounds these dual goals for the Amazon by estimating the marginal effects of new agricultural land on the full income and assets of farm settlers over a 13-year period from 1996 to 2009. Using micro panel data from agrarian settlements where forest was being rapidly cleared, and controlling for factors that would otherwise confound the relationship, we estimate the effect of converting forest to agriculture on total household income to estimate the opportunity cost of conserving forest. Our measure of income reflects any re-allocation of resources by utility maximizing households and any productivity effects due to loss of forest ecosystem services. The estimated effect of new agricultural land on income is positive, but small relative to the income per hectare of previously cleared land. However, we show that income increases investment in physical assets, which raises households' income generating capacity and future accumulation of assets. Thus, while there is only a small immediate income gain from clearing more forest, the long-term effects on wealth are still substantial. This demonstrates that given the right conditions, conversion of forest to agricultural land can be an impetus for asset accumulation by smallholders. It also highlights the importance of considering the indirect and long-term welfare benefits of new agricultural land when assessing the opportunity costs of forest conservation.
Converting terrestrial ecosystems from sources to sinks of carbon			It may be possible to sequester carbon in forests and forest products, but to date global trends in land management have resulted in a release of terrestrial carbon to the atmosphere. Over 100 PgC were released between 1850 and 1980, and during the 1980s global changes in land use (predominantly deforestation) caused a net release of 1.6 PgC yr(-1), about 25% of the total emissions of carbon dioxide from human activities and about 15% of the enhanced radiative forcing. Management practices that could change this release of terrestrial carbon to an accumulation include (i) a halt to deforestation; (ii) an expansion in the land area of forests; (iii) an increase in the stocks of carbon in existing forests; (iv) more efficient harvest and greater use of wood in long-lasting products; and (v) the substitution of wood fuels for fossil fuels. However, the rate of global warming needs management as well. Unless the warming is gradual enough to avoid widespread mortality of forests, the additional releases of carbon caused by the warming itself, through increased respiration, decay, and fires, may cancel the intended effects of forest management.
Coordination and cross-sectoral integration in REDD+: experiences from seven countries			Ever since a global mitigation mechanism that aims to reduce emissions by avoiding deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) was introduced in climate change negotiations, governance challenges in implementing this concept in tropical forest countries have received considerable attention. In particular, multilevel governance has been identified as a key challenge, as REDD+ aims to tackle local deforestation activities through a global results-based financial scheme. This paper will present an analysis from seven REDD+ countries (Brazil, Cameroon, Indonesia, Nepal, Papua New Guinea, Tanzania and Vietnam) where 293 qualitative interviews were conducted with national-level REDD+ actors. We examined what kind of multilevel coordination problems emerge, particularly in relation to horizontal, cross-sectoral coordination, and analysed these problems through the concepts of functional alignment, institutional complexity and accountability. We argue that there are problems with coordination that have emerged due to failures in recognizing the key multilevel issues. REDD+ is not adequately integrated into existing policies, and there is a gap between REDD+ and sectoral and national development policies. This leads to overlapping regulations and unequal resource allocation among sectors. Our analysis suggests that effective coordination mechanisms for REDD+ should be built on existing mechanisms and experience, include all the stakeholders, ensure the flow of information across the levels and harness the potential of REDD+ itself to overcome multi-sectoral problems. At the national level, there is great awareness of the issues that hinder coordination and effective REDD+ implementation, but this awareness does not seem to be matched by the actions taken to date. © 2015 Taylor & Francis.
Co-production of agroecological innovations to improve sustainability in South American fruit farms			Agricultural intensification and expansion are the main drivers of biodiversity loss that continue to increase this century, especially in South America. International markets and global policy provide incentives and frameworks to address this, but these are unlikely to be effective unless farmers on the ground are enabled and motivated to respond to them by developing long-term solutions that fit their production systems and local contexts. Here, we use a multi-actor transdisciplinary approach to co-design and test agroecological innovations suitable for intensive, exporting South American fruit farms. We focus on highly biodiverse regions experiencing habitat loss in the Mediterranean and dry tropical forest regions of Chile and Brazil, respectively. The innovations were designed to support local biodiversity without compromising productivity or quality. Fourteen farmers participated throughout the project, covering a total of 4178 ha of intensive table grape, mango and cherry production. All were under pressure from buyers to report action on biodiversity. Farmers worked with researchers and industry representatives through an iterative process of dialogues and workshops to select, co-design and implement three agroecological innovations: perches for birds of prey, cover crops and native hedgerows. Farmers became engaged in monitoring their effectiveness and redesigning them to suit local contexts. We develop an extensive set of resources for ongoing dissemination, including an online sustainability metric to report the practices carried out. Eight farms continued to implement at least one agroecological innovation beyond the end of the project, motivated by its fit to their management system and their ability to report positive actions in their supply chains. Policy implications. Our model of knowledge co-production demonstrates how transdisciplinary research in agriculture, fully localised in a particular food-producing context, can enable farmers in the global South to engage with biodiversity conservation in response to top-down market signals incentivising sustainability. We argue that many top-down effort to enhance the sustainability of food supply chains, whether through market incentives, voluntary codes or trade regulations, requires locally based knowledge co-production, in which multiple stakeholders from agriculture and the food industry can benefit from working with locally based researchers.Read the free Plain Language Summary for this article on the Journal blog.La intensificacion y expansion de la agricultura son los principales motores de la perdida de biodiversidad durante este siglo, especialmente en Sudamerica. Los mercados internacionales y la politica global ofrecen incentivos y marcos para abordar esto, pero es poco probable que sean efectivas a menos que los agricultores esten capacitados y motivados para responder a ellos, desarrollando soluciones a largo plazo que se adapten a sus sistemas de produccion y contextos locales. En este trabajo, utilizamos un enfoque transdisciplinario de multiples actores para co-disenar y probar innovaciones agroecologicas adecuadas para predios de produccion fruticola intensivas y exportadoras de Sudamerica. Nos enfocamos en regiones de gran biodiversidad que experimentan perdida de habitat, en las regiones mediterranea y de bosque tropical seco de Chile y Brasil, respectivamente. Las innovaciones se disenaron para apoyar la biodiversidad local sin comprometer la productividad o calidad de la produccion. Catorce agricultores participaron en todo el proyecto, abarcando un total de 4.178 ha de produccion intensiva de uva de mesa, mango y cereza. Todos estaban mandatados por los compradores para que informaran de las medidas adoptadas en materia de biodiversidad. Los agricultores trabajaron con investigadores y representantes de la industria a traves de un proceso iterativo de dialogos y talleres para seleccionar, co-disenar e implementar tres innovaciones agroecologicas: perchas para aves rapaces, cultivos de cobertura y setos nativos. Los agricultores se involucraron en monitorear su efectividad y redisenarlos para adaptarlos a los contextos locales Desarrollamos un amplio conjunto de recursos para la difusion continua, incluida una metrica de sostenibilidad en linea para informar sobre las practicas implementadas. Ocho predios siguieron aplicando al menos una innovacion agroecologica una vez finalizado el proyecto, motivadas por su adecuacion a su sistema de gestion y su capacidad para informar de acciones positivas en sus cadenas de suministro. Implicancia politica. Nuestro modelo de coproduccion de conocimiento demuestra como la investigacion transdisciplinar en agricultura, localizada en un contexto particular de produccion de alimentos, puede permitir a los agricultores del Sur comprometerse con la conservacion de la biodiversidad en respuesta a las senales del mercado que incentivan la sostenibilidad. Sostenemos que muchos esfuerzo de arriba hacia abajo para mejorar la sostenibilidad de las cadenas de suministro de alimentos, ya sea a traves de incentivos de mercado, codigos voluntarios o regulaciones comerciales, requiere una coproduccion de conocimientos basado en el lugar, en la que multiples partes interesadas de la agricultura y la industria alimentaria pueden beneficiarsr al trabajar con investigadores locales.A intensificacao e a expansao agricola sao os principais fatores relacionados a perda de biodiversidade, que continua a aumentar neste seculo, especialmente na America do Sul. Os mercados internacionais e o cenariopolitico global fornecem incentivos e estrutura para lidar com este problema, mas e improvavel que estes sejam eficazes a menos que os agricultores estejam capacitados e motivados a desenvolver solucoes de longo prazo que se adaptem aos seu sistema de producao e contexto local. Aqui, utilizamos a abordagem transdisciplinar envonvedo multiplos atores para co-desenvolver e testar inovacoes agroecologicas adequadas a fazendas de fruticultura intensiva e exportadoras da America do Sul. Nos enfocamos areas com elevada biodiversidade, atingidas por perda de habitat, situadas em regiao mediterranea ede floresta tropical seca no Chile e no Brasil, respetivamente. As inovacoes foram concebidas para apoiar a biodiversidade local sem comprometer a produtividade ou a qualidade. Catorze agricultores participaram do projeto, abrangendo area total de 4.178 ha com producao intensiva de uva de mesa, manga e cereja. Todos estavam sob pressao dos compradores para apresentarem acoesrelacionadas a biodiversidade. Os agricultores trabalharam com pesquisadores e representantes da industria atraves de um processo iterativo de dialogo e grupo de trabalho, para selecionar, co-desenvolver e implementar tres inovacoes agroecologicas: poleiros para aves de rapina, cultivo de cobertura e faixas com plantas nativas. Os agricultores empenharam-se em monitorar a eficacia e desenvolver adaptacoes para adequa-las ao contexto local. Desenvolvemos um conjunto amplo de recursos para divulgacao continua, incluindo uma metrica de sustentabilidade online para comunicar as praticas realizadas. Oito agricultores continuaram a implementar pelo menos uma inovacao agroecologica apos a finalizacao do projeto, motivados pela sua adequacao ao sistema demanejo e por representar acao positiva para a cadeia de abastecimento. Implicacoes para as politicas. O nosso modelo de coproducao de conhecimento demonstra como a pesquisatransdisciplinar na agricultura, situada totalmente em um contexto particular de producao de alimentos, pode permitir que os agricultores do Sul global se envolvam na conservacao da biodiversidade em resposta a sinais de mercado, de cima para baixo, que incentivam a sustentabilidade. Argumentamos que muitos esforcos, de cima para baixo, para melhorar a sustentabilidade das cadeias de abastecimento alimentar, seja atraves de incentivos de mercado, codigos voluntarios ou regulamentos comerciais, requer a coproducao de conhecimentos de base local, na qual varios tomadores de decisao, da agricultura e da industria alimentar, podem se beneficiar trabalhando com pesquisadores locais.Read the free Plain Language Summary for this article on the Journal blog.
Coral reefs			Introduction This chapter examines the implications of global environmental change for the geomorphology of coral reefs and reef-associated sedimentary landforms such as beaches and reef islands. These tropical ecosystems cover an estimated 284 to 300 km2 of the Earth' s surface (Spalding et al., 2001) and are considered among the most valuable on Earth, providing economic goods and services worth in excess of US$375 billion a–1 to millions of people (Best and Bornbusch, 2005). They are zones of high biological diversity, habitat for about a quarter of all known marine species, important components of the global carbon cycle, and provide the physical foundation for a number of mid-ocean nation states. Indeed, reefs possess benefits under four categories of ecosystem services (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005). Such benefits include: regulation of incident oceanographic swell conditions to control reef and lagoon circulation, reduce shoreline erosion, protect beaches and coastlines from storm surges, and control beach and island formation; provision of food resources (fisheries) and aggregates for building (coral and sand), as well as the provision of land surface area and associated subsurface water resources, especially through reef island construction; supporting nutrient cycling and active carbonate production to build reef and reef island structures; and cultural benefits that include spiritual identity for indigenous communities and potential for tourism and recreation-based income. Coral reefs worldwide are considered to be in serious ecological decline as a consequence of anthropogenic impacts, natural stresses and climate change (e.g. Hughes et al., 2003; Buddemeier et al., 2004). Broad-scale assessments (e.g. Wilkinson, 2004) have argued that 20% of the world' s coral reefs have been destroyed and that 25% of reefs are under imminent or long-term risk of collapse. In the Indo-Pacific region, it has been calculated that coral cover loss rates were 2% per year (losses of 3168 km2 a–1) between 1997 and 2003 (Bruno and Selig, 2007). © Cambridge University Press 2009.
Corrigendum to “Contributions of native forest protection to local water supplies in East Maui” [Sci. Total Environ. 688 (2019) 1422–1432] (Science of the Total Environment (2019) 688 (1422–1432), (S0048969719327937), (10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.06.220))			#VALUE!
COST AND PERFORMANCE OF CO2 STORAGE IN FORESTRY PROJECTS			In order to include forestry projects in a possible CO2 emission reduction regime, and to compare the costs of individual projects or national programs, it is necessary to determine the rate of equivalency between carbon in fossil fuel emissions and carbon stored in different types of forestry projects. This paper presents a comprehensive and consistent methodology to account for the costs and carbon flows of different categories of forestry projects and describes the application of the methodology to a set of projects in Central America. Several estimates have been made to date of the overall potential for carbon storage through global reforestation and the costs of such efforts, based on global macroeconomic estimates and extrapolations from current forest-sector experience. However, there has yet to be a consistent analysis of the magnitude and cost of carbon savings by a "bottom-up" approach to sustainable forestry development This methodology is applied to a set of projects proposed in Costa Rica and other Central American countries under the Tropical Forest Action Plan, to estimate a sample set of national CO2 reduction cost curves. The costs of carbon savings in the forestry projects studied in Central America mostly fall between $5 and $13 ton-C1, depending on the type of project, the climate, and the opportunity cost of land. These projects also promise socio-economic benefits at the local level, provided they are adequately endowed with funding, training and institutional support. The total amount of CO2 storage potential is significant, about 100 million tons per country, but not enough to suggest that forestry can offset more than a few percent of global CO2 emissions from fossil fuel use.
Cost benefits of forest restoration in a tropical grazing landscape: Thiaki rainforest restoration project			Global forest restoration is vital to mitigate climate change. Tropical forests are under the greatest threat from clearing while offering significant potential for restoration. Forest carbon credits through trading schemes have the potential to enable restoration, providing landholders with incentives to restore forests. Impediments to restoration are numerous, with one of the main ones being the unknown costs of forest restoration and uncertain returns from payment schemes, such as carbon trading programs. Many research and modeling papers on the potential of carbon markets to stimulate reforestation in agricultural landscapes rely on general estimates of reforestation. The reality, though, is that the benefits, returns, and break-even points of the reforestation costs and carbon price are highly sensitive to actual costs. Few papers actually investigate the real costs of farm-level restoration. Nearly all recent papers have used modeled scenarios in calculating Net Present Value (NPV), and so estimates of restoration cost and a return from carbon vary widely depending on modeled assumptions. Real data from a demonstration project in the Wet Tropics of Australia are provided in this paper. Three land use scenarios are compared: carbon only, cattle only, and a combination of carbon and cattle using on-ground data for restoration. Not surprisingly, scenarios of the highest carbon prices generate the highest net benefits in both carbon only and mixed carbon and cattle scenarios. A minimum carbon price of AUD$37 per ton of carbon dioxide equivalent is required to match income derived from cattle. The current policy environment that rewards the lowest cost abatement runs counter to Australia playing its role in the urgent need to limit global temperature rise to 2 degrees Celsius and preferably 1.5 degrees Celsius.
Costa Rica's Payments for Ecosystem Services Program: Understanding the Implications of Implementing Targeting Mechanisms and Procurement Auctions on Cost-Effectiveness and Equity of Participation			0
Cost-benefit analysis of alternative land-use scenarios A sustainability study for the Volcanic Central Talamanca Biological Corridor			0
Cost-Benefit Analysis of Corporate Investments in Tropical Forest Restoration			This study conducts a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) of corporate investments in tropical forest restoration. As environmental and sustainability concerns rise, corporations increasingly recognize the importance of contributing to tropical forest restoration as part of their corporate social responsibility and sustainability strategies. However, decisions to invest in tropical forest restoration often involve complex economic considerations. Therefore, using a CBA approach, this research aims to evaluate whether the economic benefits of such investments outweigh the associated costs. The study identifies the benefits of investing in tropical forest restoration, including carbon sequestration, biodiversity protection, and enhanced well-being of local communities, alongside measuring implementation costs such as planting, maintenance, and administrative expenses. Through empirical data and relevant economic analysis tools, we calculate the net benefits of these investments. The findings provide insights into the economic effects of corporate investments in tropical forest restoration. By demonstrating that the economic benefits can outweigh implementation costs, this study offers a strong rationale for corporations to consider tropical forest restoration as an integral part of their business and sustainability strategies. Additionally, it identifies key factors influencing the economic returns of such investments, aiding corporations in optimizing the positive impacts of their initiatives. © 2025 Institute of Physics Publishing. All rights reserved.
Cost-effective restoration for carbon sequestration across Brazil's biomes			Tropical ecosystems are central to the global focus on halting and reversing habitat destruction as a means of mitigat-ing carbon emissions. Brazil has been highlighted as a vital part of global climate agreements because, whilst ongoing land-use change causes it to be the world's fifth biggest greenhouse gas emitting country, it also has one of the greatest potentials to implement ecosystem restoration. Global carbon markets provide the opportunity of a financially viable way to implement restoration projects at scale. However, except for rainforests, the restoration potential of many major tropical biomes is not widely recognised, with the result that carbon sequestration potential maybe squandered. We synthesize data on land availability, land degradation status, restoration costs, area of native vegetation remaining, carbon storage potential and carbon market prices for 5475 municipalities across Brazil's major biomes, including the savannas and tropical dry forests. Using a modelling analysis, we determine how fast restoration could be implemented across these biomes within existing carbon markets. We argue that even with a sole focus on carbon, we must restore other tropical biomes, as well as rainforests, to effectively increase benefits. The inclusion of dry forests and savannas doubles the area which could be restored in a financially viable manner, increasing the potential CO2e sequestered >40 % above that offered by rainforests alone. Importantly, we show that in the short-term avoiding emissions through conservation will be necessary for Brazil to achieve it's 2030 climate goal, because it can sequester 1.5 to 4.3 Pg of CO2e by 2030, relative to 0.127 Pg CO2e from restoration. However, in the longer term, restoration across all biomes in Brazil could draw down between 3.9 and 9.8 Pg of CO2e from the atmosphere by 2050 and 2080.
Cost-effectiveness of reducing emissions from tropical deforestation, 2016-2050			Reducing tropical deforestation is potentially a large-scale and low-cost strategy for mitigating climate change. Yet previous efforts to project the cost-effectiveness of policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from future deforestation across the tropics were hampered by crude available data on historical forest loss. Here we use recently available satellite-based maps of annual forest loss between 2001-2012, along with information on topography, accessibility, protected status, potential agricultural revenue, and an observed inverted-U-shaped relationship between forest cover loss and forest cover, to project tropical deforestation from 2016-2050 under alternative policy scenarios and to construct new marginal abatement cost curves for reducing emissions from tropical deforestation. We project that without new forest conservation policies 289 million hectares of tropical forest will be cleared from 2016-2050, releasing 169 GtCO(2). A carbon price of US$20/tCO(2) ($50/tCO(2)) across tropical countries would avoid 41 GtCO(2) (77 GtCO(2)) from 2016-2050. By comparison, we estimate that Brazil's restrictive policies in the Amazon between 2004-2012 successfully decoupled potential agricultural revenue from deforestation and reduced deforestation by 47% below what would have otherwise occurred, preventing the emission of 5.2 GtCO(2). All tropical countries enacting restrictive anti-deforestation policies as effective as those in the Brazilian Amazon between 2004-2012 would avoid 58 GtCO(2) from 2016-2050.
Costs and benefits of restoration are still poorly quantified: evidence from a systematic literature review on the Brazilian Atlantic Forest			The achievement of international forest restoration goals requires economically viable land-use options. The Brazilian Atlantic Forest is a priority area for ecosystem restoration, as it is widely deforested to make place for intensive agriculture and one of the most threatened biodiversity hotspots in the world. We systematically reviewed existing scientific literature on the biome to highlight the evidence on economic benefits and costs of forest restoration. A total of 15 publications were identified that quantify costs and/or economic benefits of forest restoration. We observed that most studies (12) were published after 2018 and that research on the topic was biogeographically biased as 12 publications referred to study sites in Brazil's Southeast Region. Given its beneficial natural conditions, the Atlantic Forest is predestined for a wide range of restoration-related opportunities, yet economic benefits of restoration are underexplored (seven studies). Moreover, benefits from a multifunctional use of restored forests are almost absent in the literature with only three studies presenting primary data. Elaboration of restoration costs is also limited to 10 studies that focus predominantly on active restoration. Thus, we argue that the economic costs and benefits of forest restoration are not well understood. Clarity thereon is, however, critical for policy formulation and to mobilize private investments. We therefore call for studies to fill in the knowledge gap on restoration economics in the Atlantic Forest biome, and to study restoration economics in other biomes as well.
Could cattle ranching and soybean cultivation be sustainable? A systematic review and a meta-analysis for the Amazon			Tropical forests are being destroyed to make space for agricultural activities with the assumption that they are required to feed the growing global population. Consequently, more sustainable practices are needed to guarantee food security and environmental protection of highly threatened natural biodiversity hotspots like the Amazon rainforest. Cattle ranching and soybean cultivation are by far the greater drivers of land use change and deforestation in the Amazon region. We performed a systematic review of papers related to these two main drivers and a meta-analysis on the effects of sustainable practices on different ecosystem services. The results of the review highlight a large concern about the negative impacts of cattle ranching and soybean crops on the ecosystem dynamics and functionality of the Amazon biome, in addition to the clear relationship with deforestation. Another relevant finding is the large gap in empirical research concerning the effects of sustainable practices on different ecosystem services. Such a gap is evident since only 13 studies from the initial database met the requirements for a meta-analysis. Of the 171 comparisons between the ecosystem services provided in conventional land-uses and those adopting sustainable practices, the overall model indicated a non-significant effect, although the results were heterogeneous. Crop yield and herbage biomass were negatively affected, while livestock productivity, soil organic carbon, soil fertility and woody biomass were positively affected. Also, the six sustainable practices evaluated showed different outcomes, from a predominance of positive effects in silvopastoral systems, to a predominance of negative effects on agrosilvicultural systems. Our systematic review and meta-analysis indicate that cattle ranching and soybean cultivation can indeed be conducted in a more sustainable way, enhancing the provision of ecosystem services while avoiding deforestation. In turn, our results also highlight the lack of empirical data and the need to standardize the methodologies used to deeply assess the effects of such practices. In conclusion, we suggest a way to advance research into the real effects of sustainable practices aimed at reducing the negative impacts of cattle ranching and soybean crops in the Amazon.
Coverage, vegetation structure and carbon storage of the mangrove forest of Morales, Puntarenas, Costa Rica			Introduction: Mangrove forests provide diverse ecosystem services. However, mangroves are one of the most impacted tropical ecosystems, mainly due to land use change, as has occurred in the Gulf of Nicoya in Costa Rica. Objective: Analyze mangrove spatial cover over time, and forest structure, and the carbon storage of the mangrove forest of Morales, to generate a current base line of the state of the mangrove forest. Methods: The study was carried out in the mangrove forest of Morales, Puntarenas, Costa Rica. Total mangrove forest area was calculated from aerial photographs between 1944 and 2020. In 2021, 5 x 5 m plots were sampled in the field. In each plot, trees were counted, they were identified to the lowest possible taxon, their height were measured, and their circumference to calculate their diameter, and soil samples of 4.5 cm depth and interstitial water were collected. The complexity index (CI) of the mangrove stand and the importance value (IV) were calculated for each mangrove genus. Organic carbon content (C-org) was calculated from allometric equations for trees and with loss on ignition for soil. Results: The mangrove forest area decreased by 24 ha between 1944 and 2020, mainly because of the development of shrimp and salt ponds. The forest CI in 2021 was 18.3 and the genus of greatest importance was Rhizophora. The mangrove forest stores 48 Mg C-org/ha in living vegetation and 11 Mg C-org/ha in the soil up to 4.5 cm depth. Conclusions: The mangrove forest structure and the carbon storage, in general, are similar to other mangrove stands in the Gulf of Nicoya. Considering only the carbon in the above ground living vegetation, the loss of 24 ha is equivalent to 4 224 Mg CO(2 )released. The feasibility of carrying out ecological restoration of the lost areas could be analyzed.
Cropping system diversification for food production in Mindanao rubber plantations: a rice cultivar mixture and rice intercropped with mungbean			Including food production in non-food systems, such as rubber plantations and biofuel or bioenergy crops, may contribute to household food security. We evaluated the potential for planting rice, mungbean, rice cultivar mixtures, and rice intercropped with mungbean in young rubber plantations in experiments in the Arakan Valley of Mindanao in the Philippines. Rice mixtures consisted of two- or three-row strips of cultivar Dinorado, a cultivar with higher value but lower yield, and high-yielding cultivar UPL Ri-5. Rice and mungbean intercropping treatments consisted of different combinations of two- or three-row strips of rice and mungbean. We used generalized linear mixed models to evaluate the yield of each crop alone and in the mixture or intercropping treatments. We also evaluated a land equivalent ratio for yield, along with weed biomass (where Ageratum conyzoides was particularly abundant), the severity of disease caused by Magnaporthe oryzae and Cochliobolus miyabeanus, and rice bug (Leptocorisa acuta) abundance. We analyzed the yield ranking of each cropping system across site-year combinations to determine mean relative performance and yield stability. When weighted by their relative economic value, UPL Ri-5 had the highest mean performance, but with decreasing performance in low-yielding environments. A rice and mungbean intercropping system had the second highest performance, tied with high-value Dinorado but without decreasing relative performance in low-yielding environments. Rice and mungbean intercropped with rubber have been adopted by farmers in the Arakan Valley.
Cross-scale spatial variability and associations of carbon pools provide insight into regulating carbon sequestration in tropical montane rainforests			The spatial distribution of plant, soil, and microbial carbon pools, along with their intricate interactions, presents a great challenge for the current carbon cycle research. However, it is not clear what are the characteristics of the spatial variability of these carbon pools, particularly their cross-scale relationships. We investigated the crossscale spatial variability of microbial necromass carbon (MNC), soil organic carbon (SOC) and plant biomass (PB), as well as their correlation in a tropical montane rainforest using multifractal analysis. The results showed multifractal spatial variations of MNC, SOC, and PB, demonstrating their adherence to power-law scaling. MNC, especially low MNC, exhibited stronger spatial heterogeneity and weaker evenness compared with SOC and PB. The cross-scale correlation between MNC and SOC was stronger than their correlations at the measurement scale. Furthermore, the cross-scale spatial variability of MNC and SOC exhibited stronger and more stable correlations than those with PB. Additionally, this research suggests that when SOC and PB are both low, it is advisable for reforestations to potentiate MNC formation, whereas when both SOC and PB are high some thinning can be advisable to favour MNC formation. Thus, these results support the utilization of management measures such as reforestation or thinning as nature-based solutions to regulate carbon sequestration capacity of tropical forests by affecting the correlations among various carbon pools.
Cryptocarbon: The promises and pitfalls of forest protection on a blockchain			In this commentary, we explore how blockchain is being leveraged to address the fundamental problems with market-based forest protection globally. In doing so, we consider the ways `cryptocarbon' initiatives are creating new challenges that have so far escaped critical scrutiny. A blockchain is a distributed and immutable electronic database - a ledger of every transaction that has ever taken place on a network, stored as cryptographically secured blocks, strung together in a chain. The technology is being increasingly hyped as applicable for a whole range of industries, social service provisions, and environmental management concerns. This includes the facilitation of natural asset market mechanisms, like Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD + ). The original aim of REDD + was to incentivise conservation, making tropical forests more valuable standing than cut down. Multiple factors, including lack of consumer interest, created an oversupply of carbon commodities. Ninety-five percent of the world's avoided deforestation credits, representing millions of hectares of conserved forest, were stuck without a buyer. Several flagging REDD + projects are now hoping that blockchain technology can carry them to new heights of market capitalisation. However, like with any powerful new technology, the benefits remain ambiguous.
CTFS-ForestGEO: a worldwide network monitoring forests in an era of global change			Global change is impacting forests worldwide, threatening biodiversity and ecosystem services including climate regulation. Understanding how forests respond is critical to forest conservation and climate protection. This review describes an international network of 59 long-term forest dynamics research sites (CTFS-ForestGEO) useful for characterizing forest responses to global change. Within very large plots (median size 25ha), all stems 1cm diameter are identified to species, mapped, and regularly recensused according to standardized protocols. CTFS-ForestGEO spans 25 degrees S-61 degrees N latitude, is generally representative of the range of bioclimatic, edaphic, and topographic conditions experienced by forests worldwide, and is the only forest monitoring network that applies a standardized protocol to each of the world's major forest biomes. Supplementary standardized measurements at subsets of the sites provide additional information on plants, animals, and ecosystem and environmental variables. CTFS-ForestGEO sites are experiencing multifaceted anthropogenic global change pressures including warming (average 0.61 degrees C), changes in precipitation (up to +/- 30% change), atmospheric deposition of nitrogen and sulfur compounds (up to 3.8g Nm(-2)yr(-1) and 3.1g Sm(-2)yr(-1)), and forest fragmentation in the surrounding landscape (up to 88% reduced tree cover within 5km). The broad suite of measurements made at CTFS-ForestGEO sites makes it possible to investigate the complex ways in which global change is impacting forest dynamics. Ongoing research across the CTFS-ForestGEO network is yielding insights into how and why the forests are changing, and continued monitoring will provide vital contributions to understanding worldwide forest diversity and dynamics in an era of global change.
Cultural Ecosystem Services and Popular Perceptions of the Benefits of an Ecological Restoration Project in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest			It is essential to understand how ecological restoration (ER) improves human well-being in order to justify more investments and upscaling in this emergent field of action. As part of a 22-year-old, 80ha ER project being carried out around a water reservoir that supplies drinking water to the city of Iracemapolis (population 19,700), in the mega-diversity Atlantic Forest biome of Brazil, we assessed local community perceptions of the tangible and intangible benefits expected to arise from this project. A detailed questionnaire was completed for 292 members of the local community to gauge perceptions of benefits arising from various cultural and provisioning ecosystem services (ESs; especially safe and clean drinking water) provided by the 80ha forest restoration project. A striking 94% of those interviewed wanted more ER projects in their community. Participants reported an appreciation for cultural ESs such as esthetic landscape improvement, tourism, recreation, as well as various religious, spiritual, and educational services. In addition, 87% of interviewees believed that the restoration project improved the quality of their drinking water, and 63% said they would agree to an increase in water tariffs if the proceeds were to be invested in more forest restoration. Judging from this study, investigation and subsequent communication of popular perceptions of the various benefits of ER projects could promote consensus-building and support for projects among stakeholders, and inform governmental and societal investments in restoration.
Cultural valuation and biodiversity conservation in the Upper Guinea forest, West Africa			The cultural valuation of biodiversity has taken on renewed importance over the last two decades as the ecosystem services framework has become widely adopted. Conservation initiatives increasingly use ecosystem service frameworks to render tropical forest landscapes and their peoples legible to market-oriented initiatives such as REDD+ and biodiversity offsetting schemes. Ecosystem service approaches have been widely criticized by scholars in the social sciences and humanities for their narrow focus on a small number of easily quantifiable and marketable services and a reductionist and sometimes simplistic approach to culture. We address the need to combine methods from each of the "three cultures" of natural science, quantitative social science, and qualitative social science/humanities in conceptualizing the relationship between cultural valuation and biodiversity conservation. We combine qualitative data with forest inventories and a quantitative index of cultural value to evaluate the relationship between cultural valuation and biodiversity conservation in Upper Guinea forest in Liberia, West Africa. Our study focuses on "sacred agroforests," spaces that are associated with Mande macro-language speaking groups such as the Loma. We demonstrate that sacred agroforests are associated with different cultural values compared with secondary forests. Although biodiversity and biomass are similar, sacred agroforests exhibit a different species composition, especially of culturally salient species, increasing overall landscape agro-biodiversity. Sacred agroforests are also shaped and conserved by local cultural institutions revolving around ancestor worship, ritual, and the metaphysical conceptual category "sal epsilon." We conclude that to understand the relationship between cultural valuation and biodiversity conservation, interpretivist approaches such as phenomenology should be employed alongside positivist ecosystem service frameworks.
Current land cover in the tropics and its potential for sequestering carbon			Emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases from human activity are increasing the concentrations of these gases in the atmosphere. The Earth is expected to warm as a result, with consequences that are potentially highly disruptive to human societies. Reductions in the use of fossil fuels and in rates of deforestation worldwide will reduce emissions of CO2, but atmospheric concentrations will continue to increase unless emissions are reduced by more than 60% (about 4.5 billion tons of carbon annually). Reforestation seems to offer one of the few means for reducing the atmospheric concentration of CO2 over periods as short as human generations. We report here an approach for evaluating the potential for reforestation to help stabilize or even reduce the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere. Reforestation is defined broadly to include tree plantations, natural regrowth of secondary forests, and the practice of agroforestry. Our premise is that human use of the land has generally reduced woody biomass and that such lands have a potential for reaccumulating carbon if appropriately managed. We used published ground studies together with global vegetation index data from the NOAA 7 satellite to estimate current land cover in tropical regions. Then, superimposing this map of current land cover over maps depicting the distribution of vegetation cover prior to human disturbance, we obtained an estimate of about 3200 X 106 ha in the tropics (almost 60% of the total land area considered) where woody biomass had been decreased, and where carbon might again be sequestered. We calculated the amount of carbon that could be withdrawn from the atmosphere and stored in woody biomass if several management options were implemented. Biomass accumulations were determined from forestry statistics. Application of the data on biomass to the areas suitable for accumulation of carbon yielded an estimate of potential accumulation of 160‐170 Pg carbon, an amount equivalent to the accumulation of carbon in the atmosphere since the start of the industrial revolution, or to about 25 years of fossil fuel emissions at current rates. Estimates of both area and potential accumulation of carbon were crude, probably not better than ±50%. They are useful for suggesting the role that tropical lands might play in stabilizing atmospheric concentrations of CO2, but they should not be used to suggest specific management options in individual countries. As maps with higher spatial resolution become available, however, the method should provide more precise estimates overall and in specific locations. Copyright 1993 by the American Geophysical Union.
Data & Code for 'Decay of similarity across tropical forest communities: integrating spatial distance with soil nutrients'			Data and Code supporting the analyses of the paper entitled: Decay of similarity across tropical forest communities: integrating spatial distance with soil nutrients. By Guille Peguero, Miquel Ferrin et al. The 'read me' file contains descriptions of all the datasets and the 'code' file the R scripts and modified functions needed to reproduce all the analyses. Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Data from: Limited biomass recovery from gold mining in Amazonian forests			Gold mining has rapidly increased across the Amazon Basin in recent years, especially in the Guiana shield, where it is responsible for >90% of total deforestation. However, the ability of forests to recover from gold mining activities remains largely unquantified. Forest inventory plots were installed on recently abandoned mines in two major mining regions in Guyana, and re-censused 18 months later, to provide the first ground-based quantification of gold mining impacts on Amazon forest biomass recovery. We found that woody biomass recovery rates on abandoned mining pits and tailing ponds are amongst the lowest ever recorded for tropical forests, with close to no woodybiomass recovery after 3-4 years. On the overburden sites (i.e. areas not mined but where excavated soil is deposited), however, aboveground biomass recovery rates (0.4 - 3.5 Mg ha-1yr-1) were within the range of those recorded in other secondary forests across the Neotropics following abandonment of pastures and agricultural lands. Our results suggest that forest recovery is more strongly limited by severe mining-induced depletion of soil nutrients, especially nitrogen, than by mercury contamination, due to slowing of growth in nutrient-stripped soils. We estimate that the slow recovery rates in mining pits and ponds currently reduce carbon sequestration across Amazonian secondary forests by ~21,000 t C yr-1, compared to the carbon that would have accumulated following more traditional land uses such as agriculture or pasture. Synthesis and applications. To achieve large-scale restoration targets, Guyana and other Amazonian countries will be challenged to remediate previously mined lands. The recovery process is highly dependent on nitrogen availability rather than mercury contamination, affecting woody biomass regrowth. The significant recovery in overburden zones indicates that one potential active remediation strategy to promote biomass recovery may be to back-fill mining pits and ponds with excavated soil. Plots were installed in two central gold mining areas in Guyana, namely Mahdia (5°16'0.01"N 59°08'60.00"W) and Puruni (6°00'0.00"N 59°11'60.00"W), from January to March, 2016, and re-censused approximately 18 months (June to August, 2017) later. Both sites are currently mined by artisanal and small-scale miners. At each study site, measurement plots were established on previously mined vegetation patches, ranging in age from 0.6 to 3 years since abandonment of mining activity at the time of establishment. Nine 0.25 ha (50 m x 50 m) plots and a control old-growth forest plot (100 m x 100 m) were established at each location. However, approximately half of all plots (five in Mahdia and four in Puruni) were re-mined before the 2017 re-census and thus were excluded in this study. Each plot was positioned to include all three mining zones, i.e. the mining pit, the mine tailings and the overburden. Within each plot and within each mining zone, three nested subplots of 3m x 3m and 1m x 1m were established. All trees >2 cm DBH (diameter at reference height of 1.3m) were measured and tagged with a unique number in the larger 0.25 ha plot and identified to species level where possible. All tree saplings 25-200 cm tall and all tree seedlings 5-25 cm tall were identified and counted in the 3m x 3m and 1m x 1m subplots respectively. Nested subplots were also established in the 1-ha control plot, where all trees >10 cm DBH were measured and recorded and standard RAINFOR protocols applied to map, measure and identify trees (Phillips, Baker, Feldpausch, & Brienen, 2015). Tree species in all plots were identified by a local botanist. Heights of larger trees were measured using a laser rangefinder, whereas a tape measure was used to measure the height of saplings and seedlings. In the re-census in 2017, the diameter of all individuals still standing from the first census was re-measured, along with all new recruits >2 cm DBH in each 0.25 ha plot and >25 cm and >5 cm tall in our nested 3m x 3m and 1m x 1m subplots respectively. Trees not present in the second census but present in the first census were assumed to have died. Vouchers were only collected for non-woody species which were unknown and logged at the Centre for Biodiversity, University of Guyana. This dataset contains plot data for abandoned gold mining sites in Guyana (Mahdia and Puruni) along with respective coordinates, description of header titles and vegetation to bareland cover ratio.Highlighted plots were sites which were not re-mined in 2017 (Census II) and therefore used in the analysis of the paper. Data for control plots at both Mahdia and Puruni were deposited within the ForestPlots.net/RAINFOR network (https://www.forestplots.net). Copyright: CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication
Data from: Rubber agroforestry in Thailand provides some biodiversity benefits without reducing yields			Monocultural rubber plantations have replaced tropical forest, causing biodiversity loss. While protecting intact or semi-intact biodiverse forest is paramount, improving biodiversity value within the 11.4 million hectares of existing rubber plantations could offer important conservation benefits, if yields are also maintained. Some farmers practice agroforestry with high-yielding clonal rubber varieties to increase and diversify incomes. Here, we ask whether such rubber agroforestry improves biodiversity value or affects rubber yields relative to monoculture. We surveyed birds, fruit-feeding butterflies and reptiles in 25 monocultural and 39 agroforest smallholder rubber plots in Thailand, the worlds biggest rubber producer. Management and vegetation structure data were collected from each plot, and landscape composition around plots was quantified. Rubber yield data were collected for a separate set of 34 monocultural and 47 agroforest rubber plots in the same region.Reported rubber yields did not differ between agroforests and monocultures, meaning adoption of agroforestry in this context should not increase land demand for natural rubber. Butterfly richness was greater in agroforests, where richness increased with greater natural forest extent in the landscape. Bird and reptile richness were similar between agroforests and monocultures, but bird richness increased with the height of herbaceous vegetation inside rubber plots. Species composition of butterflies differed between agroforests and monocultures, and in response to natural forest extent, while bird composition was influenced by herbaceous vegetation height within plots, the density of non-rubber trees within plots (representing agroforestry complexity), and natural forest extent in the landscape. Reptile composition was influenced by canopy cover and open habitat extent in the landscape. Conservation priority and forest-dependent birds were not supported within rubber.Synthesis and applications. Rubber agroforestry using clonal varieties provides modest biodiversity benefits relative to monocultures, without compromising yields. Agroforests may also generate ecosystem service and livelihood benefits. Management of monocultural rubber production to increase inter-row vegetation height and complexity may further benefit biodiversity. However, biodiversity losses from encroachment of rubber onto forests will not be offset by rubber agroforestry or rubber plot management. This evidence is important for developing guidelines around biodiversity-friendly rubber and sustainable supply chains, and for farmers interested in diversifying rubber production. Sampling protocols are outlined in the paper inJournal of Applied Ecology. The accompanying ReadMe.txt file explains the contents of each .csv file, including definitions of each column. Copyright: CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication
Data from: Spatial and temporal patterns of frugivorous Hornbill movements in Central Africa and their implications for rain forest conservation			Tropical forest conservation and restoration require an understanding of the movements and habitat preferences of important seed dispersers. With forests now being altered at an unprecedented rate, avian frugivores are becoming increasingly vital for forest regeneration. Seed movement, however, is highly dependent on the behavioral characteristics of their dispersers. Here, we examined the movements, habitat preferences, and range sizes of two African frugivores: the Black-casqued (Ceratogymna atrata) and the White-thighed (Bycanistes albotibialis) Hornbill, in the lowland rain forests of southern Cameroon. Using satellite transmitters, we tracked eight hornbills for 3 yr to characterize their movements and relate them to environmental landscape features. Hornbill movements differed significantly, with B. albotibialis ranging over larger areas (mean = 20,274 ha) than C. atrata (mean = 5604 ha), and females of both species covering over 15 times the area of males. Evidence suggests that movements are irruptive during particular periods, perhaps driven by low resource availability. In addition, hornbills often returned to the same localities within a year, although movements were not characterized as migratory. Both species displayed significant differences in habitat preference, with B. albotibialis utilizing disturbed habitat more frequently than C. atrata (t = 22.04, P = 2.2 * 1016). Major roads were found to act as barriers for C. atrata, but not for B. albotibialis. The ability of both hornbill species to move large distances suggests hornbills will play a vital role in the maintenance and regeneration of rain forests in Central Africa as forest fragmentation increases and terrestrial vertebrates decline in numbers. HornbillmovementsrawdataTab-delimited raw text data file, with data recovered from satellite transmitters, before filtering for quality of satellite read. Copyright: CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication
Data on arthropod abundance in tropical forest restoration plots with high or low plant phylogenetic diversity			Consideration of plant phylogenetic diversity in ecological restoration carries substantial potential, as communities with a greater diversity of lineages with older evolutionary histories can increase the diversity of niches and thus are likely to recover larger species networks than communities clustered in specific clades with reduced variation in functional traits. In this study, we experimentally assessed how arthropod communities were affected by the phylogenetic diversity of a set of tropical tree species. We established 12 experimental restoration plots with either high or low plant phylogenetic diversity, while maintaining constant the number of plant species. After one and three years, arthropods with different feeding habits (herbivores, predators, pollinators, and detritivores) were collected and identified as morphospecies or operational taxonomic units using metabarcoding techniques. We provide insights on the influence of plant phylogenetic diversity on arthropod abundance and species diversity, particularly among predator, pollinator, and detritivore common and dominant species, which increased with plant phylogenetic diversity. The trend, however, was the opposite for the diversity of herbivore common and dominant species, which decreased as plant phylogenetic diversity increased. These findings highlight the importance of considering plant species richness when designing restoration strategies, but also their evolutionary histories, as the same number of plant species can produce different outcomes for higher trophic levels, as a function of their phylogenetic relationships. Between July 2018 and January 2019, we established 12 restoration plantings (15 * 15 m) within the active cattle pastures, with a minimum distance of 50 m among the plots. To manipulate the phylogenetic diversity of the plantings, we used a total of 43 tropical tree species. In half of the plots, we established plant assemblages with high phylogenetic diversity (HPD), incorporating 27 phylogenetically distant species from 23 families, widely distributed across the phylogeny of the regional pool of species (see below). In the remaining plots, we established plantings with low plant phylogenetic diversity (LPD), with 27 species from 10 families clustered within the phylogeny and with more recent common ancestors. We collected arthropods from the experimental plots in September 2019 and 2021 (~ 1 and 3 years after establishment of restoration plots), using distinct methods for each arthropod guild. To capture pollinators, we used pan traps comprising three plastic containers painted in blue, yellow, and white, each filled with 200 ml of soapy water. This variety of colors is recommended to attract the greatest diversity of pollinators, as different taxa have distinct preferences for different colors (Leong, et al., 1999, Padron, et al., 2020). Two sets of traps were placed on each plot, one in the middle of the upper right quadrant and the other at the plots center. To collect adult lepidopterans, we used one Van Someren- Rydon trap with a bait made with a mixture of pineapple fermented with beer, positioned at the plots center. Sweep nets and manual surveys were employed along four perpendicular transects positioned every two meters within each plot to collect herbivores and predators from the canopies of saplings and surrounding vegetation. For detritivores and other crawling arthropods, two pitfall traps were placed in the middle of the lower left quadrant, as well as in the center of each plot. These diverse traps enabled the collection of resident organisms colonizing the plots but also those passing through the vegetation islands. After 72 hours, specimens were collected from all traps and stored with 70% undenatured ethanol, except for lepidopterans which were collected after 24 hours in the Van Someren-Rydon traps. These specimens were subsequently frozen and stored in glassine paper bags. After taxonomic and/or molecular identification (see below), organisms were classified based on their feeding habits, using available ecological literature for the most specific taxonomic level. We classified organisms that consumed any part of plants (including seeds) as herbivores, except for adult Lepidoptera specimens and other floral visitors, which were classified as pollinators. Organisms that feed on other animals were classified as predators, and those involved in the consumption of decomposing organic matter or associated with the cycling of soil nutrients were classified as detritivores. Organisms that could not be classified were excluded from subsequent analyses. We systematically grouped all collected organisms based on their respective order, family, and when feasible, assigned them to genus and species. In cases where precise taxonomic identification was unattainable, we categorized the specimens as morphospecies. For molecular identification, we sorted specimens into two distinct groups: i) those obtained from color and Van Someren-Rydon traps, and ii) those captured with pitfall traps, manual surveys, and sweep nets. Specimens were categorized into small (< 3 mm), medium (> 3 mm and < 15 mm) and large (> 15mm) size classes, according to the criteria outlined by Galvez-Reyes, et al. (2021). Whereas the entire body was used for small arthropods, medium-sized arthropods were dissected to select the thorax (including the head), and only two legs were selected for large arthropods. After placing specimens or their parts in falcon tubes according to their size class, we extracted DNA from the composite arthropod samples of each size category and group, to perform a metabarcoding analysis (i.e. sensu Yu et al., 2012), following a modified protocol by Galvez-Reyes, et al. (2021) using a DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen). We used primers B_F 5 CCIGAYATRGCITTYCCICG 3' (Shokralla, et al., 2015) and Fol-degen-R 5 TANACYTCNGGRTGNCCRAARAAYCA 3' (Yu, et al., 2012) to amplify a 418-base pair region located at the 5 end of the mitochondrial COI gene. This specific region is part of the standard barcode region for metazoans. For the construction of metabarcoding libraries, individual samples (n =104) were pooled and grouped in equimolar proportions based on their designated category (pollinators or crawling arthropods), resulting in the generation of 60 final libraries (one library per sample). DNA samples, along with negative control, were sequenced using an Illumina Miseq 2x300 bp platform at Illumina (RTL Genomics). Additional details on bioinformatic read processing are elaborated in Supplementary Information A1. # Data on arthropod abundance in tropical forest restoration plots with high or low plant phylogenetic diversity ## Description of the data and file structure Data sets contents 1. Abundance of arthropods (predators, herbivores, pollinators and detritivores) 2. Arthropod Species Abundance by Rank (to calculate species rank abundance curves) 3. Arthropod Species Abundance by treatment and year (by guild: Predators, herbivores, Pollinators and Detritivores)- To calculate number of Hills 4. Arthropod Species Abundance by treatment and year (to calculate species composition differences for both, Morphospecies and OTUs) *in all cases: HPD=High Phylogenetic Diversity and LPD = Low Phylogenetic Diversity Experimental Procedure: The study was carried out within 'Los Amigos' cattle ranch, located in the buffer zone of the Los Tuxtlas biosphere reserve (18°3256 N, 94°5958 W) in Veracruz, Mexico. The climate in this area is warm and humid with mean temperatures ranging from 24 to 26°C and total precipitation ranging from 2,000 to 4,000 mm (Soto, 2004). The vegetation in this region includes evergreen tropical forest with a high level of fragmentation surrounded by an agricultural and cattle ranching landscape (Von Thaden, et al., 2018). The ranch itself has cattle pastures, bordered by remnants forests Between July 2018 and January 2019, we established 12 restoration plantings (15 * 15 m) within the active cattle pastures, with a minimum distance of 50 m among the plots. To manipulate the phylogenetic diversity of the plantings, we used a total of 43 tropical tree species. In half of the plots, we established plant assemblages with high phylogenetic diversity (HPD), incorporating 27 phylogenetically distant species from 23 families, widely distributed across the phylogeny of the regional pool of species (see below). In the remaining plots, we established plantings with low plant phylogenetic diversity (LPD), with 27 species from 10 families clustered within the phylogeny and with more recent common ancestors (Supplementary information Table S1). In each plot we planted between 1 and 7 seedlings (between 30 - 70 cm tall) from each species in a 1 * 1 m grid, resulting in a total of 196 individuals per plot. However, due to plant mortality, between 21 and 28 species (15 to 19 non-pioneer species and 10 to 12 pioneer species) remained in each plot, but contrasts in phylogenetic diversity between both treatments were maintained (Supplementary information Table S1, Santos-Gally and Boege, 2022). We collected arthropods from the experimental plots in September 2019 and 2021 (~ 1 and 3 years after establishment of restoration plots), using distinct methods for each arthropod guild. To capture pollinators, we used pan traps comprising three plastic containers painted in blue, yellow, and white, each filled with 200 ml of soapy water. This variety of colors is recommended to attract the greatest diversity of pollinators, as different taxa have distinct preferences for different colors (Leong, et al., 1999, Padron, et al., 2020). Two sets of traps were placed on each plot, one in the middle of the upper right quadrant and the other at the plots center. To collect adult lepidopterans, we used one Van Someren- Rydon trap with a bait made with a mixture of pineapple fermented with beer, positioned at the plots center. Sweep nets and manual surveys were employed along four perpendicular transects positioned every two meters within each plot to collect herbivores and predators from the canopies of saplings and surrounding vegetation. For detritivores and other crawling arthropods, two pitfall traps were placed in the middle of the lower left quadrant, as well as in the center of each plot. These diverse traps enabled the collection of resident organisms colonizing the plots but also those passing through the vegetation islands. After 72 hours, specimens were collected from all traps and stored with 70% undenatured ethanol, except for lepidopterans which were collected after 24 hours in the Van Someren-Rydon traps. These specimens were subsequently frozen and stored in glassine paper bags. After taxonomic and/or molecular identification (see below), organisms were classified based on their feeding habits, using available ecological literature for the most specific taxonomic level. We classified organisms that consumed any part of plants (including seeds) as herbivores, except for adult Lepidoptera specimens and other floral visitors, which were classified as pollinators. Organisms that feed on other animals were classified as predators, and those involved in the consumption of decomposing organic matter or associated with the cycling of soil nutrients were classified as detritivores. Organisms that could not be classified were excluded from subsequent analyses. We systematically grouped all collected organisms based on their respective order, family, and when feasible, assigned them to genus and species. In cases where precise taxonomic identification was unattainable, we categorized the specimens as morphospecies. For molecular identification, we sorted specimens into two distinct groups: i) those obtained from color and Van Someren-Rydon traps, and ii) those captured with pitfall traps, manual surveys, and sweep nets. Specimens were categorized into small (*< *3 mm), medium (> 3 mm and < 15 mm) and large (> 15mm) size classes, according to the criteria outlined by Galvez-Reyes, et al. (2021). Whereas the entire body was used for small arthropods, medium-sized arthropods were dissected to select the thorax (including the head), and only two legs were selected for large arthropods. After placing specimens or their parts in falcon tubes according to their size class, we extracted DNA from the composite arthropod samples of each size category and group, to perform a metabarcoding analysis (i.e. sensu Yu et al., 2012), following a modified protocol by Galvez-Reyes, et al. (2021) using a DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen). We used primers B_F 5 CCIGAYATRGCITTYCCICG 3' (Shokralla, et al., 2015) and Fol-degen-R 5 TANACYTCNGGRTGNCCRAARAAYCA 3' (Yu, et al., 2012) to amplify a 418-base pair region located at the 5 end of the mitochondrial COI gene. This specific region is part of the standard barcode region for metazoans. For the construction of metabarcoding libraries, individual samples (n =104) were pooled and grouped in equimolar proportions based on their designated category (pollinators or crawling arthropods), resulting in the generation of 60 final libraries (one library per sample). DNA samples, along with negative control, were sequenced using an Illumina Miseq 2x300 bp platform at Illumina (RTL Genomics). Additional details on bioinformatic read processing are elaborated in Supplementary Information A1. Copyright: CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication
Data_Sheet_1_Ancient fires enhance Amazon forest drought resistance.PDF			Drought and fire reduce productivity and increase tree mortality in tropical forests. Fires also produce pyrogenic carbon (PyC), which persists in situ for centuries to millennia, and represents a legacy of past fires, potentially improving soil fertility and water holding capacity and selecting for the survival and recruitment of certain tree life-history (or successional) strategies. We investigated whether PyC is correlated with physicochemical soil properties, wood density, aboveground carbon (AGC) dynamics and forest resistance to severe drought. To achieve our aim, we used an Amazon-wide, long-term plot network, in forests without known recent fires, integrating site-specific measures of forest dynamics, soil properties and a unique soil PyC concentration database. We found that forests with higher concentrations of soil PyC had both higher soil fertility and lower wood density. Soil PyC was not associated with AGC dynamics in non-drought years. However, during extreme drought events (10% driest years), forests with higher concentrations of soil PyC experienced lower reductions in AGC gains (woody growth and recruitment), with this drought-immunizing effect increasing with drought severity. Forests with a legacy of ancient fires are therefore more likely to continue to grow and recruit under increased drought severity. Forests with high soil PyC concentrations (third quartile) had 3.8% greater AGC gains under mean drought, but 33.7% greater under the most extreme drought than forests with low soil PyC concentrations (first quartile), offsetting losses of up to 0.68 Mg C ha-1yr-1 of AGC under extreme drought events. This suggests that ancient fires have legacy effects on current forest dynamics, by altering soil fertility and favoring tree species capable of continued growth and recruitment during droughts. Therefore, mature forest that experienced fires centuries or millennia ago may have greater resistance to current short-term droughts. Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Data_Sheet_1_Bacuru Droa: Indigenous forest custody as an effective climate change mitigation option. A case study from Darien, Panama.pdf			Efforts to naturally remove atmospheric CO2 demand that largely intact forests be maintained. Our inter-cultural research initiative tested the hypothesis that Indigenous custody of the land is compatible with the maintenance of intact forests. Here we combined traditional knowledge, phytolith analysis, remote sensing, and tree inventories to study old-growth forests in Panama's Darien. Phytoliths served to elucidate historical vegetation, remote sensing revealed the current and past Indigenous footprints while tree stature and identity characterised the forest. Until now there has been very little to no human impact within these forests and current Indigenous footprint is both small and stable. Large trees accounted for 13% of trees in the plots that we established. For over half of the species, the measured tree height was taller than previously published maximum heights, leading us to conclude that these forests are a truly exceptional ecological refugium. Noting that the local communities are not rewarded for their custody of these exceptional forests we call to revisit the Good Practice Guidance for Land Use Land Use Change and Forestry to include intact forest land. In the context of sub-optimal carbon finance options, we also propose matching as a methodology that could prove additionality of forest conservation initiatives in climate mitigation portfolios. Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Data_Sheet_1_Light effects on seedling growth in simulated forest canopy gaps vary across species from different successional stages.docx			Tropical forests continue to suffer from various kinds of disturbances in the Anthropocene. An immediate impact of disturbances on forest ecosystems is the creation of numerous large and small canopy gaps, which dramatically affect forest structure and function. Yet, we know little about the effect of canopy gaps on forest successional trajectory. More specifically, the responses of seedlings from different successional stages to increased light intensity under large and small canopy gaps in understory remain unclear. In this study, dominant tree seedlings from early-, mid-, and late-successional stages were selected, respectively from a tropical montane forest in Hainan Island, China to study their growth rate, biomass and traits. Our results showed that the light condition under small canopy gaps (SG, 10-15% of full sunlight) and large canopy gaps (LG, 40-50% of full sunlight) induced greater increment of relative growth rates for seedlings from early- and mid-successional stages relative to that in late-successional stage. Both SG and LG also significantly increased photosynthesis rate, leaf area (LA), light saturation point (LSP), root mass ratio (RMR) and root: shoot ratio, but decreased specific leaf area (SLA) of seedlings across successional stages. Tree seedlings from the early-successional stage displayed the greatest decrease in leaf mass ratio, increase in LA, LSP, and RMR, in comparison to those from mid- and late- successional stages. Light condition and SLA were the most important factors for seedlings relative growth rate across successional stages. SLA connected the interaction between the light condition and successional stage on seedlings growth, thereby jointly explaining the 93% variation of seedlings growth, combining with area-based light saturated rate of CO2 assimilation. Our study highlights the distinct effect of disturbance-induced canopy gaps on seedling regeneration in the understory in tropical forest due to the variation of light intensity. We suspect that the seedlings from late-successional stage will recover relatively slow after disturbances causing canopy losses, which can have detrimental impacts on structure feature and successional trajectory in tropical forest, as well as forest-based ecosystem services. Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Deadwood biomass: An underestimated carbon stock in degraded tropical forests?			Despite a large increase in the area of selectively logged tropical forest worldwide, the carbon stored in deadwood across a tropical forest degradation gradient at the landscape scale remains poorly documented. Many carbon stock studies have either focused exclusively on live standing biomass or have been carried out in primary forests that are unaffected by logging, despite the fact that coarse woody debris (deadwood with ≥10 cm diameter) can contain significant portions of a forest's carbon stock. We used a field-based assessment to quantify how the relative contribution of deadwood to total above-ground carbon stock changes across a disturbance gradient, from unlogged old-growth forest to severely degraded twice-logged forest, to oil palm plantation. We measured in 193 vegetation plots (25 × 25 m), equating to a survey area of >12 ha of tropical humid forest located within the Stability of Altered Forest Ecosystems Project area, in Sabah, Malaysia. Our results indicate that significant amounts of carbon are stored in deadwood across forest stands. Live tree carbon storage decreased exponentially with increasing forest degradation 7-10 years after logging while deadwood accounted for >50% of above-ground carbon stocks in salvage-logged forest stands, more than twice the proportion commonly assumed in the literature. This carbon will be released as decomposition proceeds. Given the high rates of deforestation and degradation presently occurring in Southeast Asia, our findings have important implications for the calculation of current carbon stocks and sources as a result of human-modification of tropical forests. Assuming similar patterns are prevalent throughout the tropics, our data may indicate a significant global challenge to calculating global carbon fluxes, as selectively-logged forests now represent more than one third of all standing tropical humid forests worldwide. © 2015 IOP Publishing Ltd.
Deadwood stocks increase with selective logging and large tree frequency in Gabon			Deadwood is a major component of aboveground biomass (AGB) in tropical forests and is important as habitat and for nutrient cycling and carbon storage. With deforestation and degradation taking place throughout the tropics, improved understanding of the magnitude and spatial variation in deadwood is vital for the development of regional and global carbon budgets. However, this potentially important carbon pool is poorly quantified in Afrotropical forests and the regional drivers of deadwood stocks are unknown. In the first large-scale study of deadwood in Central Africa, we quantified stocks in 47 forest sites across Gabon and evaluated the effects of disturbance (logging), forest structure variables (live AGB, wood density, abundance of large trees), and abiotic variables (temperature, precipitation, seasonality). Average deadwood stocks (measured as necromass, the biomass of deadwood) were 65 Mg ha−1 or 23% of live AGB. Deadwood stocks varied spatially with disturbance and forest structure, but not abiotic variables. Deadwood stocks increased significantly with logging (+38 Mg ha−1) and the abundance of large trees (+2.4 Mg ha−1 for every tree >60 cm dbh). Gabon holds 0.74 Pg C, or 21% of total aboveground carbon in deadwood, a threefold increase over previous estimates. Importantly, deadwood densities in Gabon are comparable to those in the Neotropics and respond similarly to logging, but represent a lower proportion of live AGB (median of 18% in Gabon compared to 26% in the Neotropics). In forest carbon accounting, necromass is often assumed to be a constant proportion (9%) of biomass, but in humid tropical forests this ratio varies from 2% in undisturbed forest to 300% in logged forest. Because logging significantly increases the deadwood carbon pool, estimates of tropical forest carbon should at a minimum use different ratios for logged (mean of 30%) and unlogged forests (mean of 18%). © 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Decoding seasonal changes: soil parameters and microbial communities in tropical dry deciduous forests			In dry deciduous tropical forests, both seasons (winter and summer) offer habitats that are essential ecologically. How these seasonal changes affect soil properties and microbial communities is not yet fully understood. This study aimed to investigate the influence of seasonal fluctuations on soil characteristics and microbial populations. The soil moisture content dramatically increases in the summer. However, the soil pH only gradually shifts from acidic to slightly neutral. During the summer, electrical conductivity (EC) values range from 0.62 to 1.03 ds m-1, in contrast to their decline in the winter. The levels of soil macronutrients and micronutrients increase during the summer, as does the quantity of soil organic carbon (SOC). A two-way ANOVA analysis reveals limited impacts of seasonal fluctuations and specific geographic locations on the amounts of accessible nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P). Moreover, dehydrogenase, nitrate reductase, and urease activities rise in the summer, while chitinase, protease, and acid phosphatase activities are more pronounced in the winter. The soil microbes were identified in both seasons through 16S rRNA and ITS (Internal Transcribed Spacer) gene sequencing. Results revealed Proteobacteria and Ascomycota as predominant bacterial and fungal phyla. However, Bacillus, Pseudomonas, and Burkholderia are dominant bacterial genera, and Aspergillus, Alternaria, and Trichoderma are dominant fungal genera in the forest soil samples. Dominant bacterial and fungal genera may play a role in essential ecosystem services such as soil health management and nutrient cycling. In both seasons, clear relationships exist between soil properties, including pH, moisture, iron (Fe), zinc (Zn), and microbial diversity. Enzymatic activities and microbial shift relate positively with soil parameters. This study highlights robust soil-microbial interactions that persist mainly in the top layers of tropical dry deciduous forests in the summer and winter seasons. It provides insights into the responses of soil-microbial communities to seasonal changes, advancing our understanding of ecosystem dynamics and biodiversity preservation.
Deep instability of deforested tropical peatlands revealed by fluvial organic carbon fluxes			Tropical peatlands contain one of the largest pools of terrestrial organic carbon, amounting to about 89,000 teragrams (1 Tg is a billion kilograms). Approximately 65 per cent of this carbon store is in Indonesia, where extensive anthropogenic degradation in the form of deforestation, drainage and fire are converting it into a globally significant source of atmospheric carbon dioxide. Here we quantify the annual export of fluvial organic carbon from both intact peat swamp forest and peat swamp forest subject to past anthropogenic disturbance. We find that the total fluvial organic carbon flux from disturbed peat swamp forest is about 50 per cent larger than that from intact peat swamp forest. By carbon-14 dating of dissolved organic carbon (which makes up over 91 per cent of total organic carbon), we find that leaching of dissolved organic carbon from intact peat swamp forest is derived mainly from recent primary production (plant growth). In contrast, dissolved organic carbon from disturbed peat swamp forest consists mostly of much older (centuries to millennia) carbon from deep within the peat column. When we include the fluvial carbon loss term, which is often ignored, in the peatland carbon budget, we find that it increases the estimate of total carbon lost from the disturbed peatlands in our study by 22 per cent. We further estimate that since 1990 peatland disturbance has resulted in a 32 per cent increase in fluvial organic carbon flux from southeast Asia-an increase that is more than half of the entire annual fluvial organic carbon flux from all European peatlands. Our findings emphasize the need to quantify fluvial carbon losses in order to improve estimates of the impact of deforestation and drainage on tropical peatland carbon balances. © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
Deep Learning Based Retrieval of Forest Aboveground Biomass from Combined LiDAR and Landsat 8 Data			Estimation of forest aboveground biomass (AGB) is crucial for various technical and scientific applications, ranging from regional carbon and bioenergy policies to sustainable forest management. However, passive optical remote sensing, which is the most widely used remote sensing data for retrieving vegetation parameters, is constrained by spectral saturation problems and cloud cover. On the other hand, LiDAR data, which have been extensively used to estimate forest structure attributes, cannot provide sufficient spectral information of vegetation canopies. Thus, this study aimed to develop a novel synergistic approach to estimating biomass by integrating LiDAR data with Landsat 8 imagery through a deep learning-based workflow. First the relationships between biomass and spectral vegetation indices (SVIs) and LiDAR metrics were separately investigated. Next, two groups of combined optical and LiDAR indices (i.e., COLI1 and COLI2) were designed and explored to identify their performances in biomass estimation. Finally, five prediction models, including K-nearest Neighbor, Random Forest, Support Vector Regression, the deep learning model, i.e., Stacked Sparse Autoencoder network (SSAE), and multiple stepwise linear regressions, were individually used to estimate biomass with input variables of different scenarios, i.e., (i) all the COLI1 (ACOLI1), (ii) all the COLI2 (ACOLI2), (iii) ACOLI1 and all the optical (AO) and LiDAR variables (AL), and (iv) ACOLI2, AO and AL. Results showed that univariate models with the combined optical and LiDAR indices as explanatory variables presented better modeling performance than those with either optical or LiDAR data alone, regardless of the combination mode. The SSAE model obtained the best performance compared to the other tested prediction algorithms for the forest biomass estimation. The best predictive accuracy was achieved by the SSAE model with inputs of combined optical and LiDAR variables (i.e., ACOLI1, AO and AL) that yielded an R-2 of 0.935, root mean squared error (RMSE) of 15.67 Mg/ha, and relative root mean squared error (RMSEr) of 11.407%. It was concluded that the presented combined indices were simple and effective by integrating LiDAR-derived structure information with Landsat 8 spectral data for estimating forest biomass. Overall, the SSAE model with inputs of Landsat 8 and LiDAR integrated information resulted in accurate estimation of forest biomass. The presented modeling workflow will greatly facilitate future forest biomass estimation and carbon stock assessments.
Deep soil carbon stock, origin, and root interaction in a tropical integrated crop-livestock system			Integrated crop-livestock systems (ICLS) with fast-growing tree plantations are an environmentally sound approach for agricultural production. Soil carbon stocks can be increased under these systems, but there is no information on the relative contributions of the pasture and the trees in building soil C in tropical regions. This study aimed to investigate C storage, origin, and roots sequestration in the soil profile (1.0 m) in a pasture-forest system. The study was conducted in a 6-year-old ICLS in whichEucalyptus(C-3) were introduced into a palisade grass pasture [Urochloa brizantha(Hochst. Ex A. Rich.) R. Webster 'Marandu', C-4]. Samples were collected at four locations perpendicular to theEucalyptusplanting line: 0 (planting line), 2.0, 4.0, and 6.0 m (middle of the plot). A monoculture palisade grass pasture was included for comparison. The insertion ofEucalyptusin the pasture modified the quantity and distribution of grass above and belowground. Forage root and shoot biomass were lower in the integrated system compared to the monoculture pasture, mainly nearEucalyptus. However, plant C sequestration in the ICLS was 68% higher than in the monoculture pasture, due to the C accumulated by aboveground trees biomass. Overall, monoculture pasture had higher soil C-4-C stocks at the 0-0.20 m depth, while integrated system withEucalyptusstored more C-3-C in deeper soil layers (0.60-1.0 m) nearEucalyptus. Soil C stock increased in both systems, but the contribution ofEucalyptuswas deeper in the soil profile, while the grass contribution was greater in the upper 0.20 m soil layers.
Deep Soil Water Content and Forage Production in a Tropical Agroforestry System			Agroforestry systems integrating tree and forage growth are important for maintaining soil health but may change the soil's physical-hydric properties. Our goal was to investigate the impact of introducing Eucalyptus trees into a pasture on the soil water content throughout the soil profile. The study was conducted in a 6-year-old agroforestry system where two species of Eucalyptus were introduced into a palisade grass pasture. Soil moisture was sampled at 0.0 (planting row), 2.0, 4.0, and 6.0 m (midpoint between tree rows) from the Eucalyptus tree rows. A monoculture palisade grass pasture was used as a control. The soil water content down to a depth of 50 cm was lowest in the tree row and increased with distance from the trees. In the Eucalyptus row, the soil water content in the 0-50 cm layer was lower than in the monoculture pasture. Agroforestry systems decreased the water content in the superficial layers of the soil in the rainy months; in the dry season, the soil water contents in all layers were similar between the Eucalyptus inter-rows. In most seasons, the agroforest systems reduced the forage production close to the Eucalyptus tree rows, up to 2 m from the trees, likely due to the soil water content decrease. Overall, this study showed that in tropical regions with sandy soils, the grass and trees' competition must be considered when establishing integrated agroforestry systems in order to maximize the advantages and benefits of the diversified agroecosystem.
Defaunation affects carbon storage in tropical forests			Carbon storage is widely acknowledged as one of the most valuable forest ecosystem services. Deforestation, logging, fragmentation, fire, and climate change have significant effects on tropical carbon stocks; however, an elusive and yet undetected decrease in carbon storage may be due to defaunation of large seed dispersers. Many large tropical trees with sizeable contributions to carbon stock rely on large vertebrates for seed dispersal and regeneration, however many of these frugivores are threatened by hunting, illegal trade, and habitat loss. We used a large data set on tree species composition and abundance, seed, fruit, and carbon-related traits, and plant-animal interactions to estimate the loss of carbon storage capacity of tropical forests in defaunated scenarios. By simulating the local extinction of trees that depend on large frugivores in 31 Atlantic Forest communities, we found that defaunation has the potential to significantly erode carbon storage even when only a small proportion of large-seeded trees are extirpated. Although intergovernmental policies to reduce carbon emissions and reforestation programs have been mostly focused on deforestation, our results demonstrate that defaunation, and the loss of key ecological interactions, also poses a serious risk for the maintenance of tropical forest carbon storage.
Defaunation disrupts the behavior of large terrestrial vertebrates, impacting ecological functions in the Amazon			Wildlife defaunation in tropical forests disrupts critical ecological functions such as predation, seed dispersal, and nutrient cycling. While exclusion experiments are commonly used to investigate the effects of wildlife loss on plant diversity and vegetation structure, their potential impact on broader ecosystem functions remains underexplored. Here we investigate how defaunation could affect ecosystem functions in the Amazon rainforest by quantifying the changes in the occurrence and frequency of behaviors exhibited by terrestrial mammals induced by experimental defaunation. Using camera traps, we recorded vertebrate behaviors across exclusion and control plots, categorizing them into feeding, excretion/defecation, bioturbation, and trampling. We then calculated weighted standardized indices, integrating behavior frequency and body mass, to assess the potential local impacts of vertebrates across plots. We found that all behaviors were drastically reduced (>95 % reduction) under severe defaunation conditions, primarily due to the absence of medium- and large-bodied mammals and birds. In defaunated plots, small mammals partially performed some behaviors, but they were unable to compensate for the loss of larger species. These results highlight the substantial reduction in critical vertebrate behaviors and suggest that such changes can significantly disrupt ecosystem functions in defaunated tropical forests.
Defaunation in assemblages of medium and large mammals in the Anthropocene and the erosion of its traits: a quantitative analysis for Brazilian biomes			Mammals are part of the megafauna and play an important ecosystem role. Over the past 500 years, the assemblages of these animals have been reduced on a large scale in the Neotropics. Anthropic actions are among the main causes of threat and occur in the form of deforestation and fragmentation of ecosystems, which leads to the emptying of mammal assemblages in the tropical forests and savannas of the new world. This loss of mammals can affect evolutionary processes - morphology and behavior - leading to changes in the distribution of traits, which are the characteristics of species that influence the functioning of ecosystems. Working ecosystems usually promote services that meet human needs such as: food, water, fuels, nutrient cycling, primary production, climate regulation, disease, and educational and recreational services. As an example of the impact of traits on the ecosystem and ecosystem services, we have the frugivorous diet. Frugivory contributes to the maintenance of the phytogeographic dynamics of forest remnants, which act in the sequestration and stock of atmospheric carbon, being therefore important in regulating the climate and has an impact on agriculture. Thus, our work aims to understand how the defaunation in mammal assemblages that occurred in the last 500 years in Brazilian biomes affects the distribution of the hypervolume of the traits of the cranial dimensions related to the diet and of the traits of the diet spectrum. Assemblages can be measured by the hyperdimensional space of the traits, and it is expected that integral assemblages have a higher morphological ecologic volume than defaunted assemblages do. The data will be analyzed by Principal Component Analysis (PCA) followed by an analysis by Convex Hull, which will assess the loss of volume (morphological and dietary) between historical and modern value. To test the difference between modern (defaunate) and historical (non-defaunate) eco-morphometric values, the scores of the ordering sites (PCAs) will be obtained and a paired central trend measurement comparison test (eg Student t test) will be applied between modern scores vs. historical ones. By comparing these values, we can understand how defaunition erodes two metrics that imply the functioning of ecosystems. For example, the expected reduction in the hypervolume of the cranial dimensions of the assemblages implies the size of prey consumed or of scattered seeds. The feasibility of the project rests on its low cost since the data will be obtained mainly through inventories available in the literature. Still, we see in this project a great potential for publication in an indexed magazine and in the generation of data for the proponent's course completion work.
Defeating the 'resource curse': Key priorities for conserving Papua New Guinea's native forests			The native forests of Papua New Guinea (PNG) are some of the most biologically and culturally diverse ecosystems on Earth, and are a major stock of terrestrial carbon. These forests are being altered at a rapid rate, especially by industrial logging and swidden farming. Wildfires, expanding oil palm plantations, and industrial mining are also causing forest loss. At current rates of exploitation, most industrially accessible forests in PNG are projected to be logged or cleared in just 1-2 decades. Much of the country's timber is exported as raw logs, mainly to China, providing only limited income and employment for local communities. Despite growing exploitation of its natural resources, many social indicators in PNG, such as per-capita income, literacy, and the Human Development Index, remain alarmingly low. We highlight a range of near-term policy measures designed to improve forest conservation and sustainability in PNG. These include: (1) reducing annual timber harvests to a more-sustainable level, (2) curtailing raw-log exports while promoting expansion of domestic wood-processing industries, (3) combating serious corruption in the forestry sector, (4) reinstating the rights of traditional communities in PNG to sue corporations for past or anticipated environmental damage, (5) expanding and improving the management of protected areas, and (6) stabilizing the administration of international carbon-trading funds designed to reduce emissions from forest conversion. We also recommend that educational and family-planning support be improved for younger women to help reduce the destabilizing effects of rapid population growth. These measures will help to reduce environmental damage and slow the exhaustion of timber supplies, while improving societal benefits for PNG citizens. © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
Deforestation and reforestation impacts on soils in the tropics			Deforestation and reforestation cause dramatic changes to tropical ecosystems, including underlying soil properties and their corresponding ecosystem services. In this Review, the impacts of this land-use change on soils and their functions are discussed.Soils under natural, tropical forests provide essential ecosystem services that have been shaped by long-term soil-vegetation feedbacks. However, deforestation of tropical forest, with a net rate of 5.5 million hectares annually in 2010-2015, profoundly impacts soil properties and functions. Reforestation is also prominent in the tropics, again altering the state and functioning of the underlying soils. In this Review, we discuss the substantial changes in dynamic soil properties following deforestation and during reforestation. Changes associated with deforestation continue for decades after forest clearing eventually extend to deep subsoils and strongly affect soil functions, including nutrient storage and recycling, carbon storage and greenhouse gas emissions, erosion resistance and water storage, drainage and filtration. Reforestation reverses many of the effects of deforestation, mainly in the topsoil, but such restoration can take decades and the resulting soil properties still deviate from those under natural forests. Improved management of soil organic matter in converted land uses can moderate or reduce the ecologically deleterious effects of deforestation on soils. We emphasize the importance of soil knowledge not only in cross-disciplinary research on deforestation and reforestation but also in developing effective incentives and policies to reduce deforestation.
Deforestation in Continental Ecuador with a Focus on Protected Areas			Forest conservation is of particular concern in tropical regions where a large refuge of biodiversity is still existing. These areas are threatened by deforestation, forest degradation and fragmentation. Especially, pressures of anthropogenic activities adjacent to these areas significantly influence conservation effectiveness. Ecuador was chosen as study area since it is a globally relevant center of forest ecosystems and biodiversity. We identified hotspots of deforestation on the national level of continental Ecuador between 1990 and 2018, analyzed the most significant drivers of deforestation on national and biome level (the Coast, the Andes, The Amazon) as well as inside protected areas in Ecuador by using multiple regression analysis. We separated the national system of protected areas (SNAP) into higher and lower protection levels. Besides SNAP, we also considered Biosphere Reserves (BRs) and Ramsar sites. In addition, we investigated the rates and spatial patterns of deforestation in protected areas and buffer zones (5 km and 10 km outwards the protected area boundaries) using landscape metrics. Between 1990 and 2018, approximately 4% of the accumulated deforestation occurred within the boundaries of SNAP, and up to 25.5% in buffer zones. The highest rates of deforestation have been found in the 5 km buffer zone around the protected areas with the highest protection level. Protected areas and their buffer zones with higher protection status were identified as the most deforested areas among SNAP. BRs had the highest deforestation rates among all protected areas but most of these areas just became BRs after the year 2000. The most important driver of deforestation is agriculture. Other relevant drivers differ between the biomes. The results suggest that the SNAP is generally effective to prevent deforestation within their protection boundaries. However, deforestation around protected areas can undermine conservation strategies to sustain biodiversity. Actions to address such dynamics and patterns of deforestation and forest fragmentation, and developing conservation strategies of their landscape context are urgently needed especially in the buffer zones of areas with the highest protection status.
Deforestation scenarios show the importance of secondary forest for meeting Panama's carbon goals			Context Tropical forest loss has a major impact on climate change. Secondary forest growth has potential to mitigate these impacts, but uncertainty regarding future land use, remote sensing limitations, and carbon model accuracy have inhibited understanding the range of potential future carbon dynamics. Objectives We evaluated the effects of four scenarios on carbon stocks and sequestration in a mixed-use landscape based on Recent Trends (RT), Accelerated Deforestation (AD), Grow Only (GO), and Grow Everything (GE) scenarios. Methods Working in central Panama, we coupled a 1-ha resolution LiDAR derived carbon map with a locally derived secondary forest carbon accumulation model. We used Dinamica EGO 4.0.5 to spatially simulate forest loss across the landscape based on recent deforestation rates. We used local studies of belowground, woody debris, and liana carbon to estimate ecosystem scale carbon fluxes. Results Accounting for 58.6 percent of the forest in 2020, secondary forests (< 50 years) accrue 88.9 percent of carbon in the GO scenario by 2050. RT and AD scenarios lost 36,707 and 177,035 ha of forest respectively by 2030, a carbon gain of 7.7 million Mg C (RT) and loss of 2.9 million Mg C (AD). Growing forest on all available land (GE) could achieve 56 percent of Panama's land-based carbon sequestration goal by 2050. Conclusions Our estimates of potential carbon storage demonstrate the important contribution of secondary forests to land-based carbon sequestration in central Panama. Protecting these forests will contribute significantly to meeting Panama's climate change mitigation goals and enhance water security.
Degradation of Ecosystem Services and Deforestation in Landscapes With and Without Incentive-Based Forest Conservation in the Ecuadorian Amazon			Anthropogenic activities such as logging or forest conversion into agricultural lands are affecting Ecuadorian Amazon forests. To foster private and communal conservation activities an economic incentive-based conservation program (IFC) called Socio Bosque was established. Existing analyses related to conservation strategies are mainly focused on deforestation; while degradation and the role of IFC to safeguard ecosystem services are still scarce. Further on, there is a lack of landscape-level studies taking into account potential side effects of IFC on different forest types. Therefore we assessed ecosystem services (carbon stocks, timber volume) and species richness in landscapes with and without IFC. Additionally, we evaluated potential side-effects of IFC in adjacent forest types; hypothesizing potential leakage effects of IFC. Finally, we tested if deforestation rates decreased after IFC implementation. Forest inventories were conducted in 72 plots across eight landscapes in the Ecuadorian Central Amazon with and without IFC. Plots were randomly selected within three forest types (old-growth, logged and successional forests). In each plot all individuals with a diameter at breast height greater than 10 cm were measured. Old-growth forests in general showed higher carbon stocks, timber volume and species richness, and no significant differences between old-growth forests in IFC and non-IFC landscapes were found. Logged forests had 32% less above-ground carbon (AGC) and timber volume in comparison to old-growth forests. Surprisingly, logged forests near IFC presented higher AGC stocks than logged forests in non-IFC landscapes, indicating positive side-effects of IFC. Successional forests contain 56% to 64% of AGC, total carbon and timber volume, in comparison to old-growth forests, and 82% to 87% in comparison to logged forests. Therefore, successional forests could play an important role for restoration and should receive more attention in national climate change policies. Finally, after IFC implementation deforestation rate decreased on parish level. Our study presents scientific evidence of IFC contribution to conserving ecosystem services and species richness. In addition IFC could help indirectly to reduce degradation effects attributed to logging, indicating potential compatibility of conservation aims with forest activities at a landscape level.
Degradation of mangrove forests in the Sundarbans: An assessment based on perspectives of mangrove resource collectors using the DPSIR framework			Mangrove forests provide vital ecosystem services to communities in tropical countries, yet they are susceptible to degradation. The causes and effects of mangrove forest degradation in the Sundarbans of Bangladesh have not been thoroughly investigated. This study aimed to explore these issues from the perspective of mangrove resource collectors (MRCs). Utilizing the DPSIR (Driver, Pressure, State, Impact, and Response) framework, data were collected through in-depth interviews and focus group discussions with MRCs. The findings revealed that the drivers of mangrove degradation included reduced freshwater supply, increased demand for mangrove resources, climate change, and tourism. These drivers created pressures on the mangrove forests, manifesting through natural disasters, rising salinity levels, the establishment of the Farakka barrage, forest fires, coastal development, overexploitation, and pollution. Consequently, the forests experienced alterations in cover, a decline in mature trees, reduced stem density, and changes in species composition. The impacts of this degradation included biodiversity loss, diminished ecosystem services, and adverse effects on the livelihoods of communities dependent on mangroves. MRCs highlighted the necessity for support in generating alternative incomes, restoring freshwater supply, addressing the Farakka barrage issue collaboratively, enhancing forest management practices, and promoting mangrove afforestation and reforestation. These findings carry significant implications for policy reform, research, sustainable management, and conservation efforts for mangrove forests. They also underscore the need for developing alternative livelihood programs for communities living around the Sundarbans and other tropical regions facing similar challenges.
Degradation of soil nutrients and slow recovery of biomass following shifting cultivation in the heath forests of Sarawak, Malaysia			Heath forests which are tropical forests on sandy soils are widely distributed in Borneo and provide many ecosystem services, such as carbon storage and non-timber forest products. Over the past several decades, such forests have been disturbed by non-traditional shifting cultivation, which is usually conducted in unsuitable land with short fallow duration. Anthropogenic disturbances in forests growing on sandy soils that have low nutrient retention capacities may promote further reductions in soil fertility. Long-term monitoring of soil nutrients and biomass accumulation is rare in degraded tropical rainforests growing on sandy soils despite the known negative effects of non-traditional shifting cultivation practices on soil fertility, vegetation and biomass recovery, and the growth of trees planted to rehabilitate forests. The objective of the current study was therefore to elucidate changes in soil fertility and biomass recovery potential in degraded forests on sandy soils in Borneo. We monitored soil nutrients and chemical properties in fifty-four 12 x 12 m plots located on different topographical positions along upper and lower slopes. Samples were collected in plots aged 7 and 14 years after abandonment of shifting cultivation. The biomass of secondary forest trees in all plots 12 years after the abandonment was also measured to determine the relationship between biomass accumulation and changes in soil nutrients. We found that soil pH and cation exchange capacity, and the concentrations of most nutrients, including nitrogen, magnesium, and phosphorus, had decreased significantly 7-14 years after abandonment; biomass accumulation in the plots was also limited 12 years after abandonment ( < 0.8 Mg ha(-1) year(-1)). These changes in soil traits within the study plots were similar regardless of topographical position, and the changes were not related to the amount of biomass. Soil nutrients in the plots may have leached out as a result of removal of thick root mats in the surface soil, high sand content, and large amounts of rainfall in the area rather than uptake by recovering trees. These results indicate that it may be difficult to recover soil fertility on steep slopes in sandy soil conditions because of high leaching rates and erosion when the soil surface layer is destroyed by shifting cultivation. It is therefore important to carefully manage shifting cultivation practices in tropical forests on sandy soils in Borneo.
Delineation of secondary succession mechanisms for tropical dry forests using LiDAR			Research suggests that secondary forest structure and composition subsequent to human disturbance could be related to wind or vertebrate dependent seed dispersal mechanisms. This paper examines the capability of a waveform LiDAR system (LVIS: LiDAR Vegetation Imaging System) to detect the location of wind-dispersed or vertebrate-dispersed forest patches in a mosaic of a secondary Tropical Dry Forest in the Santa Rosa National Park, Guanacaste, Costa Rica. Canopy-height estimations derived from LVIS data were used to identify and locate two types of dispersal-dependent arrangements of canopy heights: flat-topped (windborne seed dispersed) or dome-shaped (vertebrate-dispersed) fragments. Following identification, a Ripley's K indicator was used to compare the locations for each confirmed canopy type to those reported in existing maps. Results indicated that dome-shaped patches tended to be arranged in clusters at the middle of former pastures (far from older forests), and that flat-topped patches tended to be located adjacent to older forests, forming extensions from the old growth patches and at the downwind side of the slope. Such characteristics agree with the theoretical observation of the spatial configuration of vertebrate- and wind-dispersed fragments reported in the study site. Our findings demonstrate that processes controlling forest regeneration in the TDF can be successfully identified through LiDAR data. (C) 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Delivering win-wins for conservation and production in oil palm plantations: Determining links between habitat restoration, biodiversity, and yield			Oil palm is currently grown across more than 18 million hectares of the tropics. It has the highest yield per hectare of all vegetable oil crops, and therefore forms a critical component of global food security. However, the expansion of the industry has driven large-scale loss of tropical forest, and associated declines in biodiversity and increases in carbon emissions. To minimise the environmental impacts and maximise the food security benefits of palm oil production, plantation management needs to maximise yield per hectare, but minimise negative impacts on the environment. An essential requirement for long term sustainability is to find options for ecological intensification - supporying biodiversity that delivers yield benefits within plantations. Within this, finding ways to manage plantations to maximise delivery of pest control, pollination, and healthy soil dynamics is likely to be key. Although agronomic approaches for delivering these functions are well developed by the oil palm industry, there has been little investigation of the role that biodiversity plays in these, or ways that oil palm landscapes can be managed to support ecosystem services and yield. Based within an established research programme in industrial oil palm plantations in Riau, Indonesia (the Biodiversity and Ecosystem Function in Tropical Agriculture (BEFTA) Programme), this project will consider the effect of plantation management practices on delivery of key yield-supporting ecosystem functions. Working in close collaboration with oil palm industry scientists from the Sinar Mas Agro Resources and Technology Research Institute (SMARTRI), the student will travel to Indonesia to collect field-based data from a series of well-established experimental sites in which large-scale manipulations of understory vegetation complexity and tree planting have been conducted. Data collection by the student could include a range of management options, taxa, and ecosystem functions, depending on the interests of the student. As well as offering a variety of options for new field-based data collection, the well-established field sites also offer an exciting opportunity to link with >8 years of existing data sets. Available data include information on environmental conditions, biodiversity, rates of ecosystem functions, and yield. Through this highly collaborative, fieldwork- and data-based approach, the student will develop skills in tropical ecology, agronomy, experimental design, data collection, and statistical analyses, as well as developing awareness and understanding of the oil palm industry. Results from this project will give valuable new insights into landscape-scale management options for delivery of ecosystem functions and maximising yield in oil palm systems. This will not only provide novel insights into the ecological dynamics of human-modified systems, but also bring substantial sustainability and food security benefits. Through our strong existing collaborations with SMARTRI and IPB University, and oil palm sustainability organisations such as the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO), findings from the project will be shared directly with growers and policy makers, to deliver important bioscience evidence for increased sustainability of agriculture and food security
Demographic drivers of tree biomass change during secondary succession in northeastern Costa Rica			Second-growth tropical forests are an important global carbon sink. As current knowledge on biomass accumulation during secondary succession is heavily based on chronosequence studies, direct estimates of annual rates of biomass accumulation in monitored stands are largely unavailable. We evaluated the contributions of tree diameter increment, recruitment, and mortality to annual tree biomass change during succession for three groups of tree species: second-growth (SG) specialists, generalists, and old-growth (OG) specialists. We monitored six second-growth tropical forests that varied in stand age and two old-growth forests in northeastern Costa Rica. We monitored these over a period of 8 to 16 years. To assess rates of biomass change during secondary succession, we compared standing biomass and biomass dynamics between second-growth forest stages and old-growth forest, and evaluated the effect of stand age on standing biomass and biomass dynamics in second-growth forests. Standing tree biomass increased with stand age during succession, whereas the rate of biomass change decreased. Biomass change was largely driven by tree diameter increment and mortality, with a minor contribution from recruitment. The relative importance of these demographic drivers shifted over succession. Biomass gain due to tree diameter increment decreased with stand age, whereas biomass loss due to mortality increased. In the age range of our second-growth forests, 10-41 years, SG specialists dominated tree biomass in second-growth forests. SG specialists, and to a lesser extent generalists, also dominated stand-level biomass increase due to tree diameter increment, whereas SG specialists largely accounted for decreases in biomass due to mortality. Our results indicate that tree growth is largely driving biomass dynamics early in succession, whereas both growth and mortality are important later in succession. Biomass dynamics are largely accounted for by a few SG specialists and one generalist species, Pentaclethra macroloba. To assess the generality of our results, similar long-term studies should be compared across tropical forest landscapes.
Derivation and validation of a pedotransfer function for estimating the bulk density of tropical forest soils			Bulk density (rho(b)), a soil physical property critical for estimating soil carbon storing potentials, is often under-reported in many tropical soil databases because of the difficulty and tedious nature of its measurement in the field. In this study, a pedotransfer function was developed to estimate the bulk density of topsoils (0-30 cm) of Nimbia Forest Reserve, Nigeria. Easily measured soil variables including sand content, total organic carbon and moisture contents were used as predictor variables. A pedotransfer function (PTF) was derived based on multiple linear regression model. Bulk density values for the forest soils varied from 0.78 to 1.28 g/cm(3) with a mean value of 1.03 g/cm(3). All the metrics used for the validation of the pedotransfer function show the model is statistically significant confirming its usefulness. The RMSE, R-squared and MAE of the pedotransfer function are 0.07498, 0.42231 and 0.058934, respectively. Given that this is the first PTF developed for bulk density estimation in the study area, we recommend a comparison of this new model with others that can be developed using machine learning algorithms and other statistical techniques. The PTF developed in this study will find application in the calculation of the soil organic carbon stocks in the Nimbia Forest Reserve to provide baseline estimates-a decision support tool for sustainable soil management and possible climate change mitigation.
Descriptive statistics (means  standard deviation (n = 3)) for the measured parameters (water-holding capacity (WHC; in %), total carbon content (TC; in %), C:N ratio and pH (unitless) for the control Anthroposol, Ferralsol and Vertisol and after treatment of these three soils with biochar (B1: C...			#VALUE!
Design of complex agroecosystems: traditional and formal knowledge to conserve agrobiodiversity in the Santa Marta Mountains, Veracruz, Mexico			In the context of globalization, two major human challenges are global warming and the loss of biological and cultural diversity. Solving the latter problem can help reduce greenhouse gases, diversify production, and maintain agrobiodiversity. The objective was to propose a design of complex agroecosystems based on indigenous and scientific knowledge. In 66 agroecosystems from seven ejidos (communal lands used for agriculture), the tree species were determined in 400 square meter plots, considering three layers: high (up to 35 m), middle (up to 25 m), and low (< 17.5 m), estimating carbon sequestration using allometric equations. Three participatory workshops were carried out with 36 peasants to corroborate the species observed in the field and create lists of attributes (foliage production, cover, growth speed, and flowering and fruiting periods). With these attributes, as well as carbon sequestration capacity, melliferous and nectar potential, a proposal for an agroecosystem design was developed. The species that sequestered the largest amount of carbon was: Pouteria sapota, Manilkara sapota, Brosimum alicastrum, and Calophyllum brasiliense. The highest valued species were: Spondias mombin, Citrus limon, and Psidium guajava, Guazuma ulmifolia, Trema micrantha, Inga spp., Bursera simaruba, Mangifera indica, Pouteria sapota, and Tabebuia rosea; in the shrub and understory layer Musa paradisiaca, Coffea arabica, Chamaedorea tepejilote, and Chamaedorea spp. The combination of indigenous and western scientific knowledge allows the structuring of complex agroecological matrices to diversify coffee agroecosystems. This can be the basis for reducing poverty, conserving, or restoring different trophic relationships, and reducing global warming. Section 1 presents the literature reviewed. Section 2 presents a description of the study area with the main biological and social characteristics, also, the main methods used to characterize coffee agroecosystems, the estimation of carbon sequestration and valuation of tree species by peasants and the attributes used for the proposal of design of agroecosystems. Sections 3 and 4 present the discussion of results and finally in Sect. 5, the conclusions.
Design of tropical forest conservation contracts considering risk of deforestation			Payments for Forest Conservation (PFC) programs financially compensate forest owners to maintain and increase the provision of ecosystem services. Nonetheless, their effectiveness and additionality in preventing deforestation and degradation remain contested. The design of PFC contracts can influence landowner participation and in-turn a program's prospects for additionality. We examined preferences for select PFC contractual attributes among over 200 private forest owners in Ecuador's Amazon basin using a discrete choice experiment. Forest owners at high-risk of deforestation, as compared to others of lower risk, were almost eight-times more likely to select contracts that allowed timber harvest under a management plan, about three-times more likely to select contracts managed by local municipalities or international NGOs, and showed stronger preferences for long-term contracts. To increase enrollment of forest lands at higher risk of deforestation and degradation PFC contracts might need to reconsider the benefits of increasing financial incentives, pursue administration through local municipalities or international NGOs, allow sustainable timber harvesting, and seek permanent agreements.
Designing effective and equitable zero-deforestation supply chain policies			In response to the clearing of tropical forests for agricultural expansion, agri-food companies have adopted promises to eliminate deforestation from their supply chains in the form of 'zero-deforestation commitments' (ZDCs). While there is growing evidence about the environmental effectiveness of these commitments (i.e., whether they meet their conservation goals), there is little information on how they influence producers' opportunity to access sustainable markets and related livelihood outcomes, or how design and implementation choices influence tradeoffs or potential synergies between effectiveness and equity in access. This paper explores these research gaps and makes three main contributions by: i) defining and justifying the importance of analyzing access equity and its relation to effectiveness when implementing forest-focused supply chain policies such as ZDCs, ii) identifying seven policy design principles that are likely to maximize synergies between effectiveness and access equity, and iii) assessing effectiveness-access equity tensions and synergies across common ZDC implementation mechanisms amongst the five largest firms in each of the leading agricultural forest-risk commodity sectors: palm oil, soybeans, beef cattle, and cocoa. To enhance forest conservation while avoiding harm to the most vulnerable farmers in the tropics, it is necessary to combine stringent rules with widespread capacity building, greater involvement of affected actors in the co-production of implementation mechanisms, and support for alternative rural development paths.
Designing protected area networks that translate international conservation commitments into national action			Most countries have committed to protect 17% of their terrestrial area by 2020 through Aichi Target 11 of the Convention on Biological Diversity, with a focus on protecting areas of particular importance for biodiversity. This means national-scale spatial conservation prioritisations are needed to help meet this target and guide broader conservation and land-use policy development. However, to ensure these assessments are adopted by policy makers, they must also consider national priorities. This situation is exemplified by Guyana, a corner of Amazonia that couples high biodiversity with low economic development. In recent years activities that threaten biodiversity conservation have increased, and consequently, protected areas are evermore critical to achieving the Aichi targets. Here we undertake a cost-effective approach to protected area planning in Guyana that accounts for domestic conditions. To do this we conducted a stakeholder-led spatial conservation prioritisation based on meeting targets for 17 vegetation types and 329 vertebrate species, while minimising opportunity costs for forestry, mining, agriculture and urbanisation. Our analysis identifies 3 million ha of priority areas for conservation, helping inform government plans to double the current protected area network from 8.5 to 17%. As part of this, we also develop a new technique to prioritise engagement with local communities whose lands are identified as important to conservation. Our study both provides a scientific, politically acceptable protected area expansion strategy for Guyana, and illustrates the importance of conservation planning at the country-scale to translate international commitments into national action. © 2017
Designing restoration strategies for degraded forest ecosystems: Increasing resiliency in human-dominated landscapes			Camp John Hay watershed and forest reserve in Baguio City, Northern Luzon, Philippines is one the last remaining contiguous pine forest block in the city. Various factors, mostly anthropogenic in nature, act as the key drivers to land use change, and eventually the degradation of these pine stands. Since forests provide vital ecosystem services especially in mitigating the effects of climate change, and recognizing the close association between the state of the ecosystem and the impact of disasters, there should be a sense of urgency to address the problem. With due consideration to the socio-economic and political factors relevant to the site, this study designed a restoration plan to repair degraded sites in the forest and watershed area and to preserve the ecosystem services it provides. The different objectives of the project include: a) Restoration of degraded sites through Assisted Natural Regeneration (ANR) and enrichment planting; b) Restoration of degraded sites through planting of native species in addition to the dominant Pinus species; c) Establishment of Riparian buffer zones along the tributaries of the watershed to mitigate eroded areas in the sites; d) Maintain functionality and improve the existing nursery. Close monitoring by the major stakeholders including the indigenous community will ensure the sustainable management, conservation and restoration of this forest ecosystem to reduce disaster risk, with the aim of achieving sustainable and resilient development. © 2016 CURRAN-CONFERENCE. All rights reserved.
Detecting and interpreting secondary forest on an old Amazonian frontier			Land uses that replace tropical forests are important determinants of terrestrial carbon storage and biodiversity. This includes secondary forest growth after deforestation, which has been integrated into the REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation) concept as a means to enhance current forest carbon stocks. Incorporating secondary forest into climate change mitigation efforts requires both accurate measurements and a means to target interventions to achieve additionality. We demonstrate how remote sensing and household survey data can be combined to meet these requirements in ‘old frontiers’ of the Brazilian Amazon and introduce the idea that annual land-cover transitions − measured at the pixel level and over time − can serve as leading indicators of secondary forest regrowth. The patterns we observe are consistent with the suggested tension between equity and additionality in REDD+: the poorest households on the poorest quality lots already allow forest regeneration. Policy interventions to encourage regeneration are likely to have the greatest additional impact on higher quality lots owned by better capitalized households. © 2014 Taylor & Francis.
Detection of active oxalate-carbonate pathway ecosystems in the Amazon Basin: Global implications of a natural potential C sink			The oxalate-carbonate pathway (OCP) is a biogeochemical process, which has been described in Milicia excelsa tree ecosystems of Africa. This pathway involves biological and geological parameters at different scales: oxalate, as a by-product of photosynthesis, is oxidized by oxalotrophic bacteria leading to a local pH increase, and eventually to carbonate accumulation through time in previously acidic and carbonate-free tropical soils. Former studies have shown that this pedogenic process can potentially lead to the formation of an atmospheric carbon sink. Considering that 80% of plant species are known to produce oxalate, it is reasonable to assume that M. excelsa is not the only tree that can support OCP ecosystems.The search for similar conditions on another continent led us to South America, in an Amazon forest ecosystem (Alto Beni, Bolivia). This area was chosen because of the absence of local inherited carbonate in the bedrock, as well as its expected acidic soil conditions. Eleven tree species and associated soils were tested positive for the presence of carbonate with a more alkaline soil pH close to the tree than at a distance from it. A detailed study of Pentaplaris davidsmithii and Ceiba speciosa trees showed that oxalotrophy impacted soil pH in a similar way to at African sites (at least with 1 pH unit increasing). African and South American sites display similar characteristics regarding the mineralogical assemblage associated with the OCP, except for the absence of weddellite. The amount of carbonate accumulated is 3 to 4 times lower than the values measured in African sites related to M. excelsa ecosystems. Still, these secondary carbonates remain critical for the continental carbon cycle, as they are unexpected in the acidic context of Amazonian soils. Therefore, the present study demonstrates the existence of an active OCP in South America. The three critical components of an operating OCP are the presence of: i) local alkalinization, ii) carbonate accumulations, and iii) oxalotrophic bacteria, which were identified associated to the oxalogenic tree C. speciosa.If the question of a potential carbon sink related to oxalotrophic-oxalogenic ecosystems in the Amazon Basin is still pending, this study highlights the implication of OCP ecosystems on carbon and calcium biogeochemical coupled cycles. As previously mentioned for M. excelsa tree ecosystems in Africa, carbonate accumulations observed in the Bolivian tropical forest could be extrapolated to part or the whole Amazon Basin and might constitute an important reservoir that must be taken into account in the global carbon balance of the Tropics. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Determinants of aboveground carbon offset additionality in plantation forests in a moist tropical forest in western Kenya			Few studies have attempted to identify factors that contribute to aboveground carbon offset additionality in forest restoration planting in the tropics. Moreover, those that have compared aboveground carbon offset potential of naturally regenerating secondary forests and plantation forests have yielded conflicting results regarding the ability of the latter to attain carbon offset additionality, thus limiting broad adoption of carbon-driven forest restoration interventions. We assessed woody species diversity, stem density, stem diameter and wood specific gravity of secondary and plantation forests in Kakamega Forest in western Kenya to identify determinants of aboveground carbon offset additionality in plantation forests. Secondary forests comprised old-growth, middle-aged and young vegetation stands. Plantation forests consisted of mixed indigenous, Maesopsis eminii indigenous monoculture and Cupressus lusitanica, Pinus patula and Bischofia javanica exotic monoculture stands. Assessment was carried in 135 sample plots in three forest blocks using stratified systematic sampling in nested plots. Analysis of variance indicated that there was no significant difference in woody species diversity between secondary and plantation forests due to natural forest succession in both forest types. Mixed indigenous plantation had more aboveground carbon stock than secondary forest stands of comparable stand age due to its greater proportion of tree species with high wood specific gravity and large tree diameter. Old-growth secondary forest had more aboveground carbon stock than monoculture forest plantations due to its relatively higher wood specific gravity. Middle-aged secondary forest had relatively lower aboveground carbon stock than plantation forests of comparable stand age because of its smaller tree diameter. The results suggest that stem diameter and wood specific gravity are the most important determinants of aboveground carbon offset additionality. Thus, forest managers and investors in carbon offset projects can achieve aboveground carbon offset additionality in forest restoration interventions by planting tree species with relatively higher wood specific gravity and manipulating them to attain large stem diameter through silvicultural management. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Developed-developing world partnerships for sustainable development (2): An illustrative case for a payments for ecosystem services (PES) approach			The Converging World (TCW) developed-developing world partnership model represents a transparent approach to addressing carbon emission management in a mutually beneficial way, with a substantial 'multiplier effect' achieved though reinvestment of operating surpluses from energy generation into tropical dry evergreen forest (TDEF) restoration. Carbon dioxide is averted/sequestered at a theoretical cost of 0.0058 pound  pound per t CO(2)e (approximate to$US0.01 per t CO(2)e). For the City and County of Bristol, England, cumulative century-long CO(2)e emissions of 256,550,000 t CO(2)e could be matched by one-off investment of 3 pound:56 for each of Bristol City's 442,500 population in commissioning a 2.1 MW wind turbine in Tamil Nadu under the TCW model. Similar considerations apply at institutional level; indicative contributory investment in turbine installation is calculated for a case study institution. Calculated investments relate to the 'anchor service' of climate regulation, though the TCW model also generates multiple co-beneficial ecosystem services serving local people and addressing UN Sustainable Development Goals. Restoration of other bioregional habitats could yield additional socio-ecological benefits. TCW's aspirational investment model positions social return on investment (SROI) as primary 'interest', rather than maximisation of financial returns to investors. We test the case for founding developing world investment on the basis for 'payments for ecosystem services' (PES).
Developing a more complete understanding of tropical montane forest disturbance ecology through landslide research			Landslides are a central component of tropical montane forest disturbance regimes, including in the tropical Andes biodiversity hotspot, one of the most biodiverse ecosystems in the world. Technological developments in remote sensing have made landscape-scale landslide studies possible, unlocking new avenues for understanding montane biodiversity, ecosystem functioning, and the future effects of climate change. Here, we outline three axes of inquiry for future landslide ecology research in Andean tropical montane forest. We focus exclusively on the Andes due to the vast floral diversity and high endemicity of the tropical Andes biodiversity hotspot, and its importance for global biodiversity and regional ecosystem service provisioning; the broad elevational, latitudinal, and topographic gradients across which landslide dynamics play out; and the existence of long-term plot networks that provide the necessary baseline data on mature forest structure, composition, and functioning to contextualize disturbance impacts. The three lines of study we outline, which draw heavily on remote sensing data and techniques, will deepen scientific understanding of tropical montane forest biodiversity and ecosystem functioning, and the potential impacts of climate change on both. They are: (1) tracking landslide biodiversity dynamics across time and space with high spatial and temporal resolution satellite and unoccupied aerial vehicle imagery; (2) assessing the ecological influence of landslides through the lens of plant functional diversity with imaging spectroscopy; and (3) understanding current and predicting future landslide regimes at scale by building a living landslide inventory spanning the tropical Andes. The research findings from these three axes of inquiry will shed light on the role of landslides and the process of forest recovery from them in both the Andes and worldwide.
Developing Cost-Effective Field Assessments of Carbon Stocks in Human-Modified Tropical Forests			Across the tropics, there is a growing financial investment in activities that aim to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, such as REDD+. However, most tropical countries lack on-the-ground capacity to conduct reliable and replicable assessments of forest carbon stocks, undermining their ability to secure long-term carbon finance for forest conservation programs. Clear guidance on how to reduce the monetary and time costs of field assessments of forest carbon can help tropical countries to overcome this capacity gap. Here we provide such guidance for cost-effective one-off field assessments of forest carbon stocks. We sampled a total of eight components from four different carbon pools (i.e. aboveground, dead wood, litter and soil) in 224 study plots distributed across two regions of eastern Amazon. For each component we estimated survey costs, contribution to total forest carbon stocks and sensitivity to disturbance. Sampling costs varied thirty-one-fold between the most expensive component, soil, and the least, leaf litter. Large live stems (>= 10 cm DBH), which represented only 15% of the overall sampling costs, was by far the most important component to be assessed, as it stores the largest amount of carbon and is highly sensitive to disturbance. If large stems are not taxonomically identified, costs can be reduced by a further 51%, while incurring an error in aboveground carbon estimates of only 5% in primary forests, but 31% in secondary forests. For rapid assessments, necessary to help prioritize locations for carbon-conservation activities, sampling of stems >= 20cm DBH without taxonomic identification can predict with confidence (R-2 = 0.85) whether an area is relatively carbon-rich or carbon-poor-an approach that is 74% cheaper than sampling and identifying all the stems >= 10cm DBH. We use these results to evaluate the reliability of forest carbon stock estimates provided by the IPCC and FAO when applied to human-modified forests, and to highlight areas where cost savings in carbon stock assessments could be most easily made.
Differences in Soil Properties Between Irrigation and Cropping Sequences in the Thar Desert of India			Watering is known to convert deserts into oases. However, information on how irrigation brings changes in physical and chemical properties of soils in a desert biome is not yet known, though pertinent to land use planning. This study reports influence of irrigation and cropping sequence on physico-chemical properties of soils in the Thar Desert, Rajasthan, India. Treatments included three irrigation conditions (not irrigated, low-irrigated, and high-irrigated) and eleven cropping sequences, cotton-gram (C-G), mung bean-mustard (M-Mu), moth bean-wheat (Mo-W), moth bean-mustard (Mo-Mu), cotton-fallow (C-F), cotton-wheat (C-W), cotton-mustard (C-Mu), mung bean-wheat (M-W), moth bean-fallow (Mo-F), mung bean-fallow (M-F), and pearl millet-fallow (P-F). The irrigation reduced soil temperature (9.7 to 12.2%) and bulk density (5.3 to 6.6%), but increased silt (5.1 to 7.2%) and clay (3.8 to 5.4%) content, water holding capacity (50 to 58.3%), moisture content at field capacity (100 to 133.3%), concentration (2.3 to 3.1 times), and stock (2.2 to 3.0 times) of soil organic carbon (SOC), microbial biomass carbon (4 to 8 times), available phosphorus (1.82 to 2.1 times), and potassium (25.9 to 67.1%). These changes were higher in the high-irrigated than the low-irrigated conditions. Cropping sequences C-W, C-Mu, and C-G sequestered more SOC and retained higher microbial biomass carbon, whereas M-Mu, Mo-W, Mo-Mu and M-W maintained the highest level of phosphorus and potassium. These observations suggest that irrigation and cropping sequence are promising management options for enhancing carbon sequestration in soils, which may reduce desertification in the Thar Desert and other similar deserts in the hot tropics. © 2013 Copyright Taylor and Francis Group, LLC.
Differential nutrient limitation and tree height control leaf physiology, supporting niche partitioning in tropical dipterocarp forests			Revealing the mechanisms of environmental niche partitioning within lowland tropical forests is important for understanding the drivers of current species distributions and potential vulnerability to environmental change. Tropical forest structure and species composition change across edaphic gradients in Borneo over short distances. However, our understanding of how edaphic conditions affect tree physiology and whether these relationships drive niche partitioning within Bornean forests remains incomplete. This study evaluated how leaf physiological function changes with nutrient availability across a fine-scale edaphic gradient and whether these relationships vary according to tree height. Furthermore, we tested whether intraspecific leaf trait variation allows generalist species to populate a wider range of environments. We measured leaf traits of 218 trees ranging in height from 4 to 66 m from 13 dipterocarp species within four tropical forest types (alluvial, mudstone, sandstone and kerangas) occurring along an <5 km edaphic gradient in North Borneo. The traits measured included saturating photosynthesis (A(sat)), maximum photosynthetic capacity (V-cmax), leaf dark respiration (R-leaf), leaf mass per area (LMA), leaf thickness, minimum stomatal conductance (g(dark)) and leaf nutrient concentrations (N, P, Ca, K and Mg). Across all species, leaf traits varied consistently in response to soil nutrient availability across forest types except R-leaf_mass, [Mg](leaf) and [Ca](leaf). Changes in photosynthesis and respiration rates were related to different leaf nutrients across forest types, with greater nutrient-use efficiency in more nutrient-poor environments. Generalist species partially or fully compensated reductions in mass-based photosynthesis through increasing LMA in more nutrient-poor environments. Leaf traits also varied with tree height, except V-cmax_mass, but only in response to height-related modifications of leaf morphology (LMA and leaf thickness). These height-trait relationships did not vary across the edaphic gradient, except for A(sat), [N](leaf), [P](leaf) and [K](leaf). Our results highlight that modification of leaf physiological function and morphology act as important adaptations for Bornean dipterocarps in response to edaphic and vertical environmental gradients. Meanwhile, multiple nutrients appear to contribute to niche partitioning and could drive species distributions and high biodiversity within Bornean forest landscapes. Read the free Plain Language Summary for this article on the Journal blog.
Digestive capacity predicts diet diversity in Neotropical frugivorous bats			Predicting the diet diversity of animals is important to basic and applied ecology. Knowledge of diet diversity in animals helps us understand niche partitioning, functional diversity and ecosystem services such as pollination, pest control and seed dispersal. There is a negative relationship between the length of the digestive tract and diet diversity in animals; however, the role of digestive physiology in determining diet diversity has been ignored. This is especially important in vertebrates with powered flight because, unlike non-flying vertebrates, they have limitations that may constrain gut size. Here, we evaluate the relationship between digestive capacity and diet diversity in Carollinae and Stenodermatinae frugivorous bats. These bats disperse the seeds of plants that are key to Neotropical forest regeneration. Our results show that digestive capacity is a good predictor of diet diversity in Carollinae and Stenodermatinae frugivorous bats (R-2=077). Surprisingly, the most phylogenetically closely related species were not similar in their digestive capacity or diet diversity. The lack of a phylogenetic signal for the traits evaluated implies differences in digestive physiology and diet in closely related species. Our results highlight the predictive usefulness of digestive physiology for understanding the feeding ecology of animals.
Direct evidence for phosphorus limitation on Amazon forest productivity			The productivity of rainforests growing on highly weathered tropical soils is expected to be limited by phosphorus availability1. Yet, controlled fertilization experiments have been unable to demonstrate a dominant role for phosphorus in controlling tropical forest net primary productivity. Recent syntheses have demonstrated that responses to nitrogen addition are as large as to phosphorus2, and adaptations to low phosphorus availability appear to enable net primary productivity to be maintained across major soil phosphorus gradients3. Thus, the extent to which phosphorus availability limits tropical forest productivity is highly uncertain. The majority of the Amazonia, however, is characterized by soils that are more depleted in phosphorus than those in which most tropical fertilization experiments have taken place2. Thus, we established a phosphorus, nitrogen and base cation addition experiment in an old growth Amazon rainforest, with a low soil phosphorus content that is representative of approximately 60% of the Amazon basin. Here we show that net primary productivity increased exclusively with phosphorus addition. After 2 years, strong responses were observed in fine root (+29%) and canopy productivity (+19%), but not stem growth. The direct evidence of phosphorus limitation of net primary productivity suggests that phosphorus availability may restrict Amazon forest responses to CO2 fertilization4, with major implications for future carbon sequestration and forest resilience to climate change. © 2022, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.
Disentangling the long-term effects of disturbance on soil biogeochemistry in a wet tropical forest ecosystem			Climate change is increasing the intensity of severe tropical storms and cyclones (also referred to as hurricanes or typhoons), with major implications for tropical forest structure and function. These changes in disturbance regime are likely to play an important role in regulating ecosystem carbon (C) and nutrient dynamics in tropical and subtropical forests. Canopy opening and debris deposition resulting from severe storms have complex and interacting effects on ecosystem biogeochemistry. Disentangling these complex effects will be critical to better understand the long-term implications of climate change on ecosystem C and nutrient dynamics. In this study, we used a well-replicated, long-term (10years) canopy and debris manipulation experiment in a wet tropical forest to determine the separate and combined effects of canopy opening and debris deposition on soil C and nutrients throughout the soil profile (1m). Debris deposition alone resulted in higher soil C and N concentrations, both at the surface (0-10cm) and at depth (50-80cm). Concentrations of NaOH-organic P also increased significantly in the debris deposition only treatment (20-90cm depth), as did NaOH-total P (20-50cm depth). Canopy opening, both with and without debris deposition, significantly increased NaOH-inorganic P concentrations from 70 to 90cm depth. Soil iron concentrations were a strong predictor of both C and P patterns throughout the soil profile. Our results demonstrate that both surface- and subsoils have the potential to significantly increase C and nutrient storage a decade after the sudden deposition of disturbance-related organic debris. Our results also show that these effects may be partially offset by rapid decomposition and decreases in litterfall associated with canopy opening. The significant effects of debris deposition on soil C and nutrient concentrations at depth (>50cm), suggest that deep soils are more dynamic than previously believed, and can serve as sinks of C and nutrients derived from disturbance-induced pulses of organic matter inputs.
Dispersal traits determine passive restoration trajectory of a Nigerian montane forest			Passive restoration methods offer great promise for tropical regions where resources are limited but the success of such efforts can be variable. Using trait-based theory, we investigated the likely trajectories of passive restoration efforts in a degraded Nigerian montane forest system recently protected from burning and cattle grazing. We quantified the density, species richness, and functional trait dispersion of dispersed seeds and seedling communities at increasing distances from the forest edge. We then determined which plant traits are responsible for colonisation by quantifying changes in functional-trait dispersion and relative frequencies of dispersal-linked traits with increasing distance from the forest. We found a rapid decrease in density and species richness, and significant species turnover in both seeds and seedlings just beyond the forest edge. This was mirrored by a significant decline in functional-trait dispersion and a shift in the relative frequencies of dispersal-linked traits. These findings suggest that the reassembly of plant communities adjacent to remnant forest is dependent on functional traits present in these remnant source populations, providing support for the incorporation of trait-based theory in restoration management. (C) 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
Disrupted montane forest recovery hinders biodiversity conservation in the tropical Andes			Aim Andean montane forests are biodiversity hotspots and large carbon stores and they provide numerous ecosystem services. Following land abandonment after centuries of forest clearing for agriculture in the Andes, there is an opportunity for forest recovery. Field-based studies show that forests do not always recover. However, large-scale and long-term knowledge of recovery dynamics of Andean forests remains scarce. This paper analyses tropical montane forest recovery trajectories over a 15-year time frame at the landscape and tropical Andean scale to inform restoration planning.Methods We first detect "potential recovery" as areas that have experienced a forest transition between 2000 and 2005. Then, we use Landsat time series analysis of the normalized difference water index (NDWI) to classify four "realized recovery" trajectories ("ongoing", "arrested", "disrupted" and "no recovery") based on a sequential pattern of 5-yearly Z-score anomalies for 2005-2020. We compare these results against an analysis of change in tree cover to validate against other datasets.Results Across the tropical Andes, we detected a potential recovery area of 274 km(2) over the period. Despite increases in tree cover, most areas of the Andes remained in early successional states (10-25% tree cover), and NDWI levelled out after 5-10 years. Of all potential forest recovery areas, 22% showed "ongoing recovery", 61% showed either "disrupted" or "arrested recovery", and 17% showed "no recovery". Our method captured forest recovery dynamics in a Peruvian arrested succession context and in landscape-scale tree-planting efforts in Ecuador.Main conclusions Forest recovery across the Andes is mostly disrupted, arrested or unsuccessful, with consequences for biodiversity recovery and provision of ecosystem services. Low-recovery areas identified in this study might be good candidates for active restoration interventions in this UN Decade on Restoration. Future studies could determine restoration strategies and priorities and suggest management strategies at a local planning scale across key regions in the biodiversity hotspot.
DISSERTATION RESEARCH -Bird and Bat Effects on Arthropod Densities and Herbivory in Tropical Forest Restoration Sites			Tropical forests are disappearing at a rapid pace. Active restoration, by planting native vegetation, is an effective strategy to counteract this deforestation. However, plant-eating insects could cause significant damage to trees planted for restoration and thus limit the success of restoration sites. Top predators in an ecosystem, like birds and bats, can have strong direct effects on the abundance of plant-eating insects and indirect effects on plant damage caused by those insects. This research examines the effects of bird and bat consumption of insects in restoration sites by comparing insect abundance and levels of plant damage between trees that are exposed to bird and bat predation and trees that are protected. By consuming insects, birds and bats could provide a significant ecological service which may be of particular importance to efforts to restore tropical forest by aiding plant survival and growth. This research will help improve tropical forest restoration efforts, a critical component of strategies to conserve biodiversity. restore degraded lands and maintain ecosystem services such as hydrological cycling and carbon sequestration. This work will also examine the role of birds and bats as biological controls of potentially damaging insects, information that will be relevant for many types of agricultural industries. Collaborations with local community members and education groups will provide education and training for the people that live in the study area. Results will be disseminated in English and Spanish to both general and scientific audiences.
Dissertation Research: Interactions among Salamander and Arthropod Predators in Forest-Floor Food Webs			This study examines the interactions among organisms occupying multiple levels in deciduous forest-floor food webs.  The proposal focuses on interactions among taxonomically-divergent forest floor predators (salamanders, centipedes, spiders and beetles) using a combination of field and laboratory experiments. Laboratory experiments will test for interactions among predators, particularly intraguild predation, aggression and interspecific territoriality. Predator-removal plots have been established in the Cuyahoga Valley National Park (Ohio) to test the hypothesis that removal of forest-floor predators will have effects on other predators, and lower levels within the food chain, including detritivores, fungi, and rate of leaf litter decomposition.Forest-floor food webs are important in global nutrient cycling and the formation of healthy soils.  Knowledge of interactions among organisms that provide such ecosystem services is valuable because, in a changing environment, it is uncertain which species will persist in the face of human habitat alteration.  For example, the current amphibian decline is expected to claim the majority of tropical frog species in our lifetimes, but it is largely unknown what role these species play in tropical ecosystems.  Likewise, little is known about functional roles that amphibians and their guild members play in temperate webs.
Dissimilar forests along the Rio Doce watershed call for multiple restoration references to avoid biotic homogenization			An environmental disaster caused by the rupture of a mining tailings dam has impacted a large area of the Rio Doce watershed in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest, resulting in unprecedented damage at spatial and temporal scales. The Atlantic Forest is one of the world's most important biodiversity hotspots. A long history of land use conversion has resulted in a highly fragmented landscape. Despite numerous restoration initiatives, these efforts have often biased criteria and use limited species assemblages. We conducted a comprehensive synthesis of the plant community in riparian forests along the Rio Doce watershed. Our work detailed vegetation composition (tree and sapling strata) and examined its relationship with edaphic and landscape factors, aiming to inform restoration projects with scientifically robust knowledge. A total of 4906 individuals from the tree strata and 4565 individuals from the sapling strata were recorded, representing a total of 1192 species from 75 families. Only 0.8% of the tree species and 0.5% of the sapling species occurred in all sampled sectors, with over 84% of the species occurring in a single watershed sector for both strata. We observed a high species heterogeneity modulated by turnover (92.3% in the tree, and 92.7% in the sapling strata) among sites. Overall, our research revealed a gradient of soil fertility influencing species composition across different strata. Additionally, we discovered that preserved landscapes had a positive impact on species diversity within both strata. The species exclusivity in the sampled sites and the high turnover rate imply the need to consider multiple reference ecosystems when restoring the watershed to reduce the risk of biotic homogenization. Finally, the reference ecosystems defined here serve as a basis for the selection of locally particular species in the implementation of restoration projects that aim to improve biodiversity, ecosystem services, and water security.
Distinctive Bacterial Communities in the Rhizoplane of Four Tropical Tree Species			It is known that the microbial community of the rhizosphere is not only influenced by factors such as root exudates, phenology, and nutrient uptake but also by the plant species. However, studies of bacterial communities associated with tropical rainforest tree root surfaces, or rhizoplane, are lacking. Here, we analyzed the bacterial community of root surfaces of four species of native trees, Agathis borneensis, Dipterocarpus kerrii, Dyera costulata, and Gnetum gnemon, and nearby bulk soils, in a rainforest arboretum in Malaysia, using 454 pyrosequencing of the 16S rRNA gene. The rhizoplane bacterial communities for each of the four tree species sampled clustered separately from one another on an ordination, suggesting that these assemblages are linked to chemical and biological characteristics of the host or possibly to the mycorrhizal fungi present. Bacterial communities of the rhizoplane had various similarities to surrounding bulk soils. Acidobacteria, Alphaproteobacteria, and Betaproteobacteria were dominant in rhizoplane communities and in bulk soils from the same depth (0-10 cm). In contrast, the relative abundance of certain bacterial lineages on the rhizoplane was different from that in bulk soils: Bacteroidetes and Betaproteobacteria, which are known as copiotrophs, were much more abundant in the rhizoplane in comparison to bulk soil. At the genus level, Burkholderia, Acidobacterium, Dyella, and Edaphobacter were more abundant in the rhizoplane. Burkholderia, which are known as both pathogens and mutualists of plants, were especially abundant on the rhizoplane of all tree species sampled. The Burkholderia species present included known mutualists of tropical crops and also known N fixers. The host-specific character of tropical tree rhizoplane bacterial communities may have implications for understanding nutrient cycling, recruitment, and structuring of tree species diversity in tropical forests. Such understanding may prove to be useful in both tropical forestry and conservation.
Disturbance sensitivity shapes patterns of tree species distribution in Afrotropical lowland rainforests more than climate or soil			Understanding how tropical forests respond to abiotic environmental changes is critical for preserving biodiversity, mitigating climate change, and maintaining ecosystem services in the coming century. To evaluate the relative roles of the abiotic environment and human disturbance on Central African tree community composition, we employ tree inventory data, remotely sensed climatic data, and soil nutrient data collected from 30 1-ha plots distributed across a large-scale observational experiment in forests that had been differently impacted by logging and hunting in northern Republic of Congo. We show that the composition of Afrotropical plant communities at this scale responds to human disturbance more than to climate, with particular sensitivities to hunting and distance to the nearest village (a proxy for other human activities, including tree-cutting and gathering). These findings contrast neotropical predictions, highlighting the unique ecological, evolutionary, and anthropogenic history of Afrotropical forests.Posterior parameter estimates for the effect of environmental covariates on species counts and species correlation in their responses to environmental predictors show clustering into two general groups that represent a disturbance-tolerant pioneer community and disturbance-intolerant species.image
Divergent accumulation of amino sugars and lignins mediated by soil functional carbon pools under tropical forest conversion			Tropical primary forests are being destroyed at an alarming rate and converted for other land uses which is expected to greatly influence soil carbon (C) cycling. However, our understanding of how tropical forest conversions affect the ac-cumulation of compounds in soil functional C pools remains unclear. Here, we collected soils from primary forests (PF), secondary forests (SF), oil-palm (OP), and rubber plantations (RP), and assessed the accumulation of plant-and microbial-derived compounds within soil organic carbon (SOC), particulate (POC) and mineral-associated (MAOC) or-ganic C. PF conversion to RP greatly decreased SOC, POC, and MAOC concentrations, whereas conversion to SF in-creased POC concentrations and decreased MAOC concentrations, and conversion to OP only increased POC concentrations. PF conversion to RP decreased lignin concentrations and increased amino sugar concentrations in SOC pools which increased the stability of SOC, whereas conversion to SF only increased the lignin concentrations in POC, and conversion to OP just increased lignin concentrations in POC and decreased it in MAOC. We observed di-vergent dynamics of amino sugars (decrease) and lignin (increase) in SOC with increasing SOC. Only lignin concentra-tions increased in POC with increasing POC and amino sugars concentrations decreased in MAOC with increasing MAOC. Conversion to RP significantly decreased soil enzyme activities and microbial biomasses. Lignin accumulation was associated with microbial properties, whereas amino sugar accumulation was mainly associated with soil nutri-ents and stoichiometries. These results suggest that the divergent accumulation of plant-and microbial-derived C in SOC was delivered by the distribution and original composition of functional C pools under forest conversions. Forest conversions changed the formation and stabilization processes of SOC in the long run which was associated with con-verted plantations and management. The important roles of soil nutrients and stoichiometry also provide a natural -based solution to enhance SOC sequestration via nutrient management in tropical forests.
Divergent patterns and determinants of resistance and resilience in short and tall forests across global drylands			Forests play a crucial role in mitigating climate change, and global afforestation initiatives are in full swing, with drylands having great potential for afforestation. However, many dryland afforestation projects lead to short forests with significantly lower canopy height than their typical height. Meanwhile, the potentially increasing probability of drought threatens short forests and their tall counterparts. Yet, it remains largely unclear whether these short forests respond differently to drought compared to tall forests. Here, we used the K-means clustering method to classify global dryland forests into short and tall forests. We found significant differences in drought resistance and resilience between short and tall forests, with tall forests demonstrating higher resistance and short forests having higher resilience. Furthermore, our study indicated that in severe and extreme drought conditions, resistance and resilience of short forests were more likely influenced by climatic factors than tall forests, which were more likely affected by soil factors. These findings suggest that climatic monitoring should be intensified for short forests, and post-drought management should be strengthened for tall forests to enhance their persistence under climate change.
Divergent rates of change between tree cover types in a tropical pastoral region			ContextForest cover change analyses have revealed net forest gain in many tropical regions. While most analyses have focused solely on forest cover, trees outside forests are vital components of landscape integrity. Quantifying regional-scale patterns of tree cover change, including non-forest trees, could benefit forest and landscape restoration (FLR) efforts.ObjectivesWe analyzed tree cover change in Southwestern Panama to quantify: (1) patterns of change from 1998 to 2014, (2) differences in rates of change between forest and non-forest classes, and (3) the relative importance of social-ecological predictors of tree cover change between classes.MethodsWe digitized tree cover classes, including dispersed trees, live fences, riparian forest, and forest, in very high resolution images from 1998 to 2014. We then applied hurdle models to relate social-ecological predictors to the probability and amount of tree cover gain.ResultsAll tree cover classes increased in extent, but gains were highly variable between classes. Non-forest tree cover accounted for 21% of tree cover gains, while riparian trees constituted 31% of forest cover gains. Drivers of tree cover change varied widely between classes, with opposite impacts of some social-ecological predictors on non-forest and forest cover.ConclusionsWe demonstrate that key drivers of forest cover change, including topography, road distance and historical forest cover, do not explain rates of non-forest tree cover change. Consequently, predictions from medium-resolution forest cover change analyses may not apply to finer-scale patterns of tree cover. We highlight the opportunity for FLR projects to target tree cover classes adapted to local social and ecological conditions.
Diverging land-use projections cause large variability in their impacts on ecosystems and related indicators for ecosystem services			Land-use models and integrated assessment models provide scenarios of land-use and land-cover (LULC) changes following pathways or storylines related to different socioeconomic and environmental developments. The large diversity of available scenario projections leads to a recognizable variability in impacts on land ecosystems and the levels of services provided. We evaluated 16 projections of future LULC until 2040 that reflected different assumptions regarding socioeconomic demands and modeling protocols. By using these LULC projections in a state-of-the-art dynamic global vegetation model, we simulated their effect on selected ecosystem service indicators related to ecosystem productivity and carbon sequestration potential, agricultural production and the water cycle. We found that although a common trend for agricultural expansion exists across the scenarios, where and how particular LULC changes are realized differs widely across models and scenarios. They are linked to model-specific considerations of some demands over others and their respective translation into LULC changes and also reflect the simplified or missing representation of processes related to land dynamics or other influencing factors (e.g., trade, climate change). As a result, some scenarios show questionable and possibly unrealistic features in their LULC allocations, including highly regionalized LULC changes with rates of conversion that are contrary to or exceed rates observed in the past. Across the diverging LULC projections, we identified positive global trends of net primary productivity (+10.2% +/- 1.4 %), vegetation carbon (+9.2% +/- 4.1 %), crop production (+31.2% +/- 12.2 %) and water runoff (+9.3% +/- 1.7 %), and a negative trend of soil and litter carbon stocks (-0.5% +/- 0.4 %). The variability in ecosystem service indicators across scenarios was especially high for vegetation carbon stocks and crop production. Regionally, variability was highest in tropical forest regions, especially at current forest boundaries, because of intense and strongly diverging LULC change projections in combination with high vegetation productivity dampening or amplifying the effects of climatic change. Our results emphasize that information on future changes in ecosystem functioning and the related ecosystem service indicators should be seen in light of the variability originating from diverging projections of LULC. This is necessary to allow for adequate policy support towards sustainable transformations.
Diversity of Medium- to Large-Sized Ground-Dwelling Mammals and Terrestrial Birds in Sarawak			While Borneo is a global biodiversity hotspot, its species-rich natural rainforests have been degraded and deforested in the past few decades by unsustainable shifting agriculture, commercial logging and the rapid development of industrial tree and oil palm plantations. Populations of some wildlife species have decreased drastically due to landscape changes, while other species may be adapting to the new mosaic landscape. To understand the current condition of biodiversity distribution in a heterogeneous landscape, it is necessary to develop a sustainable plan for various land uses in order to maintain the rich biodiversity and preserve ecosystem services for local communities. Camera trap surveys for medium- to large-sized ground-dwelling mammals and terrestrial birds were conducted in lowland areas of Sarawak that were under different management regimes: logging concessions, land used for shifting agriculture and oil palm plantations. Using the mean trapping rate as an abundance index, the wildlife population in logging concessions seems to have recovered 4 years after harvesting. The composition of endangered or medium-sized species in secondary forests around villages in lowland areas is low, but this habitat still remains favourable for major game species for local communities.
Do Lianas Cause Chronic Disturbance and Alter Successional Trajectories in Tropical Forests?			Growing evidence suggests that lianas (woody vines), when abundant, can substantially alter tropical forests by disrupting tree regeneration and thus impacting carbon sequestration and species diversity.  Because liana abundance and biomass are thought to increase with climate change, studies on the ecology of lianas and their role in tropical forests are now critical.  This research will test a series of interrelated hypotheses to determine whether lianas can set in motion a positive feedback process whereby tropical forests are driven toward permanently liana-altered structure, species composition, and reduced tree density, diversity, and biomass.  To test these hypotheses, the investigators will permanently tag, spatially map the location, measure the diameter, and identify lianas in a 50 ha plot of tropical forest on Barro Colorado Island, Panama, where nearly 250,000 trees have been studied for the past 25 years.  They will also conduct a separate, controlled liana removal experiment to gain a more mechanistic understanding of liana-tree interactions. The impact of lianas on tree dynamics and forest regeneration, and the question whether lianas can redirect tropical forest succession from tree-dominated to liana-dominated ecosystems, are of profound importance for the potential impact of global change on long-term tropical forest health and the maintenance of species diversity.  In addition to testing these questions directly, this research will also have broader impacts, including educational and international capacity building focusing on training undergraduate and graduate students from both the United States and Panama in tropical biology.
Do mangrove forest restoration or rehabilitation activities return biodiversity to pre-impact levels?			Background: Mangrove forest restoration and rehabilitation programs are increasingly undertaken to re-establish ecosystem services in the context of community-based biodiversity conservation. Restoration is returning a habitat to the most natural condition, whereas rehabilitation often focuses on optimising ecosystem services alongside biodiversity. With many different restoration and rehabilitation objectives and techniques existing, it is difficult to assess the general effectiveness of restoration and rehabilitation on biodiversity and ecosystem services. This systematic review protocol presents a methodology that will be used to assess the impacts of mangrove forest restoration and rehabilitation on biodiversity and provisioning ecosystem services in a global context.Methods: This review will assess studies that have undertaken biodiversity surveys of restored and rehabilitated mangrove forests by comparing them against suitable mature reference mangrove forests within the same region, or surveys prior to degradation of the forest. This review will investigate how the age and initial tree diversity of a restoration or rehabilitation activities determine the effectiveness of these initiatives. Taxa of commercial value to local communities will be assessed to identify whether rehabilitation for optimal ecosystem service provision is likely to conflict with the full restoration of mangrove forests.
Do national strategies under the UN biodiversity and climate conventions address agricultural commodity consumption as deforestation driver?			Forest conversion in the tropics is increasingly driven by global demand for agricultural forest-risk commodities such as soy, beef, palm oil and timber. In order to be effective, future forest conservation policies should include measures targeting both producers (the supply side) and consumers (the demand side) to address commodity-driven deforestation. Whereas the UN Conventions on Biodiversity (CBD) and Climate Change (UNFCCC) do not make reference to this driving factor, here we explore whether and how recent national strategies by member states to the Conventions acknowledge the role of agricultural commodities in tropical deforestation. A text analysis of 139 Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) to climate change mitigation and 132 National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans (NBSAPs) shows that the general trade-off between national development aspirations and forest conservation is commonly acknowledged. However, only few strategies link deforestation to commodity production and consumption, whereas most documents do not mention this topic. This lack of reference to a key driver of tropical deforestation limits the prospects of safeguarding tropical forests for biodiversity and climate change mitigation purposes as part of the two UN Conventions, and might jeopardise their overall effectiveness. These findings were complemented by a content analysis of INDCs, NBSAPs and REDD+ documents from eight case countries affected by commodity-driven deforestation. We investigated whether this driver is acknowledged in the national strategies, and which policy measures are suggested to address forest loss from agricultural commodities. We found that six case countries mention agricultural commodities as deforestation driver in their REDD+ documents, whereas the biodiversity and climate change strategies were silent on the topic. Policy measures targeting commodity production were suggested in four REDD+ strategies, ranging from incentive payments, sustainable agricultural practices and land-use planning to demand-side approaches such as certification and the promotion of sustainable lifestyles. One conclusion from this exercise is that UN member states seem not to consider climate and biodiversity national plans the adequate forum to discuss detailed forest conservation approaches. We argue that in order to increase effectiveness, strategies under the UN Conventions should take commodity-driven deforestation into account, through measures that address both the producer and the consumer side. © 2017 The Authors
Do selective logging and pine plantations in humid subtropical forests affect aboveground primary productivity as well as carbon and nutrients transfer to soil?			Land use changes due to forestry activities can alter forest carbon (C) sequestration capacity by modifying vegetation structure and ecosystem functioning. The main objective of this study was to analyze aboveground net primary productivity (aNPP), through stem growth and litterfall production, and their feedback on soil C and nutrient contents, within a humid subtropical region. Two main forestry activities in NE Argentina were studied: selectively logged forests and Pinus taeda (loblolly pine) plantations for wood production. Well-preserved native forests were used as a control to compare the effects of interventions on the original subtropical forests. Despite differences in tree density and aboveground biomass among forests and pine plantation stands, the aNPP and total annual litterfall were similar across all ecosystems. However, litterfall quality and soil N content were substantially lower in pine plantations compared to both native forests. The labile soil C fractions were higher in pine plantations than native forests while no differences were observed in recalcitrant humic fractions across ecosystems. Overall, the results of this study suggest that man-made intervention in the structure of forest ecosystems does not necessarily result in degradation of aboveground ecosystem processes but had an impact on belowground processes and stocks in pine plantations, which has important implications for forest management.
Do the impact of organic residues on soil quality extend beyond the deposition area under oil palm?			Recycling empty fruit bunches (EFBs) in mature oil palm stands usually consists in distributing them over a limited area representing 3%-10% of the plot. The impact of this practice on soil quality, including soil biodiversity, is not well known at the plot scale. We analysed soil physical, chemical, and biological variables. Five zones were defined around the palm tree to assess spatial heterogeneity due to plant cover and application of organic and inorganic fertilisers. Each zone was analysed separately. Our study revealed marked variations in mineral contents around the palm tree, ranging from deficiency to excess or nutrient imbalance in adjacent zones, particularly in available P and K, Mg and pH. Similar variations in macrofauna were observed both in the litter and the soil. Our results demonstrate that the changes caused by plant cover and applications of fertiliser are mainly limited in space, but that earthworm communities move as a function of variations in nutrient availability or stress associated with EFB deposition over time. The Amacher index, adapted to the soil nutrient status for oil palm, indicated that average mineral fertility at the plot scale was rather good. The average density of soil macrofauna and nematofauna was low compared to other tropical ecosystems, but reference data from Indonesia are lacking. Application of EFBs on the harvest path mainly improved the homogeneity of soil quality within the elementary plot around the palm. However these data did not show that recycling EFB stimulates soil fauna communities or carbon sequestration at the plot scale. (C) 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
Do tree plantations or cultivated fields have the same ability to maintain soil quality as natural forests?			Human activities, such as tree cutting and land-use change, have significantly altered the forests of Iran's Zagros Mountains. In plantation projects within these forests, maintaining soil structure and fertility is necessary for sustainable forest management. Ideally, the soil quality of tree plantations should be as good as that of natural forests. In this study, we investigated the long-term impact of land-use change, i.e. conversion of natural oak forest to tree plantations or cultivated fields, on soil quality (i.e., physicochemical, biological and biochemical soil properties) in the forests of the Zagros Mountains. We found that the conversion of natural oak forest to tree plantations (in this case Cupressus arizonica, Cedrus libani, Elaeagnus angustifolia, Quercus brantii (persica), Robinia pseudoacacia and Fraxinus rotundifolia) and agriculture caused declines in soil organic carbon content, especially in the cultivated fields where it fell by around 60%. Overall, the lowest contents of soil nutrients, except Cu, were measured in agricultural soils. Interestingly, the plantation of a non-native tree (Cedrus libani) sequestrated more atmospheric carbon and nitrogen than native Persian oak forests. The impact on soil biological activity remains unclear: the conversion of natural forests into cultivated fields reduced soil biological activity, while conversion from forest to tree plantations had little influence. Finally, the conversion of natural forest to tree plantations had less impact on soil properties than conversion to cultivated fields. In conclusion, to maintain soil fertility, forest managers should avoid forest conversion to agriculture. Moreover, we do not recommend plantation of Cupressus arizonica in the Zagros region for the purpose of carbon and nitrogen sequestration and the increase of soil productivity.
Does biochar improve all soil ecosystem services?			Biochar is considered to sequester C and deliver other soil ecosystem services, but an overview that synthesizes the current knowledge of biochar implications on all essential soil ecosystem services is difficult to find in the ample biochar literature. Most previous research and review articles on this topic focused on a single ecosystem service and did not integrate all essential soil ecosystem services. This overview paper (1) synthesizes the impacts of biochar on water and wind erosion, C sequestration, soil water, nutrient leaching, soil fertility, crop yields, and other soil ecosystem services based on published literature and (2) highlights remaining research areas. Literature indicates that, in addition to sequestering C, biochar can reduce N2O emissions, nitrate leaching, and runoff; increase soil microbial biomass, plant available water, and crop yields (particularly in tropical regions), and CO2 emissions; and have small or no effects on water and wind erosion. Biochar benefits can be in this order: C sequestration > N2O emissions > Nitrate leaching > Available water > Soil biology > Soil fertility > Crop yields > Runoff. However, literature also indicates that biochar does not always improve all ecosystem services. Its benefits depend on biochar feedstock, pyrolysis temperature, application rate, biochar properties, soil properties, climate, and other factors. For example, biochar can enhance crop yields more in degraded and low fertility soils than in highly fertile and fine-textured soils. Long-term (>3 years) field-scale studies under different soil types, management conditions, and climates are needed for a determination of optimum levels of application, comprehensive life-cycle analysis, and assessment of agronomic and environmental tradeoffs. Overall, biochar can improve most soil ecosystem services, but the extent of such improvement is highly dependent on biochar properties and soil and climatic conditions.
Does conservation agriculture deliver climate change mitigation through soil carbon sequestration in tropical agro-ecosystems?			Conservation agriculture (CA), comprising minimum soil disturbance, retention of crop residues and crop diversification, is widely promoted for reducing soil degradation and improving agricultural sustainability. It is also claimed to mitigate climate change through soil carbon sequestration: we conducted a meta-analysis of soil organic carbon (SOC) stock changes under CA practices in two tropical regions, the Indo-Gangetic Plains (IGP) and Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), to quantify this. In IGP annual increases in SOC stock compared to conventional practice were between 0.16 and 0.49 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1). In SSA increases were between 0.28 and 0.96 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1), but with much greater variation and a significant number of cases with no measurable increase. Most reported SOC stock increases under CA are overestimates because of errors introduced by inappropriate soil sampling methodology. SOC increases require careful interpretation to assess whether or not they represent genuine climate change mitigation as opposed to redistribution of organic C within the landscape or soil profile. In smallholder farming in tropical regions social and economic barriers can greatly limit adoption of CA, further decreasing realistic mitigation potential. Comparison with the decreases in greenhouse gas emissions possible through improved management of nitrogen (N) fertilizer in regions such as IGP where N use is already high, suggests that this is a more effective and sustainable means of mitigating climate change. However the mitigation potential, and other benefits, from crop diversification are frequently overlooked when considering CA and warrant greater attention. Increases in SOC concentration (as opposed to stock) in near-surface soil from CA cause improvements in soil physical conditions; these are expected to contribute to increased sustainability and climate change adaptation, though not necessarily leading to consistently increased crop yields. CA should be promoted on the basis of these factors and any climate change mitigation regarded as an additional benefit, not a major policy driver for its adoption. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Does REDD+ Complement Law Enforcement? Evaluating Impacts of an Incipient Initiative in Madre de Dios, Peru			Subnational initiatives to Reduce Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation and enhance carbon stocks (REDD+) have been implemented across the tropics over the last decade. Such initiatives are often embedded within pre-existing conservation policies, such as forest law enforcement, making it challenging to disentangle attributable impacts. In this article, we analyze a new REDD+ project implemented in Brazil nut concessions in the southeastern Peruvian Amazon. Public law enforcement to verify compliance with Peru's Forest Law was already ongoing and intensified locally during our study period. Thus, we combine longitudinal data from remote sensing and household surveys of 197 concessionaires in a before–after control-intervention (BACI) study design to: a) evaluate the project's impacts during the 2012–2018 period on deforestation, forest degradation, and the participants' wellbeing and b) assess how the law-enforcing field inspections may have complemented the project effects. Our results show that the REDD+ initiative had insignificant effects on deforestation and forest degradation, but confirm the curbing effects of the field inspection measures on forest loss. The non-significance of the REDD+ effects may reflect delays in cash incentive payments to enrolled concessionaires, lack of careful alignment of benefit provision with project participants, and limited enforcement of project conditionalities. Most REDD+ participants reported a reduced subjective wellbeing, which may reflect the frustrated expectations associated with project implementation. We discuss the implications of our results and outline lessons for similar tropical forest conservation initiatives. Copyright © 2022 Montoya-Zumaeta, Wunder, Rojas and Duchelle.
Does rice paddy management increase soil organic carbon in the warm temperate and tropical regions?			Enhancing soil organic carbon (SOC) storage in agricultural fields is an effective option for climate change mitigation and food security. In temperate regions, rice farming under paddy is known to increase SOC stock due mainly to the reduced decomposition caused by prolonged submerged conditions compared to the cropping practices under non-flooded conditions. It remains unclear, however, if and to what extent rice paddy management increases SOC storage in warmer climate regions where decomposition is much faster. We thus examined the factors controlling the SOC stock and the net change in SOC normalized to the duration under paddy (Delta SOC) at paddy fields in warm temperate (21 sites) and tropical climatic regions (11 sites) from peer-reviewed literature which was concentrated to Asia. Using collected data (e.g., SOC content, bulk density, mean annual temperature (MAT), precipitation, management duration, soil management, crop rotation), we evaluated predictor variables that account for Delta SOC variability (i.e., mean decrease accuracy) by random forest regression. The mean paddy duration for all data (n = 170) was 22 years. Average SOC stock and Delta SOC at 0-20 cm depth were 38 +/- 1.45SE Mg C ha(-1) and 0.34 +/- 0.04SE Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1), respectively, indicating that continuous paddy management had a positive effect on SOC storage in both climatic regions. SOC stock was two-fold higher and Delta SOC was four-fold higher in the warm temperate region compared to the tropical region (p < 0.05). The best predictor variables for Delta SOC were MAT followed by soil management and then paddy duration. While organic amendment including both straw and manure increased Delta SOC in both warm temperate and tropical paddies, we did not detect a positive effect of chemical fertilizer application alone or crop rotation type (e.g., rice-upland vs rice-rice). Despite high variability, Delta SOC in the warm temperate region significantly declined over time from 0.82 +/- 0.10 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1) (< 20 yrs) to 0.22 +/- 0.06 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1). While SOC stock was 50% lower, the tropical paddies showed no clear decline in Delta SOC up to 41 years (0.04-0.21 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1)). These results suggest that SOC accretion might have reached equilibrium after 20 years of paddy practice in the warm temperate region and, if so, Delta SOC is likely to diminish to zero in the near future. In tropical paddy fields, on the other hand, slow SOC build-up may continue for a longer term although the Delta SOC value itself is not high. While the current study showed the efficacy of paddy management on SOC build-up under the warmer climate regions, further study on the rate and qualitative changes is necessary to evaluate the trade-offs between soil fertility improvement (e.g., soil N build-up) and methane emission.
Does the Introduction of N2-Fixing Trees in Forest Plantations on Tropical Soils Ameliorate Low Fertility and Enhance Carbon Sequestration via Interactions Between Biota and Nutrient Availability? Case Studies From Central Africa and South America			Plant and/or crop growth rely on nutrient dynamics driven by specific soil biota in different environments. This mini-review aims to provide an overview of interactions between soil organisms, nutrient dynamics, and C sequestration. To this end, we investigated published results from three forest plantations (eucalyptus monocultures and mixed plantations with N-2-fixing acacia) on tropical nutrient-poor soils. One case study is located in Central Africa (Congolese coastal plains) and two others in South America (Southeastern Brazil). Overall, the studies showed that soil biota activity exerted positive effects on (i) C accretion, as both soil carbon and belowground and aboveground biomass are driven and enhanced by soil biota; and (ii) on nutrient dynamics and biogeochemical cycles in nutrient-poor soil of tropical ecosystems, which are boosted following C accumulation. On the other hand, the pedoclimatic environment may potentially impact soil functioning of mixed-species plantations through its influence on the composition and activity of bacterial communities. Regardless of the potential risk of acacia invasiveness, benefits such as pulp, fuelwood, electric pole and non-timber products supply, have been reported in Central Africa. We, therefore, conclude that including N-2 fixing trees in forestry plantations as reported in this mini-review helps strengthen the links between soil biota, nutrient and SOC dynamics in mixed-species plantations on tropical nutrient-poor soils.
Does the Process of Passive Forest Restoration Affect the Hydrophysical Attributes of the Soil Superficial Horizon?			There has been an increase in the area of secondary tropical forests in recent years due to forest restoration in degraded areas. Recent analyses suggest that the success of passive forest restoration is highly uncertain and needs to be better understood. This study aimed to investigate the behavior of saturated hydraulic conductivity (Ks) and some hydrophysical soil attributes between agricultural land uses, restored forests, and a degraded forest fragment. The areas evaluated are located in the municipality of Rio Claro, Sao Paulo, Brazil, under different types of land use: (i) two areas in the process of passive forest restoration: one of 18 and another of 42 years (NR18 and NR42); (ii) a degraded forest fragment (FFD); (iii) pasture (P), and (iv) sugarcane (SC). The hydraulic soil conductivity characterization was performed using the Beerkan method. Dry soil bulk density (BD), total porosity (Pt), macroporosity (Mac), microporosity (Mic), penetration resistance (PR), mean aggregate diameter (MWD), and soil organic carbon (OC) were also determined. The comparative analysis of the hydrophysical attributes of the soil superficial horizon in agricultural land uses (P and SC), restored forests (NR18 and NR42), and a degraded forest (DFF) confirms that the recovery of soil hydrological functioning in ongoing forest restoration processes can be a relatively slow process. In addition, the intensity of previous land use leaves footprints that can affect passive restoration areas for decades after agriculture abandonment, increasing the time for the recovery ofKsand soil hydrophysical attributes.
Does tree species composition affect soil CO2 emission and soil organic carbon storage in plantations?			Mixed tree plantations are potential silvicultural systems to increase soil carbon storage through altering litter and root inputs and soil physiochemical properties.Afforestation and reforestation are major strategies for global climate change mitigation. Different tree species composition can induce diverse changes in soil CO2 emission and soil carbon sequestration in tree plantation. This study employed three plantations of monoculture and mixed Pinus yunnanensis and Eucalyptus globulus to estimate the effect of tree species composition on soil CO2 emission and soil organic carbon storage in subtropical China. We found that tree species composition had a significant effect on the soil CO2 emission and soil organic carbon storage. Soil CO2 emission was lower in the mixed plantation than in the P. yunnanensis plantation, whereas it was higher than in the E. globulus plantation. Differences in soil CO2 emission among the three plantations were determined by leaf litterfall mass, fine root biomass, soil available nitrogen, pH, soil bulk density, and soil C:N ratio. Soil organic carbon storage was 34.5 and 23.2 % higher in the mixed plantation than in the P. yunnanensis and E. globulus plantations, respectively. Higher soil organic carbon stock in the mixed plantation was attributed to lower C/N ratio of leaf litter and soil, greater fine root biomass and soil organic carbon content, and lower soil CO2 emission. We conclude that mixed tree plantation can enhance soil carbon sequestration, but can decrease or increase soil CO2 emission through altering litter and root inputs and soil physiochemical properties.
Domestic forests: A new paradigm for integrating local communities' forestry into tropical forest science			Despite a long history of confrontation between forest agencies and forest people, "indigenous" or "local" practices are increasingly considered as a viable alternative of forest management. This paper is a synthesis derived from various long-term research programs carried out by the authors in Southeast Asia and Africa on forests managed by farmers. These researches looked at local practices and underlying science, including their social, political, and symbolic dimensions. They also addressed evolutionary trends and driving forces, as well as potential and limits for forest conservation and development, mitigation of deforestation, biodiversity conservation, and poverty alleviation in a context of global environmental, political, and social change. We discuss how forest management by local communities, contrary to the unified models of professional forest management, exhibits a high historical and geographical diversity. The analysis we draw from the various examples we studied reveals several invariants, which allows proposing the unifying paradigm of "domestic forest." The first universal feature concerns the local managers themselves, who are, in their vast majority, farmers. Management practices range from local interventions in the forest ecosystem, to more intensive types of forest culture, and ultimately to permanent forest plantation. But in all cases, forest management is closely integrated with agriculture. The second universal feature concerns the conceptual continuity of planted forests with the natural forest, in matters of vegetation's structure and composition as well as economic traits and ecosystem services. The resulting forest is uneven-aged, composed of several strata, harboring a large diversity of species, and producing a wide range of products, with timber seldom being the dominant one. The term "domestic forest" aims at highlighting the close relationship the domestication process establishes between a specific human group, including its elementary units, the "domestic units," and the forest, transformed and managed to fulfill the needs of that group. The domestic forest paradigm calls for the integration into forest science of a new concept of land management in which production and conservation are compatible, and in which there is no choice to be made between people and nature. It does not aim at contesting the value of conventional forest science, but it proposes domestic forests as a new scientific domain, for the combined benefit of forest science and of forest people. It does not contest the value of conventional forest management models, but pushes towards more equitable relations between forest agencies and farmers managing forest resources on their own lands. Copyright © 2007 by the author(s).
Drawing on traditional knowledge to identify and describe ecosystem services associated with Northern Amazon's multiple-use plants			Tropical multiple-use plants provide an array of ecosystem services, including providing food for wildlife, non-timber forest products (NTFPs) and commercial logs. As land-use and land-cover change (LUCC) continues in tropical forests, questions on whether the ecosystem services they provide can be sustained become more pressing. As particular species of plants are targeted for provisioning services, such as commercial logging, the implications for other ecosystem services are often unknown. In this paper we drew on the traditional knowledge of the Makushi and Wapishiana Amerindians of Southern Guyana, and multiple-use plants to gauge the ecosystem services that may be compromised as tropical forests undergo change. An inventory of tree and palm species was classified into one or more of four resource-use classes: commercial timber, wildlife food, traditional uses or no known use. Species that intersected more than one resource use were defined as multiple-use species, and occupied four primary classes - wildlife food/commercial timber, commercial timber/traditional uses, wildlife food/traditional uses and wildlife food/commercial timber/traditional uses. Traditional knowledge allowed us to identify plant species and describe how they are used for provisioning, cultural and supporting ecosystem services and shaping our understanding of the multiple dimensions of ecosystem services associated with a single species.
Drivers of community assembly in tropical forest restoration sites: role of local environment, landscape, and space			There is increasing recognition that community assembly theory can offer valuable insights for ecological restoration. We studied community assembly processes following tropical forest restoration efforts, using dung beetles (Scarabaeinae) as a focal taxon to investigate taxonomic and functional patterns of biodiversity recovery. We evaluated the relative importance of the local environment (i.e., canopy cover, understory cover, tree basal area, and soil texture), landscape context (i.e., habitat patch proximity and availability and percentage of surrounding area classified as natural forest or Eucalyptus spp. plantation), and space (i.e., spatial proximity of the study areas to estimate dispersal limitation or unmeasured spatially structured processes) on dung beetle species and functional trait composition across a gradient of 15 restoration sites in Brazilian Atlantic Forest. We also assessed which factors were the primary determinants in the establishment of individual dung beetle functional groups, classified according to size, food relocation habit, diet, and period of flight activity. Both species and functional trait composition were most strongly influenced by the local environment, indicating that assembly was predominantly driven by niche-based processes. Most of the variation explained by space was co-explained by local environment and landscape context, ruling out a strong influence of dispersal limitation and random colonization on assembly following restoration. In addition, nearly all of the variance explained by landscape context was co-explained by local environment, suggesting that arrival and establishment at a site depends on both local and landscape-scale environmental factors. Despite strong evidence for niche-based assembly, a large amount of variation remained unexplained in all models, suggesting that stochastic processes and/or unmeasured environmental variables also play an important role. The relative importance of local environment, landscape context, and space changed considerably when analyzing the assembly mechanisms of each functional group separately. Therefore, to recover distinct functional traits in restoration sites, it may be necessary to manipulate different components of the local environment and surrounding landscape. Overall, this study shows that assembly rules can help to better understand recovery processes, enabling improvement of future restoration efforts.
Drivers of soil organic carbon stock during tropical forest succession			Soil organic matter contributes to productivity in terrestrial ecosystems and contains more carbon than is found in the atmosphere. Yet, there is little understanding of soil organic carbon (SOC) sequestration processes during tropical forest succession, particularly after land abandonment from agriculture practices.Here, we used vegetation and environmental data from two large-scale surveys covering a total landscape area of 20,000 ha in Southeast Asia to investigate the effects of plant species diversity, functional trait diversity, phylogenetic diversity, above-ground biomass and environmental factors on SOC sequestration during forest succession.We found that functional trait diversity plays an important role in determining SOC sequestration across successional trajectories. Increases in SOC carbon storage were associated with indirect positive effects of species diversity and succession age via functional trait diversity, but phylogenetic diversity and above-ground biomass showed no significant relationship with SOC stock. Furthermore, the effects of soil properties and functional trait diversity on SOC carbon storage shift across elevation.Synthesis. Our results suggest that reforestation and restoration management practices that implement a trait-based approach by combining long-lived and short-lived species (conservative and acquisitive traits) to increase plant functional diversity could enhance SOC sequestration for climate change mitigation and adaptation efforts, as well as accelerate recovery of healthy soils.
Drivers, constraints and trade-offs associated with recultivating abandoned cropland in Russia, Ukraine and Kazakhstan			Further cropland expansion might be unavoidable to satisfy the growing demand for land-based products and ecosystem services. A crucial issue is thus to assess the trade-offs between social and ecological impacts and the benefits of converting additional land to cropland. In the former Soviet Union countries, where the transition from state-command to market-driven economies resulted in widespread agricultural land abandonment, cropland expansion may incur relatively low costs, especially compared with tropical regions.Our objectives were to quantify the drivers, constraints and trade-offs associated with recultivating abandoned cropland to assess the potentially available cropland in European Russia, western Siberia, Ukraine and Kazakhstan the region where the vast majority of post-Soviet cropland abandonment took place. Using spatial panel regressions, we characterized the socio-economic determinants of cropland abandonment and recultivation. We then used recent maps of changes in cropland to (i) spatially characterize the socio-economic, accessibility and soil constraints associated with the recultivation of abandoned croplands and (ii) investigate the environmental trade-offs regarding carbon stocks and habitat for biodiversity.Less cropland abandonment and more recultivation after 2000 occurred in areas with an increasing rural population and a younger labor force, but also improved yields. Synergies were observed between cropland recultivation and intensification over the 2000s. From 47.3 million hectares (Mha) of cropland abandoned in 2009, we identified only 8.5 (7.1-17.4) Mha of potentially available cropland with low environmental trade-offs and low to moderate socio-economic or accessibility constraints that were located on high-quality soils (Chernozems). These areas represented an annual wheat production potential of similar to 14.3 (9.6-19.5) million tons (Mt). Conversely, 8.5 (4.2-12.4) Mha had high carbon or biodiversity trade-offs, of which similar to 10% might be attractive for cropland expansion and thus would require protection from recultivation. Agro-environmental, accessibility, and socio-economic constraints suggested that the remaining 30.6 (25.7-30.6) Mha of abandoned croplands were unlikely to provide important contributions to future crop production at current wheat prices but could provide various ecosystem services, and some could support extensive livestock production. Political and institutional support could foster recultivation by supporting investments in agriculture and rural demographic revitalization. Reclaiming potentially available cropland in the study region could provide a notable contribution to global grain production, with relatively low environmental trade-offs compared with tropical frontiers, but is not a panacea to address global issues of food security or reduce land-use pressure on tropical ecosystems. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Drought stress and carbon uptake in an Amazon forest measured with spaceborne imaging spectroscopy			Amazonia contains vast stores of carbon in high-diversity ecosystems, yet this region undergoes major changes in precipitation affecting land use, carbon dynamics, and climate. The extent and structural complexity of Amazon forests impedes ground studies of ecosystem functions such as net primary production (NPP), water cycling, and carbon sequestration. Traditional modeling and remote-sensing approaches are not well suited to tropical forest studies, because (i) biophysical mechanisms determining drought effects on canopy water and carbon dynamics are poorly known, and (ii) remote-sensing metrics of canopy greenness may be insensitive to small changes in leaf area accompanying drought. New spaceborne imaging spectroscopy may detect drought stress in tropical forests, helping to monitor forest physiology and constrain carbon models. We combined a forest drought experiment in Amazonia with spaceborne imaging spectrometer measurements of this area. With field data on rainfall, soil water, and leaf and canopy responses, we tested whether spaceborne hyperspectral observations quantify differences in canopy water and NIPP resulting from drought stress. We found that hyperspectral metrics of canopy water content and light-use efficiency are highly sensitive to drought. Using these observations, forest NIPP was estimated with greater sensitivity to drought conditions than with traditional combinations of modeling, remote-sensing, and field measurements. Spaceborne imaging spectroscopy will increase the accuracy of ecological studies in humid tropical forests.
Dung beetles as hydrological engineers: effects of tunnelling on soil infiltration			1. Soil infiltration capacity determines the partitioning of precipitation into infiltration and overland flow and is therefore an important soil hydrological characteristic. Water infiltration through soil is facilitated by macropores created by roots and soil macrofauna. In clay-rich soils, such as those of the tropical forests of Sabah, Malaysian Borneo, most infiltration occurs via these preferential flow pathways. 2. We evaluated the effects of dung beetle tunnelling on infiltration and macropore creation (depth and width of the flow pathways) in tropical forest soils in Sabah. Using mesocosms, we applied three treatments (i) soil-only, (ii) dung-only, (iii) dung + dung beetles, and measured saturated hydraulic conductivity (i.e., the steady-state infiltration rate) after 0, 5 and 10 days, and assessed depth and width of infiltration pathways by applying a blue dye tracer. 3. The steady-state infiltration rate increased in the presence of dung beetles, though differences among treatments were only statistically significant after 10 days. After 5 days of dung beetle presence, infiltrated water had reached a greater depth than the control mesocosms without beetles. However, there were no differences in the width of infiltration pathways among treatments. 4. These results reveal the important, but under studied roles of dung beetles on soil hydrological functioning, that may have consequences for nutrient cycling and plant productivity. Further, our findings indicate that the novel application of an established hydrological method-blue dye tracer-can provide interesting and reliable results for macrofauna-soil interaction studies.
Dung beetles as indicators of tropical forest restoration success: Is it possible to recover species and functional diversity?			Tropical forest restoration is becoming increasingly more applied to offset biodiversity loss and maintain ecosystem processes, but knowledge about its efficacy is still limited. We evaluated the success of tropical forest active restoration using dung beetles (Coleoptera: Scarabaeinae) as bioindicators and combining measures of species diversity, composition and functional diversity. We assessed patterns of dung beetles community assembly along a restoration chronosequence and also compared restoration areas with reference (primary and old secondary forest) and degraded (pasture) ecosystems. Species composition in the restoration areas was clearly progressing towards the preserved forests and deviating from the pasture with increasing restoration age. We also found a turnover of open environment specialists and habitat generalists to forest generalists and forest specialist species along the restoration chronosequence. However, the majority of individuals in the older restored habitats were typically forest generalists. Biomass was the only variable that increased with restoration age. Species richness, number of individuals, biomass and functional richness in the restored areas were similar to, or even smaller, than in pastures and substantially lower than forest reference sites. Rarefied richness, functional evenness and functional dispersion did not vary between the habitats. We found that while restored areas have the capacity to host forest-restricted species, 18 years since active restoration has not been long enough to recover a stable and diverse dung beetle assemblage. Our study also demonstrates that measures of composition, species diversity and functional diversity can complement each other and contribute to a better understanding of the efficacy of restoration practices. (C) 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Dynamics of ecosystem services provided by subtropical forests in Southeast China during succession as measured by donor and receiver value			The trends in the provision of ecosystem services during restoration and succession of subtropical forests and plantations were quantified, in terms of both receiver and donor values, based on a case study of a 3-step secondary succession series that included a 400-year-old subtropical forest and a 23-year history of growth on 3 subtropical forest plantations in Southeastern China. The 'People's Republic of China Forestry Standard: Forest Ecosystem Service Valuation Norms' was revised and applied to quantify the receiver values of ecosystem services, which were then compared with the emergy-based, donor values of the services. The results revealed that the efficiencies of subtropical forests and plantations in providing ecosystem services were 2 orders of magnitude higher than similar services provided by the current China economic system, and these efficiencies kept increasing over the course of succession. As a result, we conclude that afforestation is an efficient way to accelerate both the ability and efficiency of subtropical forests to provide ecosystem services.
Dynamics of land use land cover and its impact on carbon stocks in Sub-Saharan Africa: an overview			Land use land cover change (LULCC) is a global environmental trend that plays a key role in worldwide environmental change and sustainable development. Substantial disturbance resulting from natural and anthropogenic activities has been witnessed in sub-Sahara Africa (SSA) over the last four decades, which is mostly due to the increasing population being experienced in Africa. One-third of emitted greenhouse gases (GHG) are attributable to LULCC and agricultural activities most especially deforestation. Soil carbon sequestration has been considered as a possible strategy to counterbalance carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and mitigate global climate change, driven by rising concentrations of GHG in the atmosphere and global increase in temperature. The role of tropical Africa's forests in mitigating climate change has been widely acknowledged under the global treaties' Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD) initiatives. More than two-thirds of the SSA population rely on forests and woodlands for their livelihoods. Despite the importance of forests, Sub-Saharan Africa, and even the entire African continent, is experiencing an acceleration in deforestation, leading to diminished ecosystem resilience. Subsistence and commercial agriculture accounted for 10% of total forest land loss in Africa (approximately 75 million ha) between 1990 and 2010. As a result, agricultural expansion alone accounts for 70-80% of Africa's total forest loss. The challenges of implementing a policy to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, and foster conservation, sustainable management of forests, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks (REDD +) in the SSA includes interactions between a number of anthropogenic-induced factors and challenges. These factors, which are of various types (economic, institutional, etc.), cause loss of forest and forest degradation; and the challenges arising from finance, institutional and technical expertise hinder the appropriate design and implementation of national forest monitoring schemes. These challenges must be adequately addressed in order to accurately quantify the carbon budgets and implement an appropriate forest and carbon monitoring system for REDD + in SSA. Therefore, in meeting the REDD + initiatives in SSA, integrated land use management approach that enhances soil carbon sequestration potential should be given considerable systematic and scientific attention. In addition, political, socioeconomic and institutional factors that hinder sustainable forest management and land use system management must be addressed collectively.
Dynamics of soil aggregate-associated organic carbon based on diversity and high biomass-C input under conservation agriculture in a savanna ecosystem in Cambodia			No-till (NT) cropping systems have the potential to enhance soil aggregation, providing physical protection and soil C sequestration. The existence of discrepancies in the impact of tillage on soil aggregation and soil C sequestration warrants further studies, particularly for different crop rotations. We hypothesized the following: a) NT biannual crop rotations tend to be more effective in restoring large macroaggregation and the concentrations of soil organic C (SOC), total N and permanganate oxidizable C (POXC) associated with macroaggregates than NT systems with a one-year frequency pattern and conventional tillage (CT); b) the continuous biomass-C inputs via crop residues in large macroaggregates under NT tend to increase the proportion of aliphatic C than those under CT. Therefore, the objectives of this study were: (i) to assess changes in the aggregate size distribution and levels of aggregate-associated total SOC, total N and POXC and (ii) to characterize humic acid (HA) using C-13 CP-MAS nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra of 8- to 19-mm soil aggregate size class in a reference vegetation (RV) and in rice-, soybean- and cassava-based cropping systems (RcCS, SbCS and CsCS, respectively) in a clayed Oxisol after tillage and crop rotation management. We evaluated four treatments in each cropping system: 1) CT, and 2) three NT systems in a randomized complete block design with three replicates. Soil aggregate samples were collected at depths of 0-5, 5-10 and 10-20 cm. The conversion of RV to agricultural land influenced the distribution of aggregate size classes, soil aggregation indices and aggregate-associated SOC, total N and POXC in the two surface layers. The formation of large macroaggregates (8-19 mm) dominated the aggregate size distribution with a relatively higher proportion under RV and NT than under CT. Across all soil depths, the proportions of the 8- to 19-mm aggregate size fraction were 59% (NV), 43% and 47% (RcCS), 45% and 53% (SbCS) and 34% and 37% (CsCS) for the CT and NT systems, respectively. Among the three NT systems, the biannual crop rotations in the three cropping systems (NT2-Rice, NT2-Soybean, NT2-Cassava; NT3-Rice, NT3-Soybean and NT3-Cassava) indicated better performance than the one-year frequency pattern in restoring large macroaggregation and the concentrations of SOC, total N and POXC associated with large macroaggregates. Additionally, in the surface (0-5 cm) and subsurface (10-20 cm) soil layers, the SbCS with a high rate (7.32 Mg C ha(-1) year(-1)) and diversity [Pennisetum typhoides) (Pearl millet)/maize + Brachiaria ruziziensis (Brz), Stylosanthes guianensis (St)] of biomass-C inputs reached the highest levels of lability of SOC and POXC in the macroaggregate size classes of 0.25-0.5 and 8-19 mm, respectively. The CP-MAS C-13 NMR measurement suggests that the continuous and high biomass-C inputs with diverse crop residues under NT, such as millet, maize, Brz, St and Crotalaria juncea, tended to increase the proportion of aliphatic C than under CT; an opposite trend was observed for aromatic C. C-13 NMR revealed an advance caused by the association between the quantity and quality of C addition via cultural residues in the discrimination of the composition of C in the macroaggregation in the tropical region.
Dynamics of soil aggregation and organic carbon fractions over 23 years of no-till management			Evaluation of aggregate formation in no-till farming systems and the effects on soil organic matter can provide relevant insights into soil carbon storage, nutrient cycling, and soil susceptibility to erosion. However, there is little information on the soil aggregate formation pathways in no-till systems. This study aimed to investigate the effect of no-tillage duration on soil aggregates and soil organic matter compared with undisturbed soil in the rainy and dry season. The following experimental sites were analyzed: NT2 (no-till management for 7 years), NT14 (no-till management for 14 years), NT23 (no-till management for 23 years) and AF, a preserved fragment of Atlantic Forest (reference area). Aggregate formation pathway was analysed/described according to the morphological pattern using a stereo microscope (LEICA M125), in magnification ranges between 20x and 40 x. Physical fractionation of organic matter was carried out by granulometric size separation, and humic substances were separated into humic acid, fulvic acid, and humin fractions by differential solubility. No-till management affected the dynamics of soil aggregation and organic matter fractions. In the long term, no-till farming reduced biological aggregation (52.5 +/- 4.5 % in AF to 19.2 +/- 3.1 % in NT23), and increased physicochemical aggregation (21,2 +/- 2.1 % in AF to 47.2 +/- 5.1 % in NT23), may be because the traffic-induced compaction resulting from seeding. However, over the years, no-till farming increased soil particulate organic carbon (POC), mineral-associated organic matter (MAOM) and humin contents because of the constant input of crop residues to surface layers. Our results suggest that the morphological classification analysis of soil aggregates was sensitive to changes in land use over time, consisting as an indicator practical, affordable, repeatable, and easily understood and interpreted, which may be used to ascertain changes in physical soil conditions.
Dynamics of soil carbon following destruction of tropical rainforest and the subsequent establishment of Imperata grassland in Indonesian Borneo using stable carbon isotopes			Southeast Asia has the highest rate of tropical rainforest deforestation worldwide, and large deforested areas have been replaced ultimately by the highly invasive grass Imperata cylindrica. However, information on the carbon (C) budget with such land transition is very scarce. This study presents the dynamics of soil C following rainforest destruction and the subsequent establishment of Imperata grassland in the lowland humid tropics of Indonesian Borneo using stable C isotopes. To evaluate the relative contribution of organic matter originating from primary forest (C 3) and grasslands (C 4), we compared soil C stock and natural 13C abundance from six sites to a depth of 100 cm using samples with a wide range of soil textures. Twelve years after the first soil sampling in the grasslands, we re-sampled to examine temporal changes in soil organic matter. The grassland topsoil (0-5 cm) is an active layer with rapid decomposition and incorporation of fresh C (mean residence time: 7.5 year) and a substantial proportion of the stable C pool (37%). The decline in forest-derived C was slight, even at 5-10 cm depths, and subsoil (20-100 cm depth) forest-derived C did not change along the forest-to-grassland chronosequence. Grassland-derived C stock increased significantly in the subsurface and subsoils (5-100 cm). Simulation indicated that total soil C stock (0-100 cm) increased by 18.6 Mg ha -1 from initial primary forest (58.0 Mg ha -1) to a new equilibrium state of the grassland (76.6 Mg ha -1) after 30-50 years of grassland establishment. This research indicates that the soil did not function as a CO 2 source when the deforested area was replaced by Imperata grassland on the Ultisols of the Asian humid tropics. Instead, increased soil C stocks offset CO 2 emissions, with the C offset accounting for 6.6-7.4% of the loss of biomass C stock. © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Early REDD plus Implementation: The Journey of an Indigenous Community in Eastern Panama			Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) offers developing countries an opportunity to engage in global climate change mitigation through the sale of carbon credits for reforestation, avoided deforestation and forest conservation projects. Funding for REDD+ projects has increased in recent years and REDD+ projects have proliferated, but relatively few studies have, as yet, examined their implementation. Here, we present a synthesis of the challenges and lessons learned while implementing a REDD+ project in an Embera community in Panama. Our case study, documented in four cycles of collaborative action research over 11 years, examines how local communities sought to reduce emissions from deforestation and benefit from carbon offset trading while improving local livelihoods. Through semi-structured interviews and participatory methods, we found that success with REDD+ hinges on broader issues than those widely discussed in the literature and in policy circles. Though economic incentives for participants and the equitable distribution of benefits remain important to project participants, our study finds that, in adapting REDD+ strategies to best suit community needs, the role of a support system for implementation ("bridging institutions") and REDD+'s potential as a conflict resolution mechanism for tenure issues deserve more attention as key factors that contribute to meaningful participation in REDD+.
Earthworms and litter management contributions to ecosystem services in a tropical agroforestry system			The development of sustainable agricultural systems depends in part upon improved management of non-crop species to enhance the overall functioning and provision of services by agroecosystems. To address this need, our research examined the role of earthworms and litter management on nutrient dynamics, soil organic matter (SOM) stabilization, and crop growth in the Quesungual agroforestry system of western Honduras. Field mesocosms were established with two earthworm treatments (0 vs. 8 Pontoscolex corethrurus individuals per mesocosm) and four litter quality treatments: (1) low-quality Zea mays, (2) high-quality Diphysa robinioides, (3) a mixture of low-and high-quality litters, and (4) a control with no organic residues applied. Mesocosms included a single Z. mays plant and additions of N-15-labeled inorganic nitrogen. At maize harvest, surface soils (0-15 cm) in the mesocosms were sampled to determine total and available P as well as the distribution of C, N, and N-15 among different aggregate-associated SOM pools. Maize plants were divided into grain and non-grain components and analyzed for total P, N, and N-15. Earthworm additions improved soil structure as demonstrated by a 10% increase in mean weight diameter and higher C and N storage within large macro-aggregates (>2000 mu m). A corresponding 17% increase in C contained in micro-aggregates within the macro-aggregates indicates that earthworms enhance the stabilization of SOM in these soils; however, this effect only occurred when organic residues were applied. Earthworms also decreased available P and total soil P, indicating that earthworms may facilitate the loss of labile P added to this system. Earthworms decreased the recovery of fertilizer-derived N in the soil but increased the uptake of N-15 by maize by 7%. Litter treatments yielded minimal effects on soil properties and plant growth. Our results indicate that the application of litter inputs and proper management of earthworm populations can have important implications for the provision of ecosystem services (e.g., C sequestration, soil fertility, and plant production) by tropical agroforestry systems.
Ecoagricultural landscapes in the dieng mountains of central Java; A study of their evolution and dynamics			Arable lands and biodiversity hotspots overlap in many places, resulting in conflicts between actors involved in agricultural development and those promoting biodiversity conservation. In Java, high population density complexifies these conflicts. The challenge for local agricultural systems is to provide for adequate means to meet the food needs of the increasing population while the intensifying urbanization exerts pressure on agrosystems and the remaining natural ecosystems. In this context, this article seeks to evaluate to which extent rural communities and natural biodiversity can cohabit harmoniously within Javanese landscapes. To this end, interviews were conducted with farmers living within three different landscapes located in the Dieng Mountains of Central Java. Visual assessments of the agricultural environment were also carried out. The ecoagriculture approach framework, which integrates the objectives of agricultural development, biodiversity conservation and social development while promoting appropriate governance, was used for the analysis.All three landscapes exhibit somewhat harmonious relationships between communities, agricultural systems and the surrounding ecosystems, but to different extends. Vegetable crops are relatively beneficial as a result of their high market value and their nutritional qualifies, but they also generate more agricultural pollution when compared to agroforestry systems. These latter provide substantial incomes, require less care and help preserve several essential ecosystem services. However, the institutional capacity sustaining the three studied landscapes is considerably defective and represents their main handicap. Even though this case study is specific to Java, it represents a key example of the evolution of ecoagricultural landscapes in a context of high population density. Indeed, the study shows that natural and semi-natural areas responsible for essential ecosystem services can thrive in tropical regions with very high population density. This study also shows that Javanese ecoagricultural landscapes can still act as a sanctuary for the island's remaining biodiversity, and outside of officially protected areas and of the conflicts that they can generate. Finally, the study shows that agriculture remains a highly important security net for Javanese rural households, and even in a time when the income of these households is becoming more and more diversified. But the fate of the studied landscapes remains uncertain in a globalizing world facing an environmental crisis. Closer collaboration between governmental institutions and local communities might be necessary to insure the preservation of such landscapes.
Ecological agriculture in the Torres region of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil: Tradeoffs or synergies?			0
Ecological and Environmental Aspects of Nutrient Cycling in the Atlantic Forest, Brazil			In developing countries, where population growth is on the rise, intense anthropogenic actions in natural forests are observed usually in the form of burnings and shallow cuts. With aiming to deploy crops or even promote irrational exploitation of forest products. In this context, preservation of natural forests (tropical and subtropical forests) depends on the knowledge of their dynamics. This information is important to allow exploration of natural forests sustainably or to subsidize conservation actions. In planted and native forests, the biogeochemical cycling of nutrients predominantly occurs through production and decomposition of litterfall. The information provided in this chapter, in particular with regard to nutrient cycling, is an important basis for understanding the structure and dynamics of nutrients in the ecosystem. We characterized nutrient stocks and elucidate some aspects of forest growth and productivity. This information is important to enhance biodiversity conservation and generate ecosystem goods and services in the Atlantic Forest Biome. Even with the intense change of land use (from forest to agricultural, pasture and urbanization), the region has high diversity of endemic species, and is considered a priority area for biodiversity conservation.
Ecological and social drivers of coffee pollination in Santander, Colombia			Bees and other insects provide pollination services that are key to determining the fruit set on coffee plantations. These pollination services are influenced by local ecology as well as human factors, both social and economic. To better understand these different factors, we assessed their effect on pollinators and coffee pollination services in Santander, Colombia. We quantified the effect of key ecological drivers on pollinator community composition, such as the method of farm management (either conventional or organic) and the surrounding landscape composition, specifically the proximity to forest.We found that ambient levels of pollination services provided by the local pollinator fauna (open pollination) accounted for a 10.5 +/- 2.0% increase in final coffee fruit set, and that the various pollinators are affected differently by the differing factors. For example, our findings indicate that conventional farm management, using synthetic inputs, can promote pollinators, especially if they are in close proximity to natural forest fragments. This is particularly true for stingless bees. Honeybee visitation to coffee is also positively influenced by the conventional management of farms. Factors associated with greater numbers of stingless bees on farms include greater shade cover, lower tree densities, smaller numbers and types of trees in bloom, and younger coffee plantations. A forested landscape close to farms appears to enhance these factors, giving increased stability and resilience to the pollinating bees and insects. However we found that organic farms also support diverse pollinator communities, even if distant from forest fragments.The contribution of honeybees to pollination value (US$129.6/ha of coffee) is greater than that of stingless bees (US$16.5/ha of coffee). Since the method of farm management has a major impact on the numbers and types of pollinators attracted to farms, we have analysed the statistically significant social factors that influence farmers' decisions on whether to adopt organic or conventional practices. These include the availability of technology, the type of landowner (whether married couples or individual owners), the number of years of farmers' formal education, the role of institutions, membership of community organizations, farm size, coffee productivity and the number of coffee plots per farm. It is hoped that the use of our holistic approach, which combines investigation of the social as well as the ecological drivers of pollination, will help provide evidence to underpin the development of best practices for integrating the management of pollination into sustainable agricultural practices. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Ecological and socio-economic functions across tropical land use systems after rainforest conversion			Tropical lowland rainforests are increasingly threatened by the expansion of agriculture and the extraction of natural resources. In Jambi Province, Indonesia, the interdisciplinary EFForTS project focuses on the ecological and socio-economic dimensions of rainforest conversion to jungle rubber agroforests and monoculture plantations of rubber and oil palm. Our data confirm that rainforest transformation and land use intensification lead to substantial losses in biodiversity and related ecosystem functions, such as decreased above-and below-ground carbon stocks. Owing to rapid step-wise transformation from forests to agroforests to monoculture plantations and renewal of each plantation type every few decades, the converted land use systems are continuously dynamic, thus hampering the adaptation of animal and plant communities. On the other hand, agricultural rainforest transformation systems provide increased income and access to education, especially for migrant smallholders. Jungle rubber and rubber monocultures are associated with higher financial land productivity but lower financial labour productivity compared to oil palm, which influences crop choice: smallholders that are labour-scarce would prefer oil palm while land-scarce smallholders would prefer rubber. Collecting long-term data in an interdisciplinary context enables us to provide decision-makers and stakeholders with scientific insights to facilitate the reconciliation between economic interests and ecological sustainability in tropical agricultural landscapes. © 2016 The Authors.
Ecological consequences of forest elephant declines for Afrotropical forests			Poaching is rapidly extirpating African forest elephants (Loxodonta cyclotis) from most of their historical range, leaving vast areas of elephant-free tropical forest. Elephants are ecological engineers that create and maintain forest habitat; thus, their loss will have large consequences for the composition and structure of Afrotropical forests. Through a comprehensive literature review, we evaluated the roles of forest elephants in seed dispersal, nutrient recycling, and herbivory and physical damage to predict the cascading ecological effects of their population declines. Loss of seed dispersal by elephants will favor tree species dispersed abiotically and by smaller dispersal agents, and tree species composition will depend on the downstream effects of changes in elephant nutrient cycling and browsing. Loss of trampling and herbivory of seedlings and saplings will result in high tree density with release from browsing pressures. Diminished seed dispersal by elephants and high stem density are likely to reduce the recruitment of large trees and thus increase homogeneity of forest structure and decrease carbon stocks. The loss of ecological services by forest elephants likely means Central African forests will be more like Neotropical forests, from which megafauna were extirpated thousands of years ago. Without intervention, as much as 96% of Central African forests will have modified species composition and structure as elephants are compressed into remaining protected areas. Stopping elephant poaching is an urgent first step to mitigating these effects, but long-term conservation will require land-use planning that incorporates elephant habitat into forested landscapes that are being rapidly transformed by industrial agriculture and logging.
Ecological functions of neotropical amphibians and reptiles: a review.			Amphibians and reptiles (herps) are the most abundant and diverse vertebrate taxa in tropical ecosystems. Nevertheless, little is known about their role in maintaining and regulating ecosystem functions and, by extension, their potential value for supporting ecosystem services. Here, we review research on the ecological functions of Neotropical herps, in different sources (the bibliographic databases, book chapters, etc.). A total of 167 Neotropical herpetology studies published over the last four decades (1970 to 2014) were reviewed, providing information on more than 100 species that contribute to at least five categories of ecological functions: i) nutrient cycling; ii) bioturbation; iii) pollination; iv) seed dispersal, and; v) energy flow through ecosystems. We emphasize the need to expand the knowledge about ecological functions in Neotropical ecosystems and the mechanisms behind these, through the study of functional traits and analysis of ecological processes. Many of these functions provide key ecosystem services, such as biological pest control, seed dispersal and water quality. By knowing and understanding the functions that perform the herps in ecosystems, management plans for cultural landscapes, restoration or recovery projects of landscapes that involve aquatic and terrestrial systems, development of comprehensive plans and detailed conservation of species and ecosystems may be structured in a more appropriate way. Besides information gaps identified in this review, this contribution explores these issues in terms of better understanding of key questions in the study of ecosystem services and biodiversity and, also, of how these services are generated.
Ecological Importance of Small-Diameter Trees to the Structure, Diversity and Biomass of a Tropical Evergreen Forest at Rabi, Gabon			Tropical forests have long been recognized for their biodiversity and ecosystem services. Despite their importance, tropical forests, and particularly those of central Africa, remain understudied. Until recently, most forest inventories in Central Africa have focused on trees >= 10 cm in diameter, even though several studies have shown that small-diameter tree population may be important to demographic rates and nutrient cycling. To determine the ecological importance of small-diameter trees in central African forests, we used data from a 25-ha permanent plot that we established in the rainforest of Gabon to study the diversity and dynamics of these forests. Within the plot, we censused 175,830 trees >= 1 cm dbh from 54 families, 192 genera, and 345 species. Average tree density was 7,026 trees/ha, basal area 31.64 m(2)/ha, and above-ground biomass 369.40 Mg/ha. Fabaceae, Ebenaceae and Euphorbiaceae were the most important families by basal area, density and above-ground biomass. Small-diameter trees (1 cm >= dbh <10 cm) comprised 93.7% of the total tree population, 16.5% of basal area, and 4.8% of the above-ground biomass. They also had diversity 18% higher at family level, 34% higher at genus level, and 42% higher at species level than trees >= 10 cm dbh. Although the relative contribution of small-diameter trees to biomass was comparable to other forests globally, their contribution to forest density, and diversity was disproportionately higher. The high levels of diversity within small-diameter classes may give these forests high levels of structural resilience to anthropogenic/natural disturbance and a changing climate.
Ecological integrity of tropical secondary forests: concepts and indicators			Naturally regenerating forests or secondary forests (SFs) are a promising strategy for restoring large expanses of tropical forests at low cost and with high environmental benefits. This expectation is supported by the high resilience of tropical forests after natural disturbances, yet this resilience can be severely reduced by human impacts. Assessing the characteristics of SFs and their ecological integrity (EI) is essential to evaluating their role for conservation, restoration, and provisioning of ecosystem services. In this study, we aim to propose a concept and indicators that allow the assessment and classification of the EI of SFs. To this end, we review the literature to assess how EI has been addressed in different ecosystems and which indicators of EI are most commonly used for tropical forests. Building upon this knowledge we propose a modification of the concept of EI to embrace SFs and suggest indicators of EI that can be applied to different successional stages or stand ages. Additionally, we relate these indicators to ecosystem service provision in order to support the practical application of the theory. EI is generally defined as the ability of ecosystems to support and maintain composition, structure and function similar to the reference conditions of an undisturbed ecosystem. This definition does not consider the temporal dynamics of recovering ecosystems, such as SFs. Therefore, we suggest incorporation of an optimal successional trajectory as a reference in addition to the old-growth forest reference. The optimal successional trajectory represents the maximum EI that can be attained at each successional stage in a given region and enables the evaluation of EI at any given age class. We further suggest a list of indicators, the main ones being: compositional indicators (species diversity/richness and indicator species); structural indicators (basal area, heterogeneity of basal area and canopy cover); function indicators (tree growth and mortality); and landscape proxies (landscape heterogeneity, landscape connectivity). Finally, we discuss how this approach can assist in defining the value of SF patches to provide ecosystem services, restore forests and contribute to ecosystem conservation.
Ecological outcomes and livelihood benefits of community-managed agroforests and second growth forests in Southeast Brazil			The Forest and Landscape Restoration movement has emerged as an approach to reconcile biodiversity conservation, ecosystem services provisioning and human well-being in degraded landscapes, but little is known so far about the potential of different reforestation methods to achieve these objectives. Based on this gap, we assessed the ecological outcomes and local livelihood benefits of community-managed agroforests and second growth forests to assist natural regeneration in the coastal Atlantic Forest of Brazil. We investigated and compared agroforests and secondary forests according to their structure and floristic composition in 51 circular plots of 314 m(2), their role in supporting local livelihoods (45 semi-structured interviews) and the use and cultural importance of plant species (61 interviews). Agroforests and, more remarkably, managed secondary forests (1) re-established a well-developed forest structure, with a higher density of tree-sized individuals and similar basal area compared to nearby old growth forests; (2) were composed by a rich array of native species, including five threatened species, but had lower species richness than old growth remnants; and (3) improved local livelihoods by supplying market valuable and culturally important plants, including 231 native ethnospecies. Overall, local production systems showed remarkable potential to engage smallholders of developing tropical countries in Forest and Landscape Restoration and contribute to achieve its overall goals. We advocate the promotion of these systems as effective Forest and Landscape Restoration approaches in multi-scale programs and policies.Abstract in Portuguese is available with online material.
Ecological outcomes of agroforests and restoration 15 years after planting			Large-scale forest restoration relies on approaches that are cost-effective and economically attractive to farmers, and in this context agroforestry systems may be a valuable option. Here, we compared ecological outcomes among (1) 12-15-year-old coffee agroforests established with several native shade trees, (2) 12-15-year-old high-diversity restoration plantations, and (3) reference old-growth forests, within a landscape restoration project in the Pontal do Paranapanema region, in the Atlantic Forest of southeastern Brazil. We compared the aboveground biomass, canopy cover, and abundance, richness, and composition of trees, and the regenerating saplings in the three forest types. In addition, we investigated the landscape drivers of natural regeneration in the restoration plantations and coffee agroforests. Reference forests had a higher abundance of trees and regenerating saplings, but had similar levels of species richness compared to coffee agroforests. High-diversity agroforests and restoration plantations did not differ in tree abundance. However, compared to restoration plantations, agroforests showed higher abundance and species richness of regenerating saplings, a higher proportion of animal-dispersed species, and higher canopy cover. The abundance of regenerating saplings declined with increasing density of coffee plants, thus indicating a potential trade-off between productivity and ecological benefits. High-diversity coffee agroforests provide a cost-effective and ecologically viable alternative to high-diversity native tree plantations for large-scale forest restoration within agricultural landscapes managed by local communities, and should be included as part of the portfolio of reforestation options used to promote the global agenda on forest and landscape restoration.
Ecological restoration as a strategy for mitigating and adapting to climate change: lessons and challenges from Brazil			Climate change is a global phenomenon that affects biophysical systems and human well-being. The Paris Agreement of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change entered into force in 2016 with the objective of strengthening the global response to climate change by keeping global temperature rise this century well below 2 degrees C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase even further to 1.5 degrees C. The agreement requires all Parties to submit their "nationally determined contributions" (NDCs) and to strengthen these efforts in the years ahead. Reducing carbon emissions from deforestation and forest degradation is an important strategy for mitigating climate change, particularly in developing countries with large forests. Extensive tropical forest loss and degradation have increased awareness at the international level of the need to undertake large-scale ecological restoration, highlighting the need to identify cases in which restoration strategies can contribute to mitigation and adaptation. Here we consider Brazil as a case study to evaluate the benefits and challenges of implementing large-scale restoration programs in developing countries. The Brazilian NDC included the target of restoring and reforesting 12 million hectares of forests for multiple uses by 2030. Restoration of native vegetation is one of the foundations of sustainable rural development in Brazil and should consider multiple purposes, from biodiversity and ecosystem services conservation to social and economic development. However, ecological restoration still presents substantial challenges for tropical and mega-diverse countries, including the need to develop plans that are technically and financially feasible, as well as public policies and monitoring instruments that can assess effectiveness. The planning, execution, and monitoring of restoration efforts strongly depend on the context and the diagnosis of the area with respect to reference ecosystems (e.g., forests, savannas, grasslands, wetlands). In addition, poor integration of climate change policies at the national and subnational levels and with other sectorial policies constrains the large-scale implementation of restoration programs. The case of Brazil shows that slowing deforestation is possible; however, this analysis highlights the need for increased national commitment and international support for actions that require large-scale transformations of the forest sector regarding ecosystem restoration efforts. Scaling up the ambitions and actions of the Paris Agreement implies the need for a global framework that recognizes landscape restoration as a cost-effective nature-based solution and that supports countries in addressing their remaining needs, challenges, and barriers.
Ecological restoration efforts in tropical rural landscapes: Challenges and policy implications in a highly degraded region			Ecological restoration has received increasing attention as international agreements have set ambitious goals tc mitigate environmental change and reshape degraded landscapes. However, current restoration activities sometimes remain modest in their success. In particular, tropical forest restoration has had mixed outcomes wilt variable cost-efficiency. Here, we address the need for taking into account the spatial context of restoration tc inform policy initiatives that aim to improve the ecological and economic effectiveness of restoration. We ac" cessed the spatial distribution of relevant characteristics for ecological restoration in an emblematic heavily degraded tropical region: Sao Paulo state, Brazil. We compared statewide patterns in soil erosion risk, distance tc remnant habitat, and agricultural land use, to their characteristics in land voluntarily offered for active re storation. Based on this comparison, active restoration is likely to take place through small, low-priced parcels of land, usually in the context of substantial soil erosion risk and exacerbated deforestation. Restoration ecology predicts the need for expensive actions to assist a limited recovery process in such highly degraded conditions This general pattern also suggests the necessity for long-term commitment among a broad set of social actors combined to mitigation of degradation in adjacent remnants and agricultural lands. Active restoration may be complemented by spontaneous regeneration in areas with less adverse conditions. Policy makers therefore neec to consider the complementarity of lands voluntarily offered for restoration, and land made available for re storation through other mechanisms. Our findings, likely applicable to other densely populated tropical regions suggest that land-use policies need to address drivers of restoration success at a fine-scale to enable effective strategies. We suggest this can be achieved by spatial analyses that incorporate biophysical features that de termine restoration opportunities and the likelihood of success.
Ecological restoration, carbon sequestration and biodiversity conservation: The experience of the Society for Wildlife Research and Environmental Education (SPVS) in the Atlantic Rain Forest of Southern Brazil			Since 1999, SPVS has been involved in three projects that combine two fundamental goals over the course of 40 years: the conservation of one of Brazil's most important remnants of Atlantic Forest and the implementation of projects for carbon sequestration. In addition, there is an interest in replicating these projects in order to restore other degraded areas, protect the Brazilian biomes, and help to diminish deforestation and forest fire, therefore reducing carbon emissions. The acquisition of 19,000 ha of degraded areas of high biological importance in southern Brazil was the first step towards the implementation of the projects. These areas are owned by SPVS, a Brazilian NGO, and are being restored, conserved and transformed into Private Natural Reserves, in partnership with the NGO - The Nature Conservancy, and financed by the companies - American Electric Power, General Motors and Chevron Texaco. The process of forest restoration involves several stages: soil studies, surveying the region's native plants, planning for restoration by means of a Geographical Information System, production of seedlings, application of different techniques for planting (such as manual or mechanised planting with seedlings and stakes), and biomass and biodiversity monitoring. To guarantee the survival of the seedlings on the planted areas, during the first three years, there is a continuous and systematic maintenance programme including weeding of undergrowth, crowing and organic fertilisation. The three projects already planted around 500,000 seedlings of native species until September 2004, and aim to plant a further 300,000 until 2008. © 2006 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
Ecological structure and carbon storage in traditional silvopastoral systems in Nicaragua			Forests and agroforestry systems in the tropics play a decisive role in global carbon fixation strategies. The amount and type of coverage, along with the specific land use and land use change in a given area, determines whether carbon is stored or released into the atmosphere. The aim of this study was to evaluate the traditional silvopastoral systems (TSPS) through quantitative analysis of biomass and soil carbon storage whilst simultaneously qualitatively determining the ecological structure in terms of tree richness and diversity. The study was carried out in Matiguas, a sub-humid tropical region of Nicaragua, on five land use types: shrubland; intervened secondary forest; pasture with high tree density; pasture with low tree density and degraded pasture. Biomass carbon was estimated by allometric equations and soil organic carbon was evaluated at four depths (0-10, 10-20, 20-40 and 40-100cm). Of the land uses studied, shrubland had the highest diversity. The biomass carbon ranged from 1.9 to 13.2tCha(-1) for degraded pasture and intervened secondary forest, respectively. The highest soil organic carbon (SOC) storage at 1m depth was for intervened secondary forest (163tCha(-1)), whereas degraded pastures had the lowest value (76tCha(-1)). Since SOC was the largest pool of total carbon in all cases, it should be evaluated down to a depth of at least 1m. Increasing tree coverage in degraded and low-tree density pastures can contribute not only to enhance carbon sequestration but also to restore degraded lands in livestock landscapes.
Ecological Structure of a Tropical Urban Forest in the Bang Kachao Peninsula, Bangkok			Rapid urbanization has changed the structure and function of natural ecosystems, especially floodplain ecosystems in SE Asia. The ecological structure of vegetation stands and the usefulness of satellite images was investigated to characterize a disturbed tropical urban forest located in the Chao Phraya River lower floodplain, Thailand. Nine sample plots were established on the Bang Kachao Peninsula (BKP) within 4 tropical forest types in an urban area: rehabilitation forest, home-garden agroforestry, mangrove and park. The tree habitats were beach forest, swamp forest, moist evergreen forest, dry evergreen forest, mangrove forest and abandoned orchard or home-garden. Normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) values obtained from Landsat 7 satellite images were correlated with plant structure from field surveys. NDVI had the highest relationship with stand factors for number of families, number of species, Shannon-Weiner index and total basal area. Linear regression predicted well the correlation between NDVI and stand factors for families and basal area. NDVI trends reflected urban tropical forest typing and biodiversity, being high in rehabilitation and mangrove forests, moderate in home-gardens and low in parks. We suggest that the application of NDVI for assessments can be useful for future planning, monitoring and management of the BKP and hence may contribute for increasing biodiversity and complexity of these urban forests.
Econometric Evidence on Forest Ecosystem Services: Deforestation and Flooding in Malaysia			Governments around the world are increasingly invoking hydrological services, such as flood mitigation and water purification, as a justification for forest conservation programs in upstream areas. Yet, rigorous empirical evidence that these programs are actually delivering the intended services remains scant. We investigate the effect of deforestation on flood-mitigation services in Peninsular Malaysia during 1984-2000, a period when detailed data on both flood events and land-use change are available for 31 river basins. Floods are the most common natural disaster in tropical regions, but the ability of tropical forests to mitigate large-scale floods associated with heavy rainfall events remains disputed. We find that the conversion of inland tropical forests to oil palm and rubber plantations significantly increased the number of days flooded during the wettest months of the year. Our results demonstrate the importance of using disaggregated land-use data, controlling for potentially confounding factors, and applying appropriate estimators in econometric studies on forest ecosystem services.
ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL FEASIBILITY OF INTERNATIONAL CARBON OFFSETS			Forests are important in the global carbon cycle, forming a major sink for carbon. Deforestation is a significant source of carbon dioxide emitted to the atmosphere. There is some scope to enhance natural carbon sinks, and therefore reduce net emissions of greenhouse gases, through afforestation and conservation of existing forests. Such initiatives may be implemented to ''offset'' emissions of greenhouse gases from other sources. This may be undertaken by private companies, or by governments as part of bilateral agreements or multilateral arrangements. International carbon offsets may be cost effective in terms of reduction of carbon emissions achieved, and may also be one way to mobilise private capital to fund forest conservation. It is argued here that theoretically the international offset of emissions may lead to a resource saving, and that forest conservation, as opposed to afforestation, may bring about many other benefits. However, such international contracts are unlikely to be feasible or make a major contribution to the control of greenhouse gases. The reasons for this are monitoring, enforcement and scientific uncertainties, and the implicit change in property rights involved in ''selling'' carbon sequestration rights.
Economic evaluation of ecosystem services as a basis for stabilizing rainforest margins? The example of pollination services and pest management in coffee landscapes			The determination and evaluation of ecosystem services provides crucial information for a comprehensive strategy to preserve near natural habitats such as rainforest margins. We show results of an economic evaluation of coffee bee pollination services and pest control in two distinct tropical regions: a low human-impact area in Indonesia with continuous near natural forests neighboring agroforestry and a high-impact landscape in Ecuador with almost no forest fragments left. We evaluate bee pollination services comparing forest destruction scenarios, where coffee yields depend on forests providing nesting sites and foraging habitats for bees and present three novel approaches: first, we show how net coffee revenues depend on pollination services of adjacent forests considering berry weight in addition to fruit set, thereby providing a more comprehensive evaluation. Second, we combine our findings on pollination with an assessment of pest management affecting coffee production. Third, we determine net welfare effects of land-use changes including the fact that former forestland is normally used for alternative crops. In both regions, crop revenues exceed coffee pollination values, generating incentives to convert forest margins even if owners would be compensated for pollination services. The promotion of certified “biodiversity-friendly” coffee is a feasible option to maintain shade-coffee systems for conservation purposes. This is of special importance in high-impact areas where only small forest fragments remain. We conclude that a comprehensive economic analysis is necessary to adequately evaluate rainforest preservation for the enhancement of ecosystem services within a mosaic of competing land-use systems. © 2007, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Economic evaluation of pollination services comparing coffee landscapes in Ecuador and Indonesia			Biodiversity conservation through land-use systems on private land is becoming a pressing environmental policy issue. Agroforestry, such as shade-coffee production, contributes to biodiversity conservation. However, falling coffee prices force many coffee growers to convert their sites into economically more attractive land uses. We performed an economic evaluation of coffee pollination by bees in two distinct tropical regions: an area of low human impact with forests neighboring agroforestry in Indonesia and an area of high human impact with little remaining forest in Ecuador. We evaluated bee pollination for different forest-destruction scenarios, where coffee yields depend on forests to provide nesting sites for bees. We used two novel approaches. First, we examined how coffee net revenues depend on the pollination services of adjacent forests by considering berry weight in addition to fruit set, thereby providing a comprehensive evaluation. Second, we determined the net welfare effects of land-use changes, including the fact that former forestland is normally used for alternative crops. In both regions, crop revenues exceeded coffee pollination values, generating incentives to convert forests, even if owners would be compensated for pollination services. The promotion of certified "biodiversity-friendly" coffee is a feasible option to maintain shade-coffee systems. This is of special importance in high-impact areas where only small forest fragments remain. We conclude that a comprehensive economic analysis is necessary to adequately evaluate rainforest preservation for the enhancement of ecosystem services, such as pollination.
Economic impacts of carbon sequestration in reforestation: Examples from boreal and moist tropical conditions			The impact of carbon sequestration on the financial profitability of four tree plantation cases in Finland and the Philippines were examined. On the basis of stem wood growth; the accumulation of carbon in forest biomass, the formation and decomposition of litter, and the carbon flows in wood-based products were assessed for each reforestation case representing boreal (Finland) and moist tropical conditions (the Philippines). Using different unit values for carbon sequestration the profitability of reforestation was estimated for a fixed 100 year period on a per hectare basis. The financial profitability of reforestation increased notably when the sequestered carbon had high positive values. For example, when the value of carbon sequestration was set to be Twenty-five United States Dollars per megagram of carbon (25 USD/Mg C), the internal rate of return (IRR) of a reforestation investment with spruce (Picea abies) in Finland increased from 3.2 % to 4.1 %. Equally, the IRR of reforestation with mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla, King) in the Philippines increased from 12.8 % to 15.5 %. The present value of carbon sequestration ranged from 39-48 % and from 77-101 % of the present value of the reforestation costs in Finland and the Philippines, respectively, when a 25 USD/Mg C shadow price and a 5 % discount rate were applied. Sequestration of one Mg of carbon in reforestation in Finland and the Philippines was estimated to cost from 10.5-20.0 and from 4.0-13.6 USD, respectively.
Economic Incentives for the Sustainable Management and Conservation of Tropical Forests			0
Economic potential and management of tropical mixed-species plantations in Central America			Tropical forest plantations play an important role in meeting global wood demand. While research has highlighted the ecological potential of mixed-species plantations, studies on the economic viability and management of such plantations are largely missing in the context of tropical plantation forestry. In this study, we estimated the economic potential and optimized the management of commercial mixed-species plantations of four tree species native to Central America (Dalbergia retusa, Dipteryx oleifera, Hieronyma alchorneoides, and Vochysia guatemalensis) and Teak (Tectona grandis). We combined the forest growth model 3-PGmix and detailed economic data for two plantation sites in Costa Rica to optimize the management of 11 different mixtures using a genetic optimization algorithm. We found that several of the modeled mixed-species stands can be highly profitable with net present values (NPV) up to 4821.2 USD/ha at an 8% discount rate, and internal rates of return up to 17% (under excellent site conditions). This indicates that the most profitable mixtures (e.g. of V. guatemalensis-D. oleifera or T. grandis-D. oleifera on excellent sites) could compete economically with conventional monoculture plantations such as Teak monocultures. Further, mixed stands can be managed based on the same simple even-aged management approaches currently applied in monoculture plantations if the specific management parameters are adapted. The optimized management parameters also lead to improved NPV of the modeled stands under alternative valuation assumptions but are site-specific. In the present study, we only considered financial benefits from timber production. However, establishing mixed-species plantations in the tropics could provide a wide range of ecosystem services including climate change mitigation and biodiversity protection.
Economic trade-offs between carbon sequestration, timber production, and crop pollination in tropical forested landscapes			The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment distinguishes between supporting, regulating, provisioning, and cultural ecosystem services. We focus on three services, namely the provision of timber, the regulation of atmospheric carbon dioxide, and the supporting service of bee pollination for coffee production. Possible trade-offs between the different ecosystem services might result in a reduced attractiveness of afforestation projects when taking pollination services into account. We found that economic losses due to a limited reduction of tree density of a Cordia alliodora plantation can be overcompensated by generating pollination services to adjacent coffee agroforestry systems. Thus, for moderate silvicultural interventions such trade-offs do not necessarily occur. Including additional ecosystem services such as biological pest control or seed dispersal, which are also associated with the enhanced functional biodiversity in less dense tree plantations, might further emphasize the hump-shaped relationship between tree density and forest revenues. (C) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Economic Valuation of Biological Diversity Exploring Non-Market Perspectives in the Vicinity of the Lore-Lindu National Park in Indonesia’s Central Sulawesi Region			0
Economic valuation of ecosystem services from secondary tropical forests: trade-offs and implications for policy making			Natural regeneration of secondary forests can be an important source of recovery of ecosystem services (ES) critical for humanity, especially for climate change mitigation and adaptation goals. However, natural regeneration entails synergies and trade-offs across ESs and across stakeholders. To evaluate these trade-offs, we assessed the economic value of four ESs along the course of a natural regeneration process of tropical dry forests of the Pacific Coast of Mexico, and examined how this can inform the design of Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES) schemes incentivizing forest restoration. We estimated the monetary value of two provisioning ESs -forest products and fodder for calves-, using contingent valuation and direct market valuation methods, and two regulating ESs -carbon stocks and carbon sinks- using the voluntary carbon market prices and the social cost of carbon. We assessed these ESs in four natural regeneration stages: pasture, young secondary forest (0 to 12 years of natural regeneration), intermediate secondary forest (between 12 and 25 years of natural regeneration), and old-growth forest (more than 25 years of natural regeneration or primary forests).Results indicate that throughout the course of the natural regeneration process, there are changes in the magnitude of the trade-offs between regulating and provisioning ESs. We find a clear trade-off between regulating and provisioning ESs in the early stages of natural regeneration. However, as secondary forests grow older provisioning ESs recover, creating synergies rather than trade-offs in later stages of natural regeneration. Our results suggest a PES aiming to increase climate regulation services should focus on the carbon sink potential of young and intermediate secondary forests, as this would provide the greatest additionality and mitigation. We also showed the relevance of using a portfolio of economic valuation methods that can include a wider range of values for understanding landholders' preferences. While with direct market valuation methods we found that young secondary forests have the lowest economic value as compared to other natural regeneration stages, contingent valuation showed that landholders value young secondary forests the most because of their potential - future - land use (i.e. the possibility of converting it back to pasture).
Economic valuation of forest conservation: insight from a current systematic literature review			Forest conservation is vital for biodiversity, climate regulation and livelihoods. However, valuing its economic benefits is challenging. This review assesses and synthesizes current methodologies and findings on the economic valuation of forest conservation, focusing on non-market benefits and diverse valuation approaches. The study was reviewed from 2018 to 2023 using Scopus, Web of Science (WoS), and EconBiz, following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) framework. Analyzing 37 articles, three themes were identified: Community and Socioeconomic Aspects (15 articles), Economic Valuation Techniques (16 articles), and Policy Implications (6 articles). Contingent valuation and choice modelling were found to be predominant, especially in tropical forests of developing countries, where higher WTP values than other regions highlight their importance in supporting conservation efforts. Though challenges such as data disparities and limitations persist, recent advancements, such as the use of remote sensing and ecosystem service modelling, have improved the precision of forest conservation valuations. Standardized methodologies and better data integration are required to improve the accuracy and comparability of economic valuations, ensuring more reliable data for policy-making and resource allocation in forest conservation. This review aids researchers, policymakers, and practitioners in enhancing forest conservation strategies through robust economic valuation.
Economic value of the carbon sink services of tropical secondary forests and its management implications			This paper explores the economic feasibility of secondary forest regeneration and conservation as an alternative in the campaign addressing the problem of global warming. Detailed measurements of tropical secondary forests over time, in different ecological zones of Costa Rica, are used to evaluate carbon storage models. The paper addresses key issues in the international discussion about cross- and within-country compensation for carbon storage services and illustrates a method to compute/predict their economic value over time under a variety of scenarios. The procedure is applicable to other developing countries where secondary forest growth is increasingly important.
Economic value of tropical forest to coffee production			Can economic forces be harnessed for biodiversity conservation? The answer hinges on characterizing the value of nature, a tricky business from biophysical, socioeconomic, and ethical perspectives. Although the societal benefits of native ecosystems are clearly immense,they remain largely unquantified for all but a few services. Here, we estimate the value of tropical forest in supplying pollination services to agriculture. We focus on coffee because it is one of the world's most valuable export commodities and is grown in many of the world's most biodiverse regions. Using pollination experiments along replicated distance gradients, we found that forest-based pollinators increased coffee yields by 20% within approximate to1 km of forest. Pollination also improved coffee quality near forest by reducing the frequency of "peaberries" (i.e., small misshapen seeds) by 27%. During 2000-2003, pollination services from two forest fragments (46 and 111 hectares) translated into approximate to$60,000 (U.S.) per year for one Costa Rican farm. This value is commensurate with expected revenues from competing land uses and far exceeds current conservation incentive payments. Conservation investments in human-dominated landscapes can therefore yield double benefits: for biodiversity and agriculture.
Economical and ecological realization of Joint Forest Management (JFM) for sustainable rural livelihood: a case study			In India, Joint Forest Management (JFM) programme was first introduced in the year 1972 at Arabari forest range in West Bengal with the collaboration of local community and forest department for the protection of reserve forest and improvement of rural livelihood. Subsequently, in 1990 the JFM programme was further extended at nearby Bhadutola forest range of Paschim Medinipur (West Bengal, India). The evaluation of this programme with respect to ecological and economic indicators has not been done. The main objective of this study is to evaluate the effectiveness of JFM scheme in two sites and also assess the ecological impacts of such programs. Applying relevant research methods like focus group discussion (FGD), standard of living index (SLI), livelihood dependence index (LDI) and measurement of forest dependency, the effectiveness of JFM project has been assessed for the sustainable forest management. The ecological impacts were calculated using the value coefficient method through implied for ecosystem service functions. The results showed that the forest dwellers of Arabari forest range are getting more benefits like different non-timber forest products (NTFP) than Bhadutola forest range community. It is stated that around 85% respondents are highly satisfied with the implementation of JFM project. In the recent years, the standard of living index (SLI) of almost sixteen villages under JFM project has been significantly improved. The ecological impact for both the forest ranges clearly shows a positive effect on the ecosystem service values through food production, raw materials, genetic resources, climatic regulation and soil erosion control strategies. The Arabari forest range has shown more positive changes in ecological services function than the Bhadutola forest range. Therefore, this model needs to be applied effectively in different vulnerable forest ranges of tropical and sub-tropical regions of the world for sustainable forest resource conservation as well as improvement of livelihood of forest dwellers.
Economically important species dominate aboveground carbon storage in forests of southwestern Amazonia			Tree species in tropical forests provide economically important goods and ecosystem services. In submontane forests of southwestern Amazonia, we investigated the degree to which tree species important for subsistence and trade contribute to aboveground carbon storage (AGC). We used 41 1-hectare plots to determine the species abundance, basal area, and AGC of stems >10 cm diameter at breast height (dbh). Economically important taxa were classified using ethnobotanical studies and according to their stem density. These taxa (n = 263) accounted for 45% of total stems, 53% of total basal area, and 56% of total AGC, significantly more than taxa with minor or unknown uses (Welch test at p < 0.05). Taxa with 1-2 stems per hectare, or with fewer than 1 stem per hectare (common and rare) accounted for 35% of total AGC, more than the 22% accounted for by dominant taxa. High basal area had a greater impact on AGC than abundance in economic taxa because their populations are skewed to adult trees. Size in these taxa had a median dbh > 40 cm and few stems in regeneration classes of dbh < 10 to 20 cm (e.g., Bertholletia excelsa, Cariniana spp., Cedrelinga spp., Ceiba spp., Dipteryx spp.), whereas dominant Tetragastris spp., and Pseudolmedia spp. had most stems in low diameter classes and a median diameter of < 30 cm. Bertholletia excelsa, with 1.5 stems per hectare, showed the highest basal area of any species and accounted for 9% of AGC (11 Mg/ha), twice that of the second-ranking species. Our study shows that economic importance and carbon stocks in trees are closely linked in southwestern Amazonia. Unplanned harvests can disrupt synergistic dual roles altering carbon stocks temporally or permanently. Precautionary measures based on species ecology, demography, and regeneration traits should be at the forefront of REDD+ to reconcile maximum harvesting limits, biodiversity conservation, and sustainable forest management.
Economics of tropical forest policy:  analysing the impact of market uncertainty and special interest lobbying. (BL: DXN069289)			0
Eco-physiology and habitat invasibility of an invasive, tropical shrub ( Lantana camara) in western Himalayan forests of India			Mountains are remarkably diverse and globally important as cores of biological diversity. Mountains' greatest values may be as sources of all the world's major rivers, and those of the Himalayas are no less important in terms of provisioning the ecosystem services that have thus far sustained huge populations of people and high levels of biodiversity. The survival of these ecosystems and wildlife are now threatened by human activities such as timber harvesting, intensive grazing by livestock, tourism, industrialization, and agricultural expansion into forestlands, and, above all, climate change which has led to the invasion of many noxious weeds. The present study aimed to analyze the invasion status of one such noxious weed, lantana (Lantana camara), from the western Himalayan foothills. A total of 122 plant species were recorded as associates from all lantana infested sites comprising 73 shrubs, 39 herbs, five sedges, and three grasses belonging to 47 families. Fabaceae and Asteraceae were found to be the most dominant families growing generously with lantana. Significant site effect was frequently observed than effect due to invasion status. Soil samples were collected and analyzed from highly invaded and moderately invaded areas to see the relationship between soil physicochemical properties and lantana growth. Results of the present study show that factors such as pH, total nitrogen, soil organic carbon, phosphorus, and potassium contents are positively impelling lantana invasion in all the sites. In some places soil nutrients were found improved effectively due to lantana invasion when compared from the soil of non-invaded areas thereby, increasing the likelihood of further invasion.
Ecosystem carbon stocks in different aged tea agroforestry systems: implications for regional ecosystem management			Tea (Camellia sinensis) is often grown under a canopy of trees forming a distinctive agroforestry system covering an estimated area of 3.94 million ha of land globally. Although, tea is a major commercial crop in many countries in tropical and sub-tropical regions, including China, India and Sri Lanka, tea agroforestry systems (TAFS) have remained little studied for their role in carbon management and climate change adaptation/mitigation actions. We, therefore, undertook a detailed study on the storage of organic carbon in above- and below-ground vegetation and soil under age chronosequence of TAFS in North East India. The specific aim of this study was to quantify variations in soil physical and chemical properties, carbon storage in shade trees and tea bushes, and ecosystem carbon stocks under the chronosequence of TAFS. This study has established significant variations in soil properties and carbon storage in different aged TAFS. One of the salient findings is the decrease in soil bulk density and increase in water holding capacity with the age of TAFS in the 0-50 cm depth. The total vegetation C stock (shade trees + tea bushes + litter biomass) increased with increase in the age of TAFS, and the increase was as high as 25% in > 20 years compared to younger (< 10 years old) TAFS. The ecosystem C stock estimated at 162-187 Mg ha(-1)was higher than many temperate and tropical agroforestry systems suggesting TAFS may effectively contribute to Clean Development Mechanisms CDM/REDD+ mechanisms of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) once standard guidelines for market mechanisms are in place.
Ecosystem Carbon Stocks of Micronesian Mangrove Forests			Among the least studied ecosystem services of mangroves is their value as global carbon (C) stocks. This is significant as mangroves are subject to rapid rates of deforestation and therefore could be significant sources of atmospheric emissions. Mangroves could be key ecosystems in strategies addressing the mitigation of climate change though reduced deforestation. We quantified ecosystem C stocks at the seaward, interior, and upland edges of mangroves in the Republic of Palau and Yap, Federated States of Micronesia. The relatively high aboveground biomass coupled with carbon-rich soils resulted in the presence of large ecosystem carbon stocks compared to other tropical forests. Ecosystem C storage at the Palau site ranged from 479 Mg/ha in the seaward zone to 1,068 Mg/ha in the landward zone; in the Yap site C storage ranged from 853 to 1,385 Mg/ha along this gradient. Soils contained similar to 70% of the ecosystem C stocks. The elevation range of mangroves was < 146 cm, suggesting that projected sea-level rise can influence a large portion of existing stands. Declines in ecosystem carbon stocks will be pronounced if mangroves are replaced by communities adapted to greater inundation such as seagrass communities, where C pools were a parts per thousand currency sign7% of that of mangroves (48 Mg C/ha).
Ecosystem carbon storage considering combined environmental and land-use changes in the future and pathways to carbon neutrality in developed regions			Assessing the carbon storage capacity of terrestrial ecosystems is crucial for land management and carbon reduction policymaking. There is still a knowledge gap regarding how ecosystem carbon storage will be impacted by combined environmental and land-use factors and their spatial-temporal changes, especially in developed regions where urbanization has slowed down. This study investigated how developed regions in subtropical and tropical areas might increase carbon storage and achieve carbon neutrality, using Guangdong Province in South China as an example. Based on the sustainable development assumption, three land-management scenarios were developed and simulated for 2020-2060 using the Patch-generating Land Use Simulation model. Without considering disturbance and natural losses, carbon storage was estimated by net ecosystem productivity (NEP)-the difference between net primary productivity (NPP) and heterotrophic respiration (HR). NPP was predicted using an artificial neural network model trained by historical NPP data and 16 environmental and land-use variables. HR was predicted using soil respiration models from previous research. Based on the balance between carbon storage and emissions, we predicted the allowable fossil fuel consumption to achieve net-zero CO2 emissions in 2060. The results show that Guangdong's total carbon storage changes from 73.7 MtC in 2020 to 70.6-74.8 MtC in 2060 under different scenarios. Nonlinear relationships exist between the carbon stored and the areas of different land-use types. Topography, temperatures, and land-use configurations jointly lead to significantly varied carbon storage between croplands and between forests in space and time. Protecting and regenerating forests in subtropical areas and forest edges is more effective than afforestation in lowland tropical areas for storing carbon. Net-zero CO2 emissions rely more on reducing emissions than land management. To achieve this, the proportion of fossil energy in total energy consumption should be lowered from 75.5 % in 2020 to similar to 25 % in 2060.
ECOSYSTEM CARBON STORAGE OF TROPICAL FORESTS OVER LIMESTONE IN XISHUANGBANNA, SW CHINA			TANG JW, YIN JX, QI JF, JEPSEN MR & LU XT. 2012. Ecosystem carbon storage of tropical forests over limestone in Xishuangbanna, SW China. Tropical forests are recognised for their high biodiversity and the roles they play in carbon (C) storage and their influence on climate. Tropical forests over limestone take up 40% of the total area of tropical Asia. Nevertheless, C cycling in tropical forests over limestone is poorly quantified. There is a need for robust measurement of ecosystem carbon storage in tropical forests over limestone. We assessed the ecosystem C stocks, not only aboveground biomass but also belowground biomass, forest floor and mineral soil (to 1 m depth) in a tropical forest over limestone on the northern edge of tropical Asia. Mean total ecosystem C stock was estimated as 214 +/- 28 t C ha(-1) (+/- SE). The contribution of plant biomass in storing C was substantial, accounting for 80% of the total ecosystem C storage. The mean C stock of tree layer was 155 +/- 24 t C ha(-1). Soil C stocks in tropical forests over limestone in this area (50 +/- 10 t C ha(-1)) were much lower than those in tropical forests from South-East Asia. Higher percentage of C stock in plant biomass while lower percentage in mineral soil indicated that C stocks of the tropical forests over limestone would be more vulnerable to vegetation destruction than other tropical forests on non-limestone substrate. This study gave an accurate estimation of C stocks of different components in tropical forests over limestone in Xishuangbanna and highlighted the important role they play in C sequestration.
Ecosystem dynamics and services of a paired Neotropical montane forest and pine plantation			Montane forests are one of the most decimated of Neotropical biomes even though they provide a suite of valuable ecosystem services such as provision of water to lowland settlements and prevention of erosion and mudslides. In some instances, to restore these and other ecosystem services, degraded montane forests are replaced by exotic tree plantations, which cover sizeable areas in several countries. Despite their importance for assessment of ecological services and for intrinsic ecological value, comparative studies of paired native montane forest and conifer plantation are scarce along the Northern Andean Cordillera. Additionally, extrapolations are challenging because each pair of communities is highly site specific due to environmental setting, age and density of plantation, and reforestation species. Here, we assess and compare structure, biogeochemistry and ecosystem services provided by closely positioned native forest and pine plantation from a protected montane area in Venezuela. Soil nutrients and soil carbon content were 60 and 54 % respectively higher in the forest. As consequence of pine' growth form and leaf biochemistry, aboveground biomass and litter mass, as well as nutrient content and carbon stocks, were higher in the plantation. This results in the plantation storing 30 % more MgC ha(-1) than the nearby forest. Canopy structure and litter properties influence the hydrology of both ecosystems through differences in rain throughfall. Most of the ecosystem services itemized are superior in the native forest, with exception that the younger plantation sequesters more carbon. An additional service provided by plantations might be that of ecological corridors that connect fragmented native forests. Our study, a specific case of nutrient and carbon cycling dynamics in paired montane forests and pine plantations, provides another set of data for the design of policy and management of considerable areas in the Neotropics with established conservation plantations.
ECOSYSTEM RESTORATION IN MEXICO: INSIGHTS ON THE PROJECT PLANNING PHASE			Background: A deep discussion of the phases of planning by all stakeholders will help to identify the challenges faced by countries that are embarking on large-scale restoration actions to comply with international agreements.Question: Was the planning phase of restoration projects done according to international guidance? We evaluated six of the eight aspects of the international guidance for the planning phase of restoration projects carried out in Mexico between 1979 and 2016.Methods: The information about the restoration projects was compiled using a digital survey composed of 137 questions.Results: Seventy-five projects with a total area of 1,556,840 hectares were analyzed, mainly in temperate, humid, and deciduous forest. More projects measured the baseline with biotic than with abiotic variables, and social variables were seldom evaluated. Most projects aimed to recover biodiversity or ecosystem services, and they identified a reference ecosystem. Planned budgets included mainly field work.Conclusions: To promote the integration of ecological, social, and economic priorities, landscape restoration is suggested, since it is done at a scale which maximizes the benefits for nature and people. The inclusion of only field work in the budgets may decrease the total cost, but it may jeopardize project success due to poor planning. Careful and detailed planning of a national strategy constructed by all stakeholders that includes restoration of original ecosystems, agroforestry systems (which facilitate social participation and increase land productivity) and patches under natural succession, and investing in highly trained human resources will allow successful compliance with international restoration commitments.
Ecosystem Service Evaluation and Multi-Objective Management of Pinus massoniana Lamb. Plantations in Guangxi, China			Research on forest ecosystem service (ES) assessments is currently a topic of much interest in forest ecology combined with geography. Forests are the mainstay of terrestrial ecosystems and provide a wide range of welfare supports for humans. Pinus massoniana (PM) Lamb. is a major silvicultural timber species in southern China and plays an important role in meeting domestic timber demand as well as providing ESs. The assessment of the ESs of PM plantation forests is beneficial for their sustainable management. In this study, we used the woody biomass method, the InVEST water content model and the USLE, a generalized soil loss equation model to assess the values of four Ess, including wood supply, carbon sequestration and oxygen release, water conservation, and soil conservation, in PM plantations in the Guangxi Paiyangshan Forest Farm, which is a national PM seed base. A spectral clustering method was used to identify the ecosystem service clusters (i.e., partitions) in the case study area, and certain strategies were provided for different partitions to form a management strategy for the sustainable management of PM plantation forest ecosystems. This study showed that the value of each ES per hectare in the northern tropical pine plantation, ranked from the largest to the smallest, was water conservation; carbon sequestration and oxygen release; wood supply; and soil conservation, with the values of the wood supply in addition to carbon sequestration and oxygen release per hectare increasing with the age of the plantation. Based on the different service characteristics within the service clusters, the northern tropical PM plantation area was divided into wood supply, ecological nourishment and ecological restoration areas, which can focus more on wood supply and ecological nourishment.
Ecosystem Service Multifunctionality: Decline and Recovery Pathways in the Amazon and Choco Lowland Rainforests			The balance between the supply of multiple ecosystem services (ES) and the fulfillment of society demands is a challenge, especially in the tropics where different land use transition phases emerge. These phases are characterized by either a decline (from intact old-growth to logged forests) or a recovery of ES (successional forests, plantations, and agroforestry systems). This highlights the importance of ecosystem service multifunctionality (M) assessments across these land use transition phases as a basis for forest management and conservation. We analyzed synergies and trade-offs of ES to identify potential umbrella ES. We also evaluated the impact of logging activities in the decline of ES and M, and the influence of three recovery phases in the supply of ES and M. We installed 156 inventory plots (1600 m(2)) in the Ecuadorian Central Amazon and the Choco. We estimated indicators for provisioning, regulating, supporting services and biodiversity. M indicator was estimated using the multifunctional average approach. Our results show that above-ground carbon stocks can be considered as an umbrella service as it presented high synergetic relations with M and various ES. We observed that logging activities caused a decline of 16-18% on M, with high impacts for timber volume and above-ground carbon stocks, calling for more sustainable practices with stricter post-harvesting control to avoid a higher depletion of ES and M. From the recovery phases it is evident that, successional forests offer the highest level of M, evidencing high potential to recover multiple ES after human disturbance.
Ecosystem services and forest fires in India - Context and policy implications from a case study in Andhra Pradesh			Tropical landscapes are often burned by forest dwellers to obtain certain ecosystem services (ES). We analyze the importance of ES derived with the help of fires from a tropical dry forest in Andhra Pradesh, India, and conclude that regular burning of the forest is crucial for local livelihoods. We highlight the importance of "fire-driven ecosystem services (FDES)" through investigating 557 rural households' livelihood spread across 14 villages in the Chittoor District of Andhra Pradesh. Results show that regular forest burning procures valuable forest products like fuel wood and fodder grass, mainly serving domestic purposes.We discuss the tradeoffs that would result from an alteration of the existing fire scenario with respect to FDES, the likely impact on local economies, and possible management options. We conclude that the importance of FDES must be taken into consideration while designing forest conservation and management policies. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Ecosystem services from forest restoration: thinking ahead			Global deforestation and forest degradation have led to massive loss of biodiversity and decline of ecosystem services. Against this prospect, it is important not only to protect, but also to restore forest ecosystems. The paper analyzes the current and future role of the restoration of forests and degraded lands starting with the definition of various techniques, scales and objectives of forest restoration. Three key motivations for and targets of forest restoration are then discussed: forest biodiversity protection, biomass production, climate change mitigation and adaptation. The paper also briefly discusses three tools of increasing relevance for supporting forest restoration policies: the development of forest nursery techniques and the improvement of quality of forest reproductive material, the use of standard and certification tools, and financing of restoration investments, including projects aimed at reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. We conclude by making some final remarks on the future challenges of forest restoration policies.
Ecosystem services of riverine floodplains.			Based on a literature review. Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Ecosystem services provided by a large endangered primate in a forest-savanna mosaic landscape			Forested landscapes are increasingly affected by human activities, but little is known about the role of large endangered frugivores as seed dispersers in such ecosystems. We investigated the role played by the bonobo (Pan paniscus) in a human-altered forest-savanna mosaic in Democratic Republic of the Congo. The studied-groups are part of a community-based conservation programme but live at the interface with human activities. We identified dispersed species via faecal analysis, classified them into a regeneration guild and a seed size category, determined the effect of gut transit on seed germination, and the habitat use of bonobos. Bonobos dispersed intact seeds of 77 species, 80.8% of which were large-seeded (>= 10 mm long), of which few can be dispersed by sympatric frugivores. They dispersed a majority (49%) of shade-bearers that thrive in forest understory with limited amount of light, all of which were large-seeded. Transit had an overall positive effect on seed germination. Bonobos used various habitat types, showing preferences for understory with intermediate light availability and dominated by woody or herbaceous vegetation. This dispersal pattern probably enhances recruitment of shade bearers, and we thus hypothesized that those species benefited from directed dispersal by bonobos. This threatened frugivore provides unique dispersal services and likely plays a paramount functional role in the regeneration of late successional forests in this mosaic landscape. Management plans should pay particular attention to the role of large and rare frugivores in human-dominated regions as their disappearance could disrupt forest succession to a climax state. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Ecosystem services supply and interactions along secondary tropical dry forests succession			Secondary forests will likely dominate future tropical landscapes, and the ecosystem services they provide to humanity will be particularly relevant. However, few empirical studies provide quantitative evidence of how the supply of ecosystem services change along secondary forest succession. The need for such information is particularly pressing for tropical dry forests because of their extensive global coverage and a high degree of disturbance. Here we examine the changes in the potential supply of ecosystem services and the interactions among them along secondary tropical dry forest succession for a site on the Mexican Pacific coast. Using data from a chronosequence of twelve sites followed over ten years, we characterized changes in five ecosystem services along a successional gradient from abandoned farmland to old-growth forests: forage, multiple forest resources, microclimate regulation, carbon storage and carbon sequestration. The long-term recovery trajectory for each service was modelled using linear and non-linear mixed models. Interactions among them were examined over different timeframes using Spearman correlations. The results showed rapid non-linear recovery of multiple forest resources provision, microclimate regulation and carbon storage within the first two decades of succession. Carbon sequestration increased slightly over time, while the supply of forage showed no clear trend. The strength of the interactions among pairs of services changed through successional time, being particularly higher in farmlands and old-growth forests. Our findings suggest that adaptive forest management practices that foster the natural regeneration of tropical dry forests are cost-effective mechanisms to recover the supply of critical ecosystem services for local actors by meeting their livelihood needs as well as those for the global community through climate change mitigation. Maintaining tropical dry forest resilience will highly depend on the maintenance of diversity in terms of species and ecosystem services. © 2020 The Authors
Ecosystem services, agriculture, and rural poverty in the Eastern Brazilian Amazon: Interrelationships and policy prescriptions			Policymakers seeking to modify financial incentives to increase the flows of ecosystem services in and around tropical. moist forests must consider where to focus their attention and what collection of incentives can effectively achieve policy objectives. In most cases, policymakers focus on extensively forested areas where the flows of ecosystem services between agriculture and the environment is generally characterized by massive flows of carbon and soil nutrients from forests to agriculture. In these forest margin areas the stock of primary forest is eventually exhausted and the cheap ingredients provided by nature to agriculture become increasingly scarce. At this point, policy interest generally wanes, and agriculture and the environment begin slow declines in ecosystem service exchange, often with negative consequences for rural poverty. How does one promote increased flows of ecosystem services from agricultural lands without increasing poverty when forests and soils have been depleted? Can the standard instruments, e.g., payments for ecosystem services, be effective in such situations, and if so, do the costs to society of securing these services increase? Here we focus on the flows of ecosystem services at the end of the cycle of converting primary forest to agriculture. Primary data from the Bragantina area in the southeastern Brazilian Amazon, an area cleared of primary forest decades ago, are used to characterize smallholder production systems, to describe the flows of ecosystem services into and from these systems, and to develop a bioeconomic model of smallholder agriculture capable of predicting the effects of several types of policy action on ecosystem services provided by and to agriculture, and on-farm household incomes and food self-reliance. Of particular interest is the Proambiente Pilot Program in Brazil, which uses smallholder payment schemes to induce farmers to manage land and forest resources in ways that generate more ecosystem services. Baseline results suggest that smallholder agriculture leads to a gradual loss of ecosystem services (mainly above-ground and root carbon) provided by secondary forest fallows, and that reduction in fallow age leads to reductions in plant diversity. Intensifying agricultural activities accelerates this process, but considerably increases smallholder incomes. Paying farmers for ecosystem services linked to the retention of secondary forests and the Proambiente program both increase area in forest fallow, but the latter substantially reduces farm income because of input use restrictions. In general, programs aiming to promote the production of ecosystem services should not limit farmers' choices of ways to provide them. Employment and food self-reliance issues associated with policy options for increasing on-farm stocks of carbon and plant biodiversity are also explored. (C) 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Ecosystem structure and productivity of tropical rain forests along altitudinal gradients with contrasting soil phosphorus pools on Mount Kinabalu,Borneo			1. We measured above-ground net primary productivity (ANPP) and ecosystem structure and processes in eight rain forest stands at four elevations (700, 1700, 2700 and 3100 m) and on two geological substrates (sedimentary vs. ultrabasic rock) on Mount Kinabalu, Borneo. 2. All ultrabasic sites had smaller pools of total soil phosphorus (P) and of labile inorganic P than did the sedimentary sites at the same altitudes. We predicted that the magnitude of altitudinal changes in ANPP would be less on ultrabasic than on sedimentary substrates, reflecting lower temperature dependency of ANPP under stronger P limitation. 3. Although ANPP declined with increasing altitude on both substrates, the slopes of the two regression lines were similar. The intercept was, however, marginally greater on sedimentary than on ultrabasic substrate. 4. Stand-level nutrient-use efficiencies (the ratio of litterfall mass to nutrient return) for N and P were only affected by altitude on ultrabasic substrate where they increased exponentially. Mean foliar N and P contents per unit leaf area of the canopy species increased with altitude on both substrates, but differed between substrates at the same altitude only for P (lower on ultrabasic). 5. Leaf area index (LAI) decreased upslope on both substrates. We assumed that half of primary production was allocated below-ground in order to evaluate stand level net assimilation rate (NAR). This was nearly constant on sedimentary substrate, but declined linearly with increasing altitude on ultrabasic substrate, where it may have to be added to LAI to explain ANPP patterns. 6. We suggest that on sedimentary substrate trees may be able to maintain NAR under colder environments by increasing foliar N and P per unit leaf area, but P deficiency prevents them from adjusting on ultrabasic substrate.
Ecosystem-Based Strategies for Community Resilience to Climate Variability in Indonesia			Rural communities have long been using ecosystems to sustain their livelihoods, especially in times of disasters when forests act as safety nets and natural buffers. However, it is less clear how climate variability influences changes in land uses, and their implications for human well-being. We examined how forests and trees can reduce human vulnerability by affecting the three components of vulnerability: exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity. A total of 24 focus group discussions and 256 household surveys were conducted in two smallholder-dominated rural landscapes in Indonesia, which were affected by floods, drought and disease outbreaks. Our results suggest that forests and trees are important in supporting community resilience and decreasing their vulnerabilities to climate-related stresses in different ways. The role of trees varied according to the type of ecosystem service, whether provisioning or regulating, in relation to the phase of the climatic hazard, either in the pre-disaster phase or in the post-disaster recovery phase. It is therefore important to distinguish between these elements when analyzing people's responses to climatic variability in order to fully capture the contribution of forests and trees to reducing people's vulnerability. Landscape spatial characteristics, environmental degradation and community awareness of climate variability are crucial because if their linkages are recognized, local people can actively manage natural resources to increase their resilience. Interventions related to forests and trees should take into consideration these aspects to make ecosystem services a valuable option for an integrated strategy to reduce disaster risks and climate-related vulnerabilities.
Ectomycorrhizal (Dipterocarp) and arbuscular mycorrhizal (non-dipterocarp) tree			The type of mycorrhizal associations (i.e. ecto- or arbuscular mycorrhizal) formed by trees is of fundamental importance for a range of soil properties and processes in forest ecosystems, yet their importance for the distribution of other important soil biota such as bacteria is still largely unknown. This is especially so in diverse tropical forests where trees of different mycorrhizal types are intermingled in a highly heterogeneous biotic and abiotic environment. Here we used an experimental common garden that helped us to assess how abiotic and biotic variation differentially influenced bacterial communities associated with trees planted in a secondary tropical forest of Borneo. We used high-throughput amplicon sequencing to characterize rhizosphere bacterial communities of 13 climax tree species (8 ectomycorrhizal and 5 arbuscular mycorrhizal) in relation to plant traits, plant neighborhood, and abiotic environment. Rhizosphere bacterial (RB) communities differed significantly between EM and AM trees but not among EM species and only marginally among AM species. Foliar nutrients, especially potassium, showed relationships with RB community composition. Rhizosphere bacterial communities were related to the density and size of neighboring ectomycorrhizal but not arbuscular mycorrhizal trees. Diversity of RB on AM trees responded positively to AM neighbors and negatively to EM neighbors but RB diversity associated with EM trees was unaffected by neighborhood. Rhizosphere bacterial communities of AM trees were more responsive to environmental variation such as light availability and position on a slope. Plant-growth-promoting taxa of RB assorted similarly to total RB but more strongly. Synthesis: Our results suggest that the distribution of rhizosphere bacterial communities is linked to plant functional group and plant neighborhood. Because rhizosphere bacteria play important roles in nutrient cycling that influence plant species composition, it is likely that their distributional patterns are important for understanding ecosystem processes and plant demographics. Methods for generation of microbial abundance table Rhizosphere soil sample collection: In October through November 2016 when trees were eight years old, we collected fine roots from trees of 13 tree species belonging to six families (4-5 trees per species; Table 1). We selected 13 species from the total pool of 34 species focusing on an even sampling of trees that form EM and AM and also focusing on tree species with high enough survival to allow replicate sampling. Unfortunately, a high proportion of AM trees planted initially in the common garden did not survive resulting in the inclusion of only 5 AM species. Individuals were selected randomly from the 20 replicates per species. To characterize the RB community of each tree, rhizosphere soil was collected by following lateral roots out from the trunk until the fine roots were reached, ensuring that samples belonged to the focal tree. Fine roots were collected opportunistically and were found anywhere from several centimeters to 10+ meters from the trunk. Trees were sampled at three different directions from the tree trunk, with a minimum collection of 15 cm of fine roots per direction. Because soils were wet and adhered to roots when removed from the ground, we were able to exclusively sample soil located within 1 cm of fine roots (rhizosphere soil). All soil that was further than 1 cm from a fine root was discarded. Bacterial communities were sampled only from rhizosphere soil to exclude endophytes. Soil samples were kept frozen before being transported on ice to a -60 °C freezer. We homogenized rhizosphere soil by stirring with a rod and subsampled 25-30 g. Molecular analysis: We extracted genomic DNA from rhizosphere soil using a DNeasy PowerSoil kit (Qiagen Biotechnology). The concentration and purity of the DNA were determined with a NanoDrop 2000 Spectrophotometer (GE Healthcare) and standardized to 25 ng/muL (soil). We produced rDNA PCR amplicons as follows: we amplified for the V4-V5 region of the 16S rRNA gene using the primers 515FB (Parada et al., 2016) and 926R (Quince et al., 2011). Reaction and cycling conditions for PCR are found in the Supplemental Material. Library preparation was carried out with a Nextera DNA library prep kit (Illumina, Inc.). Sequencing was carried out at Biotechnology Research Institute, Universiti Malaysia Sabah on a MiSeq Desktop Sequencer (Illumina Inc.) running in paired end 2*300 mode. All molecular analyses, including sample preparation, PCR, library preparation, and sequencing were performed at Biotechnology Research Institute, Universiti Malaysia Sabah. We homogenized rhizosphere soil, subsampled 25-30 g and extracted gDNA using a DNeasy PowerSoil kit (Qiagen Biotechnology). The concentration and purity of the DNA were determined with a NanoDrop 2000 Spectrophotometer (GE Healthcare) and standardized 25 ng/muL. Details of the extraction protocol are provided in the Supplemental Material. We produced rDNA PCR amplicons as follows: We amplified the taxonomically informative V4-V5 region of the 16S rRNA gene using the primers 515FB (Parada et al., 2016) and 926R (Quince et al., 2011). Samples were amplified on a C1000 Touch Thermal Cycler (Bio-Rad) with 40 PCR cycles using the GoTaq Flexi PCR Kit (Promega Corp.) with recommended protocol to prepare amplicon pools for sequencing (details of PCR reactions and cycling conditions in supplementary materials). The locus-specific PCR products were purified using KAPA Pure Beads kit (Kapa Biosystems) with recommended protocol and standardized to a concentration of 10 ng/mL using the elution buffer. Library preparation was carried out using a Nextera DNA Sample Preparation Index Kit (96 Indices, 384 samples; Illumina, Inc.) with the following alterations to the recommended protocol. Indexing PCR reactions were set up using the KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix PCR Kit (Kapa Biosystems) with 5 muL of the purified PCR products as template and 5 muL each of index primers 1 and 2 (i7 & i5, respectively) and amplified for 12 cycles (details in supplementary materials). The indexed PCR product was purified as above. The concentration of the indexed PCR product was measured spectrophotometrically and standardized to a concentration of 10 ng/mL using the elution buffer as diluent. To allow inclusion of more samples, pools of 16S amplicons were indexed together with 18S and ITS samples for each sample (results for 18S and ITS analysis not presented here, details of pooling protocol in supplementary material). Sequencing was carried out using MiSeq Reagent Kit v3 (600 cycle) on a MiSeq benchtop sequencer (Illumina) running in paired end 2 x 300 mode. The loading concentration of the pooled DNA library was 7 pM and spiked with 30% PhiX. Bioinformatics: Loci of interest (16S) were separated from the other pooled loci (18S and ITS) prior to demuliplexing using fqgrep (Das, 2011). Contaminating PhiX sequence was removed using the akutils phix_filtering command in akutils v1.2 (Andrews, 2018). Primers were trimmed from the amplicons with the strip_primers command. 16S paired-end reads were merged using the join_paired_reads command. Merged 16S and forward read 18S sequences were assessed for quality with FastQC (Andrews, 2010). Low-quality 3 base calls were trimmed using FastX Toolkit (http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/). OTU picking and taxonomy assignments were performed using the pick_otus workflow command to process samples through QIIME 1.9.1 (Caporaso et al., 2010). Samples were demultiplexed and quality-filtered to retain sequences with a minimum quality of q20, allowing no ambiguous base calls and discarding any reads less than 95% of the original length after filtering. Chimeras were filtered from sequences with VSEARCH 1.1.1 (Rognes et al., 2016). OTU-picking was performed using SWARM (Mahe et al., 2014), allowing a distance of 3 (approximately 99% similarity). Taxonomy assignment was done with BLAST (Altschul et al., 1990) in QIIME (max e-value 1 x 10-20, assign best match) against SILVA version 132 database (Quast et al., 2013). Reference databases were filtered to include only the regions of our amplicons (V4-V5), avoiding false assignments. Rare OTUs comprising less than 0.005% of the tables were filtered out (Bokulich et al., 2013).  Tree neighborhood data We established 1.5 m radial plots around all focal trees and identified and measured the diameter at breast height (DBH, 1.3 m above soil surface) of all trees with DBH of 10 cm or greater. We also established 3.0 m radial plots and identified all tree species with DBH of 20 cm or greater.  Plant traits & abiotic variables Traits and abiotic data were taken from the dataset used for Gustafsson et al., (2016).  *See manuscript for references Microsoft Office or Open Office. Copyright: CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication
Ecuador's Mangrove Forest Carbon Stocks: A Spatiotemporal Analysis of Living Carbon Holdings and Their Depletion since the Advent of Commercial Aquaculture			In this paper we estimate the living carbon lost from Ecuador's mangrove forests since the advent of export-focused shrimp aquaculture. We use remote sensing techniques to delineate the extent of mangroves and aquaculture at approximately decadal periods since the arrival of aquaculture in each Ecuadorian estuary. We then spatiotemporally calculate the carbon values of the mangrove forests and estimate the amount of carbon lost due to direct displacement by aquaculture. Additionally, we calculate the new carbon stocks generated due to mangrove reforestation or afforestation. This research introduces time and LUCC (land use/land cover change) into the tropical forest carbon literature and examines forest carbon loss at a higher spatiotemporal resolution than in many earlier analyses. We find that 80 percent, or 7,014,517 t of the living carbon lost in Ecuadorian mangrove forests can be attributed to direct displacement of mangrove forests by shrimp aquaculture. We also find that IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) compliant carbon grids within Ecuador's estuaries overestimate living carbon levels in estuaries where substantial LUCC has occurred. By approaching the mangrove forest carbon loss question from a LUCC perspective, these findings allow for tropical nations and other intervention agents to prioritize and target a limited set of land transitions that likely drive the majority of carbon losses. This singular cause of transition has implications for programs that attempt to offset or limit future forest carbon losses and place value on forest carbon or other forest good and services.
Edge effect impacts on forest structure and carbon stocks in REDD+ projects: An assessment in the Amazon using UAV-LiDAR			Land use/land cover change (LULCC) is an ongoing process in the Brazilian Amazon, and it is a major source of emissions through the processes of deforestation and forest degradation. Identifying and monitoring deforestation and different sources of degradation is crucial for the success of forest conservation and REDD+ projects (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation). This study aims to investigate edge effects caused by land use change in REDD+ projects and understand their effect on forest structure and carbon storage potential. Here, the edge effect is not primarily caused by direct human intervention but rather by microclimatic changes induced by the agricultural conversion of adjacent areas. The study was conducted on ongoing REDD+ projects established in the Brazilian Amazon, and we relied on statistical modeling to relate forest structural characteristics (i.e., canopy height, canopy roughness, canopy openness, carbon stock, leaf area index, and understory leaf area index) along the distance gradient from the forest edge to its interior. Our findings demonstrate that edge effects extend up to a distance between 30 and 65 m, showcasing the remarkable resilience of the forests examined in this study. By comparing the area impacted by the edge effect to the forest interior, we observed a 19.6 % reduction in canopy height, 23.3 % reduction in carbon stock, 17 % reduction in leaf area index, 35.6 % increase in canopy roughness, and more than 100 % increase in canopy openness. Our results show how this source of edge effect can affect the total carbon stock of projects with different sizes. In large areas (i.e., 5000 ha), edge effect does not have a significant impact on the total carbon stock due to the small proportion of edge area, reducing 0.8 % of the total carbon stock. Nevertheless, small areas are more subjected to emission caused by edge effect, where a project with 100 ha can have a loss of 5 % in carbon stock. These results underscore the importance of promoting the widespread adoption of remote sensing techniques in REDD+ projects. This study has revealed the significant potential of LiDAR technology for monitoring local degradation in REDD+ projects. The methodology allowed for a comprehensive and detailed assessment of forest structure, offering replicable and periodic monitoring capabilities to enhance its effectiveness. © 2025 Elsevier B.V.
Edge effects and human disturbance influence soil physical and chemical properties in Sacred Church Forests in Ethiopia			Aims Tropical forests are increasingly threatened by edge effects as forest degradation and deforestation continues, compromising soil integrity, seedling regeneration capacity, and ecosystem services. Ninety-three percent of the last remaining forests of northern Ethiopia, which number 1022 in the South Gondar region of our study, are <16 ha and are protected because they have a Tewahido Orthodox Christian church at their center. The aim of this study was to determine the effects of human disturbance, forest size, distance from population center and other factors on the soil properties and nutrient status of sacred church forests. We also compared forest soil physical and chemical properties across land cover types in these forests. Methods We assessed the soil physical (water content and bulk density) and chemical (total carbon and nitrogen, available phosphorus, ammonium) properties of 40 sacred church forests across three spatial scales: within individual forests; among forests; and across land cover type (forest, forest edge-exterior,Eucalyptusplantation). We used distance from the edge within each forest to examine edge effects on soil nutrients. Results We found that nutrients and carbon decreased significantly from the interior to the outer edge of these forests and with forest size. Further, the soil ofEucalyptusplantations and areas outside of the forest were largely indistinguishable; both had significantly lower nutrient concentrations than sacred church forest soil. Conclusion Our research highlights the insidious impacts of edge effects and human disturbance on forest soils and the need for an integrated soil management program in the region that balances local needs with forest conservation. The conservation of these sacred church forests is important for maintaining regional soil nutrient status relative to agricultural lands andEucalyptusplantations.
Effect of Anthropogenic Land-Use and Land-Cover Changes on Climate and Land Carbon Storage in CMIP5 Projections for the Twenty-First Century			The effects of land-use changes on climate are assessed using specified-concentration simulations complementary to the representative concentration pathway 2.6 (RCP2.6) and RCP8.5 scenarios performed for phase 5 of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5). This analysis focuses on differences in climate and land-atmosphere fluxes between the ensemble averages of simulations with and without land-use changes by the end of the twenty-first century. Even though common land-use scenarios are used, the areas of crops and pastures are specific for each Earth system model (ESM). This is due to different interpretations of land-use classes. The analysis reveals that fossil fuel forcing dominates land-use forcing. In addition, the effects of land-use changes are globally not significant, whereas they are significant for regions with land-use changes exceeding 10%. For these regions, three out of six participating models-the Second Generation Canadian Earth System Model (CanESM2); Hadley Centre Global Environmental Model, version 2 (Earth System) (HadGEM2-ES); and Model for Interdisciplinary Research on Climate, Earth System Model (MIROC-ESM)-reveal statistically significant changes in mean annual surface air temperature. In addition, changes in land surface albedo, available energy, and latent heat fluxes are small but significant for most ESMs in regions affected by land-use changes. These climatic effects are relatively small, as land-use changes in the RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 scenarios are small in magnitude and mainly limited to tropical and subtropical regions. The relative importance of the climatic effects of land-use changes is higher for the RCP2.6 scenario, which considers an expansion of biofuel croplands as a climate mitigation option. The underlying similarity among all models is the loss in global land carbon storage due to land-use changes.
Effect of biochar application on the carbon stock and fertility of the soil under laboratory and tropical field conditions			Biochar is the solid material obtained from the carbonization of biomass, deliberately produced to be applied into soil. Biochar has been applied into soil to enhance soil carbon sequestration, contributing to mitigate climate change and increase the soil organic carbon content. This practice may also contribute to improve crop yield in the tropics where the low soil organic carbon content limits the agriculture. Although, these benefits of biochar use can be "simultaneously obtained", they cannot be "simultaneously maximized". Improved crop performance over time will be a consequence of partial decomposition of biochar, decreasing the soil C stocks and releasing CO2 to the atmosphere. Therefore, it is not clear if it is possible to sequester C through biochar addition and profit from its decay at the same time, or if it is need to choose one or other. The objective of this project is to study the biochar dynamic into soil and its interaction with the native soil organic carbon under field and laboratory conditions. Furthermore, this project will also evaluate the effects of biochar on the sugar-cane yield. If succeeded this project will address questions related to the use of biochar to increase soil C stocks and improve soil fertility in the (sub) tropical regions
Effect of changing groundwater levels caused by land-use changes on greenhouse gas fluxes from tropical peat lands			Monthly measurements of carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) fluxes in peat soils were carried out and compared with groundwater level over a year at four sites (drained forest, upland cassava, upland and lowland paddy fields) located in Jambi province, Indonesia. Fluxes from swamp forest soils were also measured once per year as the native state of this investigated area. Land-use change from drained forest to lowland paddy field significantly decreased the CO2 (from 266 to 30 mg C m(-2) h(-1)) and N2O fluxes (from 25.4 to 3.8 mu g N m(-2) h(-1)), but increased the CH4 flux (from 0.1 to 4.2 mg C m(-2) h(-1)) in the soils. Change from drained forest to cassava field significantly increased N2O flux (from 25.4 to 62.2 mu g N m(-2) h(-1)), but had no significant influence on CO2 (from 266 to 200 mg C m(-2) h(-1)) and CH4 fluxes (from 0.1 to 0.3 mg C m(-2) h(-1)) in the soils. Averaged CO2 fluxes in the swamp forests (94 mg C m(-2) h(-1)) were estimated to be one-third of that in the drained forest. Groundwater levels of drained forest and upland crop fields had been lowered by drainage ditches while swamp forest and lowland paddy field were flooded, although groundwater levels were also affected by precipitation. Groundwater levels were negatively related to CO2 flux but positively related to CH4 flux at all investigation sites. The peak of the N2O flux was observed at -20 cm of groundwater level. Lowering the groundwater level by 10 cm from the soil surface resulted in a 50% increase in CO2 emission (from 109.1 to 162.4 mg C m(-2) h(-1)) and a 25% decrease in CH4 emission (from 0.440 to 0.325 mg C m(-2) h(-1)) in this study. These results suggest that lowering of groundwater level by the drainage ditches in the peat lands contributes to global warming and devastation of fields. Swamp forest was probably the best land-use management in peat lands to suppress the carbon loss and greenhouse gas emission. Lowland paddy field was a better agricultural system in the peat lands in terms of C sequestration and greenhouse gas emission. Carbon loss from lowland paddy field was one-eighth of that of the other upland crop systems, although the Global Warming Potential was almost the same level as that of the other upland crop systems because of CH4 emission through rice plants.
Effect of Close-to-Nature management on the natural regeneration and species diversity in a masson pine plantation			China has the world's largest total area of plantation resource, among which the most common species is masson pine (Pinus massoniana Lamb). As a pioneer tree species in hill areas of southern China, masson pine is highly resistant to drought and infertile soils and thus plays an important role in the ecological restoration. However, as most masson pine plantations are monocultures, consisting of a single dominant tree species, their ecosystem services are often poor. Close-to- nature management is of great significance for the increase of species diversity and the improvement of ecological service in plantations. In 2005, a thinning experiment was conducted in a 12-year-old masson pine plantation in the Experiment Center of Tropical Forestry of Chinese Academy of Forestry, with four different levels of thinning density (i.e. 50%, 40%, 30%, and 20%). Then, four native broad-leaved tree species, ie. Castanopsis fissa, Mytilaria laosensis, Machilus pingii and C. hystrix, were interplanted with a density of 120 trees / hm2 in the thinned masson pine plantation. We investigated the community species diversity and growth conditions before the thinning experiment. Five years later, a re-investigation of the plots showed that: (1) the number of tree layer species were significant increased, with the species richness per plot (600 m2) from 2.75±2.56 to 11.17±4.32 and individual number from 5.75±2.56 to 32.17.17±19.09. In addition to the original dominant species before the experiment, nearly 10 species in original shrub layer grew into tree layer, including Evodia lepta,Schefflera minutistellata,Styrax faberi,Macaranga denticulata,Ficus esquiroliana,Eurya ciliata,Diospyros morrisiana, Pithecellobium clypearia,Litsea pungens and Actinodaphne pilosa. (2) the number of shrub and herb layer species increased only slightly from 24.63±4.24 to 27.58±3.80 per plot (600 m2). Different thinning density treatments had no significant effect on shrub-herb species in terms of Species richness index, Shannon-Wiener index, Simpson index, and Pielou index. The dominant species in shrub and herb layer were Evodia lepta and Cyrtococcum patens, respectively, which are similar with those before the thinning experiment. (3) The saplings of broad-leaved tree species benefited greatly from thinning management. The height and DBH increased significantly with the thinning intensity in Castanopsis fissa and C. hystrix. In the 50% thinning intensity stands, the broad-leaves tree saplings had significantly better performance than those in other stands, suggesting that the 50% thinning management was optimal for the growth of broad-leaves tree species. (4) There were significantly differences in early growth among the four broad-leave tree species in masson pine plantation. Overall, the early growth rates of C. fissa and Mytilaria laosensis were obviously higher than the other two species. Our results highlight the significant effects of close-to-nature management, i.e. thinning of dominant masson pine and interplanting of native tree species, on the increase of species diversity in plantations even in a relative short experimental period. As higher levels of species diversity are essential for community stability (e.g. the resistance of forest to variable disturbances), the close-to- nature management will benefit the supply of high-quality timbers and ecological services in masson pine plantations.
Effect of Cow Dung Biochar and Inorganic Fertilizer on Nutrient Leaching from the Soil			Nutrient leaching poses a significant challenge, particularly in tropical regions characterized by high rainfall, leading to diminished soil fertility and environmental contamination. This study seeks to explore the efficacy of cow dung biochar in mitigating nutrient leaching. The experimental design utilized a completely randomized design (CRD) with three replications. The investigation encompassed four treatments: a control, NPK 15:15:15 fertilizer application, sole biochar incorporation and a combination of NPK and biochar. Collected data encompassed parameters, like pH, soil texture, nitrogen, phosphorus and exchangeable cations. Statistical analysis was performed through ANOVA using SPSS 2017, while Tukey HSD was employed to discern means at a 5% significance level. Microsoft Excel 2016 was used to generate graphs and charts. Post-experimental soil and leachate analyses revealed diminished nitrogen and potassium leaching in biochar-treated scenarios. Calcium and magnesium leaching were most subdued in both control and biochar-treated soils. In conclusion, incorporating biochar into soil exhibits promise for curtailing nutrient loss via leaching, thereby reducing environmental pollution. This approach holds potential for enhancing soil fertility, bolstering productivity, reducing environmental pollution and aiding carbon sequestration to combat climate change. These findings hold significant implications for formulating policies aimed at environmental enhancement, sustainable soil management and conservation strategies. © 2024 Kalpana Corporation. All rights reserved.
Effect of land tenure on forest cover and the paradox of private titling in Panama			Meeting sustainable development goals requires policies that account for interrelatedness in social and environmental issues such as land tenure and deforestation. This work takes advantage of a nationwide titling campaign in Panama to explore the effect of private titling on forest cover across a heterogeneous landscape covering all stages of forest transition and diverse tenure arrangements. Situated in a broader matched analysis of the influence of zoning and tenure on forest cover, private management is estimated to have contributed to the deforestation of 1750-3650 km2 of mature forest nationwide from 1990 to 2020 with an average marginal effect of 15.3%. Conversely, Protected Areas and Indigenous Comarcas are estimated to have protected 1700-3900 km2 and 500-1250 km2 of mature forest, respectively. Private titling is associated with increased deforestation both during titling and years after, supporting observations that the titling process itself encourages speculative deforestation by title seekers and that private landholders value natural forests less than other land uses such as cattle. By disaggregating the data by region to highlight different stages of forest transition as well as by processes of deforestation and forest growth, this analysis shows that while private titling accelerates deforestation, it also encourages investment in reforestation. This presents a paradox for private titles and forests where agencies may perversely encourage speculative deforestation by creating stronger markets for forest-ready landscapes than for intact natural forests. In cases such as this one, where deforestation helps to secure a title, this paradox is confounded when having a title is set as a precondition for participation in a forest conservation program.
Effect of land use, season, and soil depth on soil microbial biomass carbon of Eastern Himalayas			Background: Soil microbial biomass, an important nutrient pool for ecosystem nutrient cycling is affected by several factors including climate, edaphic, and land-use change. Himalayan soils are young and unstable and prone to erosion and degradation due to its topography, bioclimatic conditions and anthropogenic activities such as frequent land-use change. Through this study, we tried to assess how soil parameters and microbial biomass carbon (MBC) of Eastern Himalayan soils originated from gneissic rock change with land-use type, soil depth and season. Chloroform fumigation extraction method was employed to determine MBC from different land-use types. Results: Soil physical and chemical properties varied significantly with season, land-use and soil depth (p < 0.001). The maximum values of soil properties were observed in the rainy season followed by summer and winter season in all the study sites. Annual mean microbial biomass carbon was highest in the forest (455.03 μg g− 1) followed by cardamom agroforestry (392.86 μg g− 1) and paddy cropland (317.47 μg g− 1). Microbial biomass carbon exhibited strong significant seasonal difference (p < 0.001) in all the land-use types with a peak value in the rainy season (forest-592.78 μg g− 1; agroforestry- 499.84 μg g− 1 and cropland- 365.21 μg g− 1) and lowest in the winter season (forest − 338.46 μg g− 1; agroforestry – 320.28 μg g− 1 and cropland − 265.70 μg g− 1). The value of microbial biomass carbon decreased significantly with soil depth (p < 0.001) but showed an insignificant increase in the second year which corresponds to a change in rainfall pattern. Besides, land-use type, season and soil depth, soil properties also strongly influenced microbial biomass carbon (p < 0.001). Microbial quotient was highest in the agroforestry system (2.16%) and least in the subtropical forest (1.91%). Conclusions: Our results indicate that land-use, soil depth and season significantly influenced soil properties and microbial biomass carbon. The physical and chemical properties of soil and MBC exhibit strong seasonality while the type of land-use influenced the microbial activity and biomass of different soil layers in the study sites. Higher soil organic carbon content in cardamom agroforestry and forest in the present study indicates that restoration of the litter layer through retrogressive land-use change accelerates microbial C immobilization which further helps in the maintenance of soil fertility and soil organic carbon sequestration. © 2020, The Author(s).
Effect of landscape structure on seed deposition in the Atlantic Forest			The process of fragmentation and habitat loss due to anthropogenic activities severely impacts biodiversity, and as a result affects various ecological processes and their associated ecosystem services. Of these ecological processes, seed rain is especially crucial in the maintenance of plant populations, influencing demographic structure and genetic variability, as well as driving the spatial-temporal distribution of tropical forests. Despite being an essential process to forest regeneration, we have a poor understanding of how landscape changes affect seed rain. In the proposed study, we plan to explore how the composition and configuration of the landscape affects the richness and abundance of seeds found in seed rain occurring in Atlantic Forest fragments. We will collect data along gradients of: forest quantity, fragment size, forest connectivity, and distance from fragment border. This study will be carried out as part of the Long-term Ecological Study of the Cantareira-Mantiqueira Corridor. Seed rain collectors will be place in 20 unique forest landscapes, with four replicates per landscape each located on a separate farm, resulting in a total of 80 farms. The farms will be monitored over the course of 6 months, during the peak period of fruit and seed production in the region (August - December). We will investigate various hypothesis to quantify the relative contribution of variables (forest cover (%), fragment area, connectivity, and distance from forest edge) to seed rain in these Atlantic Forest fragments.
Effect of Long Term Manuring on Carbon Sequestration Potential and Dynamics of Soil Organic Carbon Labile Pool Under Tropical Rice-Rice Agro-ecosystem			Soil carbon sequestration is a complex process influenced by agricultural practices, climate and soil conditions. Labile organic carbon is sensitive to soil management practices and thus provides better management of carbon dynamics than total carbon alone. Thus, an attempt is made here to investigate the Carbon sequestration potential and labile pool of soil organic carbon (SOC) in post kharif-2014 in flooded tropical rice (Oryza sativa L.) under long-term fertilizer experiment started in the year 2005–06 in the central farm of Odisha University of Agriculture and Technology (OUAT) under All India Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) taking rice as a test crop. The experiment was laid out in a Randomized Block Design with quadruplicated treatments. The treatments include no fertilization, 100% N, 100% NP, 100% NPK, 150% NPK and 100% NPK+FYM. The results revealed that cultivation over the years caused a 14% decrease in SOC in unfertilized control over uncultivated soil. The carbon sequestration potential (1.77 Mg ha−1) was highest in 100%NPK +FYM treatment. The greater accumulation of microbial biomass C, water and extractable carbon (WEO-C), potassium permanganate oxidizable C (KMnO4-C) was recorded in 100%NPK + FYM treatment. The highest carbon management index (CMI) was computed in 100%NPK with FYM. CMI can be used as a more sensitive indicator of the rate of change of SOC in response to soil management changes. Results suggested that 100% NPK+ FYM are adequate for maintaining SOC stock and this practice may help in maintaining the sustainability of rice-rice cropping system. © 2020, © 2020 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
Effect of microsite quality and species composition on tree growth: A semi-empirical modeling approach			Reforestation in the tropics mitigates the negative effects of climate change by sequestering carbon in biomass. However, tree growth is limited by nutrient availability in many tropical regions. A clear understanding of nutrient constraints and topography on growth of native timber species is thus essential to improve both the economic return on reforestation and the ecosystem services in tropical degraded lands. To address this, we use 7-year growth data from a 75-ha reforestation experiment in central Panama to test a modeling approach to predict growth of these species. The experiment includes five valuable timber species in 21 treatments, including monocultures and mixtures. We first fit a non-linear growth model as a function of tree age, then expand the former model parameters as a function of variables related to species mixture and micro-site soil conditions. Finally, we built a final model for each species to predict growth along three axes: nutrient availability, slope and species mixture. The models successfully identified how variation in growth was related to micro-site conditions and the species mixture. Although all species were long-lived pioneers, most were overall more sensitive to nutrient availability and between-trees interactions than to slope. However, the fastest growing species on average was more sensitive to slope than the other species and less sensitive to nutrient availability, showing better performance than the other species even under adverse conditions. Our models aid identification of species with the best growth potential to use in reforestation on infertile soils, leading to a better species selection according to site conditions.
Effect of skidding operations on soil carbon storage of a tropical peat swamp forest			Problem statement: There is still lack of a study that compares the soil carbon storage of kuda-kuda skidding system and excavator skidding system in tropical peat swamp forests. The objective of this study was to determine whether skidding operations affects soil carbon storage of a tropical peat swamp forest. Approach: Soil sampling was conducted on two different plots (0.3 ha each plot) to a depth of 15 cm under different skidding systems at Sibu, Sarawak, Malaysia. Plots were in the same forest concession area but considerably independent from each other. The soil samples were analyzed for acidity, organic matter content, total carbon, total nitrogen and total phosphorus. The humic acid extraction was also done and soil carbon storage values were obtained by calculation. The calculation of carbon storage was by the bulk density method. Unpaired t-test was used to compare variables under the two systems and correlation analysis was used to correlate variables (pH, soil organic matter, total carbon, total nitrogen, total phosphorus, C/N ratio, C/P ratio, humic acid yield, unstable carbon and stable carbon). Results: Soil organic matter, total carbon and unstable carbon were found to be negatively correlated with nitrogen but positively correlated with C/N ratio under kuda-kuda skidding system indicating that the lower nitrogen and higher C/N ratio markedly slowed decomposition process and enabled soil organic matter to accumulate as well as total carbon. Unstable carbon stocks under excavator skidding system was found to be higher (130.200 Mg ha-1) compared with kuda-kuda skidding system (117.124 Mg ha-1), under kuda-kuda skidding system, unstable carbon stock seemed to be preserved better and this was because of the better carbon storage. Although stable carbon contents of the two systems were similar, the excavator skidding system had faster decomposition processes, thus unstable carbon stocks decomposed more and this probably affects its function as carbon storage for further periods. Total phosphorus positively correlated with nitrogen but negatively correlated with C/N ratio under kuda-kuda skidding system, indicating that low nitrogen (0.914%) results in high C/N ratio (55.236) and this may have affected phosphorus (0.024%), thus enabled organic material to accumulate instead of losses through decomposition process. The low phosphorus (0.024%) or high C/P ratio (2346.345) under kuda-kuda skidding system resulted in decreased soil pH (3.552), thus enabled soil organic matter (97.603%) and total carbon (48.802%) to accumulate as well as unstable carbon stocks (117.124 Mg ha-1). Conclusion: The application of skidding systems in this peat swamp forest possibly alters their carbon storage particularly unstable carbon by altering their decomposition rates. Kuda-kuda skidding system is able to maintain decomposition process in this peat swamp forest. Hence, unstable carbon stocks can be preserved for further persistent breakdown processes, hence maintaining their function for carbon storage. © 2009 Science Publications.
EFFECT OF THE SEASONAL BURNING ON TREE SPECIES IN THE GUINEA SAVANNA WOODLAND, GHANA: IMPLICATIONS FOR CLIMATE CHANGE MITIGATION			The indiscriminate burning of vegetation is a common practice in the Guinea savanna of Ghana. Burning begins at the onset of the dry season (November) and lasts until the end (April). This study investigated the effects of time of burning on tree diversity and density in the Mole National Park, Ghana. A total of 36 (10 m x 10 m) quadrats were randomly demarcated in three treatments of early and late dry season burning and non-burning study plots. Samples were taken in March, a few weeks after the late burning period. Twenty seven different species belonging to fourteen families were recorded in all the treatments. Most of the species identified belonged to the families Combretaceae, Fabaceae and Leguminoceae. Vitellaria paradoxa, Terminalia avicennioides, Combretum adenogonium and Combretum molle were the most common and abundant in all treatments. Late burning plots recorded the lowest diversity amongst the three treatments. Non-burning plots had higher tree density than burnt plots. Early burning treatment recorded more diverse individual species but had the lowest density. Higher tree densities would enhance carbon sequestration. However, ecosystem resilience is also dependent on the diversity of biotic communities among other factors. Sustainable land use practices including protections of trees on farms and prescribed early dry season burns could be an option to contribute to the mitigation of climate change in the region. Late dry season fires are a threat to tree species populations and should be discouraged.
EFFECTIVENESS AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF PAYMENTS FOR REDUCED CARBON EMISSIONS FROM DEFORESTATION			This paper analyses the effectiveness and distributional effects of payments to avoid tropical deforestation. As a first: aspect, we investigated whether or not expected payments for avoided deforestation would be acceptable for tropical farmers in Southern Ecuador with the study area located directly adjacent to the Podocarpus National Park. Second, we explored possible distributional effects resulting from voluntary or mandatory remuneration schemes to avoid deforestation. Finally, a productive sustainable land use,vas conceptualised to be combined with payments For avoided deforestation to avoid leakage (i.e. deforestation processes elsewhere when avoided at a given farm). Farm level land use scenarios with ("business as usual") and without deforestation ("conservation strategy") were compared. Compensation per Mg Carbon (C) that is not emitted into the atmosphere under the "conservation strategy" was derived to achieve a monetary land net present value (NPV, sum of discounted future net revenues) equal to the NPV obtained under "business as usual'. Avoided carbon emissions were computed from above ground C in tropical forests of the project area and supplemented by In(130 formation on soil carbon from another study Economic data for cattle pasturing were obtained from a farm survey (130 households) to investigate distributional effects. To derive sustainable land use concepts, a risk sensitive bioeconomic farm model was used that considered effects of risk compensation when combining pasture with reforestation of abandoned farm lands and selective logging of natural forests. The results showed that only a few farmers (20 out of 130) would possibly accept a compensation price of US$ 10 per Mg avoided C emission, a C-compensation that is believed by other authors to reduce deforestation by 65%. Rather a compensation of around US$ 25 per Mg C was necessary to address compensation requirements of farmers who hold 50% of the tropical forest area in our study. The implementation of a voluntary remuneration scheme for avoided deforestation would not introduce systematic distributional effects (such as that only the biggest farmers would benefit from compensation), while a mandatory and enforced ban on deforestation coupled with a "fair" compensation payment equal to mean compensation requirements may lead to undesirable effects for many farmers. Finally, we demonstrate a mixed sustainable land use concept that depended on cheap credits for reforestation of abandoned pasture lands. This concept was able to stop farm level deforestation and to enlarge the economic value of farms through various combined land use options (agricultural and forestry options). The combination of land uses led to risk compensatory), effects and a more efficient land use by reintegrating unproductive abandoned areas back into the economical process. I In our conclusion a combination of payments for avoided deforestation along with productive land use concepts provided a viable solution for tropical forest conservation.
Effectiveness and synergies of policy instruments for land use governance in tropical regions			Land use is regulated through various mixes of command-and-control interventions that directly affect land use via land use restrictions, and other public interventions that indirectly affect land use via agricultural, forestry, trade or macro-economic policies. More recently, coalitions of public and private actors have designed market-based and/or demand-led policy instruments to influence land use-e.g., eco-certification, geographical indications, commodity roundtables, moratoria, and payments for environmental services. These innovative instruments fall along a continuum of state involvement and interact with traditional public forms of land use regulation, leading to "hybrid" interventions. This article reviews emerging evidence on the effectiveness of the main instruments used to promote sustainable land use, and explores interactions between the new demand-led interventions and formal regulatory public policies. Although there are still insufficient rigorous studies evaluating the effectiveness of hybrid instruments, available evidence suggests some positive direct and indirect benefits. Hybrid instruments combine elements from both private and public regulatory systems, in innovative and effective ways. We propose a typology to characterize potential interactions between instruments that regulate land use. It links various types of interactions-i.e., complementarity, substitution, and antagonism-to the various stages of regulatory processes-i.e., agenda setting, implementation, and monitoring and enforcement We give examples of governments endorsing certifications or using certification to support their own policies; governments creating enabling conditions for hybrid instruments to mature, allowing for wider adoption; and private instruments reinforcing public regulations or substituting for missing or weak governance. In some cases, governments, NGOs and corporations compete and may hinder each other's actions. With favourable institutional and governance contexts, well-designed hybrid public-private instruments can be effective. More systematic evaluation could boost the effectiveness of instruments and enhance synergistic interaction with traditional public land-use policy instruments to achieve incremental benefits as well as longer-term transformative outcomes in land-use protection. (C) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Effectiveness in the tropical forest restoration: how the differential performance of species and ecological context affect the establishment and occupation			Restoring tropical forests is essential to address global climate change, to maintain and conserve diversity and ecosystem services. The establishment and occupation of three forest restoration strategies (Total Seedling Planting (PAT), Diversity Islands (ID) and Direct Seeding (SD)) of the forest vegetation associated with watercourses was analyzed. It were evaluated: the number of individuals, resprouting intensity, aboveground biomass, canopy area, average diameter and height, per individual, in 58 sample units (10 x 30 m) distributed among the strategies after 2.5 years of implantation. It was also evaluated the main species and their similarities between the strategies. The SD provided more effective as the number of individuals, biomass and treetop area, while the intensity of resprouting was higher in ID and there were no differences in mean height and diameter. Each strategy presented a particular set of most successful species and the most similar were those that used seedlings (PAT and ID). The highlight of the SD strategy is magnified when considering ecological perspectives, and social costs involved. The species contributed to the differentiation of strategies, because they provide distinct ecological functions that influence ecological processes at the community level and individuals.
Effectiveness of restoration plantings with Pachira aquatica in swamps			Tropical freshwater swamps provide essential ecosystem services, such as flood mitigation and control. Land use changes cause alterations in their hydrology, increasing risks of degradation caused by extreme events like storms and hurricanes. We evaluated the effectiveness of different strategies to control opportunistic herbaceous vegetation, as a factor limiting the establishment of the dominant money tree Pachira aquatica for the restoration of swamps in the coastal floodplains of the Gulf coast in Mexico. Pachira aquatica saplings were planted in four treatments: (1) Control (saplings without further intervention), (2) Cut (herbaceous vegetation removal), (3) cutting with Vegetation mulch, and (4) cutting with Plastic cover. The effect of treatments on survival and relative growth rate (RGR) of P. aquatica saplings and on the herbaceous cover was measured after 2 years. Costs per treatment were also calculated. Saplings in the Control had the lowest survival (5.0%; only one seedling survived), followed by Cut (35.0 +/- 12.75%), Vegetation mulch (70.0 +/- 9.35%), and Plastic cover (95.0 +/- 5.0%). Sapling height and RGR were similar among treatments. The herbaceous layer cover was reduced to similar to 30% in Vegetation mulch and Plastic cover in comparison to Control and Cut treatments with similar to 94%. The most cost-effective treatment was Vegetation mulch, with almost half the cost of Plastic cover. Our results support the establishment of restoration plantings with P. aquatica to assist the recovery of swamps and highlight the need to include complementary interventions, to ensure higher tree sapling survival and to avoid total restoration failure in this system.
Effects of afforestation on soil nitrous oxide emissions in a subtropical montane agricultural landscape: A 3-year field experiment			Afforestation, through the conversion of upland cropland to forest, is of great significance to land use change in montane (hilly) agricultural landscapes worldwide. Such afforestation is Implemented to improve soil and water conservation and facilitate terrestrial carbon sequestration. However, particularly for subtropical and tropical regions, the effects of afforestation on soil N2O emissions have not been well investigated. Therefore, a three-year field experiment was conducted to simultaneously monitor N2O emissions from three paired sites of afforestation with cypress (Cypressus funebris) and adjacent cropland under a wheat-maize rotation system. The experiment was carried out in a subtropical montane agricultural landscape in southwest China. In both forest and cropland ecosystems, the N2O emissions exhibited a pronounced spatial and temporal variability. These variations in N2O emissions can be well explained by the spatiotemporal dynamics of environmental variables, such as soil temperature, WFPS, soil NH4+ or NO3- availability, because these environmental variables correlated significantly with the N 2 0 emissions across different experimental sites and years. The average annual N2O fluxes were 2.69 kg N ha(-1) for cropland and 0.13 kg N ha(-1) for afforestation. It is noteworthy that the annual N2O fluxes for afforestation found in the present study constitute one of the lowest recorded N2O fluxes for unfertilized forest ecosystems globally. Overall, across all experimental sites and years, afforestation with cypress (Cypressus funebris) stands significantly decreased N2O fluxes by over twenty times relative to the adjacent cropland. This outcome suggests that afforestation could be an effective mitigation strategy for soil N2O emissions in a subtropical montane agricultural landscape.
Effects of air pollution on carbon sequestration potential in two tropical forests of West Bengal, India			Tropical forests store more carbon in their above ground biomass than other forest habitats. Species and site specific allometric equations are desired to evaluate precise and dependable results of tree biomass. This study, therefore, aims to assess and compare the carbon sequestration potential (CSP) between two forests (Barjora forest, Bankura and Ballavpur Wildlife Sanctuary (BWLS), Bolpur, West Bengal), having different air pollution levels, by using a non-destructive sampling method. In the present study, it was observed that the CSP varied with different species and diameter class. Shorea robusta Gaertn. has a maximum CSP with 30284.8 kg ha(-1) and 261004.3 kg ha(-1) at Barjora forest and BWLS respectively among all the other measured tree species. The results indicated that all the tree species, with diameter at breast height (DBH) > 30 cm, contributed about 40.89% and 69.97% CSP at Barjora and BWLS, respectively. Independent samples t-test and Mann-Whitney U test were undertaken to check the significant difference between the CSP of different species, different diameter classes and different pollutant loads of the two forests. A statistically significant difference was found in carbon sequestration values and the levels of O-3, PM2.5, PM10 between BWLS and Barjora forest (p = < 0.05). Multiple linear regression model revealed that CSP decreased with increasing levels of air pollutants (NO2, O-3, PM10 and PM2.5). The results indicated that air pollution played an important role in the reduction of CSP of tropical forest located at polluted site. It was found that among the 8 common tree species, Shorea robusta Gaertn., with maximum CSP, followed by Acacia auriculiforrnis Benth., Eucalyptus globulus Labill., and Madhuca indica J.F. Gmel. may be recommended for afforestation programmes in the polluted site to reduce air pollution levels. The study could also be used for implementing Shorea robusta Gaertn. as an indicator species in tropical forest ecosystems in future.
Effects of buttressed roots on soil physical and chemical properties of soil in lowland rainforests of Diaoluoshan, Hainan, China br			Tropical rain forests are one of the most complex forest ecosystems and have long been the focus of ecological research. The aim of the study was to investigate the differences in the physico-chemical properties of soil in areas with buttress and non-buttress roots across different seasons and soil layers. We selected the typical lowland rainforests of the Diaoluoshan Nature Reserve in Hainan Province as the sample site. We collected soil samples from different soil layers of buttress and non-buttress root areas in dry and wet seasons and analyzed the differences in the physico-chemical properties of the soil, to investigate the ecological function of buttresses. The results showed the mechanical composition of the soil in buttress and non-buttress root areas in different soil layers in dry and wet seasons to be of the order: silt > sand > clay. The variation coefficient of the clay fraction in the wet season was significantly higher than that in the dry season. Soil temperature was not significantly different between buttress and non-buttress root areas across different seasons and soil layers. However, the soil moisture content was significantly higher in the buttress root areas, especial in the dry season (P < 0.05). The soil pH of buttress root areas was significantly higher than that in the non-buttress root areas in the dry season, while the buttress roots exerted no effect on the pH of the soil in the wet season. Buttress roots had a significant effect on other soil chemical indices across different seasons and soil layers. In the dry season, the organic carbon, total nitrogen, total phosphorus, hydrolyzed nitrogen, and available phosphorus contents in the soil from buttress root areas were significantly higher than those of the soil from non-buttress root areas. In the wet season, all the indices were higher in the buttress root areas than in the non-buttress root areas. The organic carbon, total nitrogen, and available phosphorus contents increased significantly by 21.04%-86.30%, 23.60%-99.74%, and 36.00%-103.45%, respectively. Buttress roots can retain not only soil water but also soil nutrients. Therefore, buttress roots are beneficial in improving the habitat heterogeneity of tropical rainforest ecosystems and forming nutrient enrichment areas and high soil carbon sequestration areas in the upper buttress roots
Effects of Clear-cutting and Slash Burning on Dynamics of Carbon and Nitrogen in Chinese Fir and Castanopsis fargesii Forests皆伐火烧对杉木林和栲树林碳、氮动态的影响			0
Effects of Different Management Practices on Stand Composition and Species Diversity in Subtropical Forests in Nepal: Implications of Community Participation in Biodiversity Conservation			In this article, we compared the structure, composition, and diversity of trees, shrubs and saplings, seedlings and herbaceous species of community- and government-managed forests in the lowlands of eastern Nepal. Results suggest that among the trees, the community forest was dominated by a single species, Shorea robusta. However, Shorea robusta and Terminalia myriocarpa were codominant in the government forest. Tree density and basal area were higher in the government forest, but shrub/sapling density and basal area were higher in the community forest, suggesting a positive effect of community management on tree regeneration. Overstory species assemblages showed an obvious compositional difference between the forests, but understory species assemblages were less obvious. Plot-level tree and shrub/sapling species richness was higher in the government forest than the community forest. However, seedling-herbaceous species richness was higher in the community forest. The dominance of Shorea robusta trees in the community forest suggests that people involved in managing forests may be more interested in a limited number of economically valuable species while removing less important trees. Such preferential management practices may increase resource heterogeneity within a forest and maintain species diversity in the understory. Thus, community participation in forest management should be encouraged, with guided management techniques and exercises, to achieve maximum forest recovery, provide sustainable ecosystem services, and maintain forest diversity. Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
Effects of experimental fuel additions on fire intensity and severity: unexpected carbon resilience of a neotropical forest			Global changes and associated droughts, heat waves, logging activities, and forest fragmentation may intensify fires in Amazonia by altering forest microclimate and fuel dynamics. To isolate the effects of fuel loads on fire behavior and fire-induced changes in forest carbon cycling, we manipulated fine fuel loads in a fire experiment located in southeast Amazonia. We predicted that a 50% increase in fine fuel loads would disproportionally increase fire intensity and severity (i.e., tree mortality and losses in carbon stocks) due to multiplicative effects of fine fuel loads on the rate of fire spread, fuel consumption, and burned area. The experiment followed a fully replicated randomized block design (N=6) comprised of unburned control plots and burned plots that were treated with and without fine fuel additions. The fuel addition treatment significantly increased burned area (+22%) and consequently canopy openness (+10%), fine fuel combustion (+5%), and mortality of individuals 5cm in diameter at breast height (dbh; +37%). Surprisingly, we observed nonsignificant effects of the fuel addition treatment on fireline intensity, and no significant differences among the three treatments for (i) mortality of large trees (30cm dbh), (ii) aboveground forest carbon stocks, and (iii) soil respiration. It was also surprising that postfire tree growth and wood increment were higher in the burned plots treated with fuels than in the unburned control. These results suggest that (i) fine fuel load accumulation increases the likelihood of larger understory fires and (ii) single, low-intensity fires weakly influence carbon cycling of this primary neotropical forest, although delayed postfire mortality of large trees may lower carbon stocks over the long term. Overall, our findings indicate that increased fine fuel loads alone are unlikely to create threshold conditions for high-intensity, catastrophic fires during nondrought years.
Effects of fire and edges on plant litterfall in a Neotropical rainforest, Brazil			Anthropogenic forest fires are occurring with increasing frequency in tropical forests, with negative consequences for a variety of ecological processes, including litterfall. Litterfall provides several ecosystem services, such as nutrient cycling and carbon storage, thus playing an important role in ecosystem functioning. We assessed the impacts of fire and fire-created edges on litterfall in Atlantic Forest remnants in Bahia, Brazil. Litterfall was assessed at monthly intervals over one year along seven 300 m-long transects placed perpendicular to the edge between the unburnt forest and the burnt forest. We installed litterfall traps at the edge (0 m) and 20, 40, 60, 80, 100 and 150 m into both the burnt and unburnt forest. The total litterfall was smaller in the burnt forest (mean of 2.5 +/- 2.2 SD t.ha-1.y-1) than in the unburnt forest (mean of 5.9 +/- 3.4 SD t.ha-1.y-1). In addition, leaf litter gradually increased from the edge toward the unburnt forest interior. Our results highlight that there is less litterfall in the burnt forest, and that the relative contribution of different litter types (leaves, twigs, and miscellaneous litter) differ between burnt forest and unburnt forest. The lower amount of litterfall in the burnt forest and forest edge may have negative consequences for the natural regeneration of these areas, as the ecosystem services provided by plant litter that are important for forest regeneration are likely to be impaired.
Effects of historical land use and recovery pathways on composition, structure, ecological function, and ecosystem services in a Caribbean secondary forest			Regenerated secondary forests in the tropics are resilient ecosystems. Differences in land-use history and disturbance, abiotic and biotic site conditions, and successional pathways can influence secondary forest biodiversity, structure, ecological functions, and ecosystem services. However, studies assessing the supply of ecosystem services of secondary forests are limited. We examined trees in plots located across late successional stage secondary forest in the Luquillo Experimental Forest, Puerto Rico with three combinations of historical canopy cover (circa 1936) and post-agricultural recovery pathways: (1) > 50% canopy cover and passive regeneration (>50 P), (2) < 50% canopy cover and passive regeneration (<50 P), and (3) < 50% canopy cover and assisted + passive regeneration (<50 A+P). Using i-Tree Eco methodology, we investigated if differences in historical cover and passive vs assisted natural regeneration resulted in differences in composition and structure, hydrological functions, and estimated regulating ecosystem services, and compared the results between native and non-native species. The <50 P plots had greater species richness than the >50 P and <50 A+P plots, while the <50 A+P plots had significantly greater DBH, height, basal area, aboveground biomass, and estimated quantities of evaporation and transpiration, carbon storage, and removal of airborne contaminants compared to the other recovery pathways. Differences among plot groups can be attributed to historical management actions in concert with successional trajectories characteristic of novel secondary forests. Native species dominated throughout these secondary forests and cumulatively exhibited services that were 1.3 to 3.5 times greater than those of non-native species. However, non-native trees contributed disproportionally to basal area and above-ground biomass, and thus to some ecosystem services. Both natives and non-natives exhibited service provision that varied significantly with diameter size class and service type, and large trees were observed to be dominant service providers irrespective of species origin. Our study marks the first landscape-scale quantitative assessment of forest composition, structure and ecological functioning that is explicitly linked to exploring regulating ecosystem services within the montane secondary forest in Puerto Rico and expands representation of this research from the Caribbean. The findings underscore the role of historical land use and recovery pathways in driving services of tropical forests and show how ecosystem functions can vary in accordance with dynamic structural attributes of individual trees. This research can provide a useful point of comparison for analysis of biomass accumulation, ecosystem service provision, and evaluating service tradeoffs associated with forest structure in other recovering and old-growth tropical landscapes.
Effects of interannual climate variability on tropical tree cover			Climatic warming is substantially intensifying the global water cycle(1) and is projected to increase rainfall variability(2). Using satellite data, we show that higher climatic variability is associated with reduced tree cover in the wet tropics globally. In contrast, interannual variability in rainfall can have neutral or even positive effects on tree cover in the dry tropics. In South America, tree cover in dry lands is higher in areas with high year-to-year variability in rainfall. This is consistent with evidence from case studies suggesting that in these areas rare wet episodes are essential for opening windows of opportunity where massive tree recruitment can overwhelm disturbance effects, allowing the establishment of extensive woodlands. In Australia, wet extremes have similar effects, but the net effect of rainfall variability is overwhelmed by negative effects of extreme dry years. In Africa, effects of rainfall variability are neutral for dry lands. It is most likely that differences in herbivore communities and fire regimes contribute to regulating tree expansion during wet extremes. Our results illustrate that increasing climatic variability may affect ecosystem services in contrasting, and sometimes surprising, ways. Expansion of dry tropical tree cover during extreme wet events may decrease grassland productivity but enhance carbon sequestration, soil nutrient retention and biodiversity(3).
Effects of land use change on turnover and storage of soil organic matter in a tropical forest			Aims Land-use change of tropical forests causes loss of soil organic matter and plant productivity. Effects of fallow or plantation vegetation on soil organic matter storage need to be clarified to optimize land-use that maximizes soil organic matter storage and plant productivity. Methods We compared 30-year changes in soil carbon stocks and litter decomposition under different land-uses (primary dipterocarp forest, Macaranga forest, Imperata grassland, transition of Imperata grassland to Acacia plantation, transition of Imperata grassland to oil palm plantation) in Indonesia. Results The Imperata grassland maximizes soil carbon stocks for up to 10 years due to considerable root litter inputs, but additional organic matter storage is limited over the following 20 years, due to high grass litter decomposability in the less acidified soil. The conversion of Imperata grassland to oil palm plantation causes greatest loss of soil organic matter, whereas Acacia plantation on Imperata grassland or the Macaranga forest maximizes soil carbon stocks due to input of recalcitrant forest litters and reduced microbial activities in the acidified soils. Conclusion Farmers could adopt short-term (<10 years) grass fallow or longer-term (>10 years) fallow under Acacia plantation on Imperata grassland or Macaranga regeneration forest to maximize soil organic matter storage. The optimum and feasible land-use strategies should be selected based on the length of fallow period and the original acidity of soil.
Effects of landscape composition and site land-use intensity on secondary succession in a tropical dry forest			Regenerating forests after agricultural land abandonment are increasingly common in human-modified tropical landscapes. These secondary forests preserve biodiversity and provide multiple ecosystem services, but such important roles depend on their recovery rates, which can be difficult to predict. Recovery is expected to occur faster when landscape composition favors seed dispersal to the regenerating site, and when previous land-use does not significantly reduce propagule bank or future plant growth. Here, we test such expectations for the recovery of a Mexican tropical dry forest during secondary succession. For this purpose, we measured several indicators of landscape composition and site land-use intensity in 30 regenerating sites located along gradients of age of abandonment and amount of surrounding forest. Generalized linear models and redundancy analysis were fitted to test if values of four vegetation properties (aboveground biomass, total and dominant species diversity, and species composition) were indicative of such effects. We found evidence that, as expected, species richness recovers faster in sites surrounded by higher forest cover, while aboveground biomass recovers slower as surrounding pasture cover increases. Species composition was also significantly but poorly explained by the interaction between age of abandonment and the amount of forest cover. Contrary to our expectations, we found weak evidence on the impact of site land-use intensity on all vegetation properties, except on the number of dominant species, which showed higher values in sites with higher land-use intensity. Our findings show that landscape context plays a major role in structuring successional plant communities in this tropical dry region, even stronger than site land-use intensity. This seems to be related to the influence of landscape patterns on dispersal and recruitment limitation, but also on the likelihood of further human disturbances. Therefore, conserving landscape quality is paramount to enhance forest recovery and its contribution to the preservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services.
Effects of landscape fragmentation of plantation forests on carbon storage in the Loess Plateau, China			Tree plantation and forest restoration are the major strategies for enhancing terrestrial carbon sequestration and mitigating climate change. The Grain for Green Project in China has positively impacted global carbon sequestration and the trend towards fragmentation of plantation forests. Limited studies have been conducted on changes in plantation biomass and stand structure caused by fragmentation, and the effect of fragmentation on the carbon storage of plantation forests remains unclear. This study evaluated the differences between carbon storage and stand structure in black locust forests in fragmented and continuous landscape in the Ansai District, China and discussed the effects of ecological significance of four landscape indices on carbon storage and tree density. We used structural equation modelling to explore the direct and indirect effects of fragmentation, edge, abiotic factors, and stand structure on above-ground carbon storage. Diameter at breast height (DBH) in fragmented forests was 53.3% thicker, tree density was 40.9% lower, and carbon storage was 49.8% higher than those in continuous forests; for all given DBH>10 cm, the trees in fragmented forests were shorter than those in continuous forests. The patch area had a negative impact on carbon storage, i.e., the higher the degree of fragmentation, the lower the density of the tree; and fragmentation and distance to edge (DTE) directly increased canopy coverage. However, canopy coverage directly decreased carbon storage, and fragmentation directly increased carbon storage and tree density. In non-commercial forests, fragmentation reduces the carbon storage potential of plantation, and the influence of patch area, edge, and patchy connection on plantation should be considered when follow-up trees are planted and for the plantation management. Thus, expanding the area of plantation patches, repairing the edges of complex-shaped patches, enhancing the connectivity of similar patches, and applying nutrients to plantation forests at regular intervals are recommended in fragmented areas of the Loess Plateau.
Effects of land-use change and disturbance on the fine root biomass, dynamics, morphology, and related C and N fluxes to the soil of forest ecosystems at different elevations at Mt. Kilimanjaro (Tanzania)			Tropical forests are threatened by anthropogenic activities such as conversion into agricultural land, logging and fires. Land-use change and disturbance affect ecosystems not only aboveground, but also belowground including the ecosystems' carbon and nitrogen cycle. We studied the impact of different types of land-use change (intensive and traditional agroforestry, logging) and disturbance by fire on fine root biomass, dynamics, morphology, and related C and N fluxes to the soil via fine root litter across different ecosystems at different elevational zones at Mt. Kilimanjaro (Tanzania). We found a decrease in fine root biomass (80-90%), production (50%), and C and N fluxes to the soil via fine root litter (60-80%) at all elevation zones. The traditional agroforestry 'Chagga homegardens' (lower montane zone) showed enhanced fine root turnover rates, higher values of acquisitive root morphological traits, but similar stand fine root production, C and N fluxes compared to the natural forest. The decrease of C and N fluxes with forest disturbance was particularly strong at the upper montane zone (60 and 80% decrease, respectively), where several patches of Podocarpus forest had been disturbed by fire in the previous years. We conclude that changes on species composition, stand structure and land management practices resulting from land-use change and disturbance have a strong impact on the fine root system, modifying fine root biomass, production and the C and N supply to the soil from fine root litter, which strongly affects the ecosystems' C and N cycle in those East African tropical forest ecosystems.
Effects of land-use changes on woody species distribution and above-ground carbon storage of forest-coffee systems			As deforestation and fragmentation continue in tropical regions with high human use and disturbance of natural habitats, production landscapes such as agroforests and plantations may provide some forest-based services depending on tree selection, agroforest management and intensification. This is typical to southwest Ethiopia with strong human-dependence on forest biodiversity and ecosystem services. We examined the effects of land-use changes and fragmentation on woody species distribution and the relative importance of forest fragments and coffee farms in wood use and carbon storage. We sampled heartwood from 71 woody species in three land use types: natural forest fragments, smallholder semiforest coffee farms and state-owned coffee plantations. We calculated wood density as an oven-dry biomass per fresh volume of heartwood core samples, and above-ground carbon biomass using allometric methods. We found that average wood density values were not correlated with fragment size. Mean wood density of species in forests was greater than in state-owned plantations. The two coffee systems can store 50-62% of the above-ground carbon biomass found in forests, indicating the need to incorporate coffee farms and forest remnants in carbon incentive, or climate mitigation and adaptation programs. To correlate species wood density with local wood preferences, we interviewed focus groups and households about the use-values of 51 farmer-appreciated species. There was a strong correlation between wood density and local wood-values signifying the concordance of species functional traits and ecosystem service values. Our results indicate the need to integrate functional traits and local ecosystem service uses in climate adaptation and mitigation by incorporating coffee agroforests with the conservation of natural forest remnants. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Effects of litter manipulation on soil respiration under short-term nitrogen addition in a subtropical evergreen forest			Nitrogen (N) availability is rapidly increasing in subtropical ecosystems, where litterfall is also accelerating and may substantially affect belowground carbon (C) storage and soil respiration (R-s). This study aims to detect how litter inputs affect R-s under N addition in a subtropical forest. We conducted a two-factor experiment (N addition and litter manipulation) in a subtropical Schima superba evergreen broad-leaved forest in eastern China. Three levels of N addition included low-N (50 kg N ha(-1) yr(-1)), high-N (100 kg N ha(-1) yr(-1)) and ambient N (0 kg N ha(-1) yr(-1)), and three levels of litter manipulation consisting of litter removal (NL), litter addition (DL) and Control litter input were conducted. Our results showed NL decreased R-s by 41% and 38% under low- and high-N additions, respectively, compared to Control litter input. DL decreased R-s by 24% compared to Control litter input under high-N addition. Furthermore, low- and high-N additions decreased the effect size of NL on R-s, whereas high-N addition decreased the effect size of DL on R-s in the study period, in both rainy and dry seasons. The effect of litter input alteration on R-s under N addition decreased, compared to R-s in Control litter input under N addition. Thus, the increase in R-s under N addition was alleviated, suggesting that soil organic C sequestration may benefit from increasing N deposition in the future. Further study is needed to clarify the effects of litter input alteration on R-s and soil C cycling under long-term N addition in subtropical forests.
Effects of logging on landscape-level tree diversity across an elevational gradient in Bornean tropical forests			Logging has caused a substantial loss of biodiversity and associated ecosystem services. Therefore, it is important to examine how logging affects biodiversity on a landscape scale to plan responsible management of a tropical forest. Although a number of plot-based studies have shown the effect of logging on local tree species richness (alpha diversity), the effect on species turnover along environmental gradients (beta diversity) remains largely unknown. In this study, we evaluated how logging disturbance affects alpha and beta diversity along an elevational gradient on the eastern slope of Mount Trus Madi in Borneo. We further investigated how pioneer and latesuccessional tree species differed in the habitat range to clarify the mechanism underlying the beta diversity pattern. We selected 90 plots, each with a radius of 20 m, with a range of disturbance intensity (five classes from highly degraded forests to pristine forests) in lower (285-600 m asl) and higher elevation areas (600-1105 m asl). The remaining above-ground biomass, which is an indicator of past disturbance intensity, strongly varied across the plots (5.4-570.6 and 3.1-771.6 Mg ha(-1) in lower and higher elevation areas, respectively). Diameter at breast height (DBH) and species name were recorded for all trees with a DBH larger than 10 cm. We calculated the species number per 20 individual trees for each plot to represent alpha diversity. Beta diversity along the elevational gradient was calculated as the slope of the relationship between standardized compositional dissimilarity (beta deviation) and the elevational difference. Alpha diversity decreased in higher (17.3-12.3 species per 20 trees) and lower areas (16.8-11.3 species per 20 trees) with increasing logging intensity. Beta diversity along the elevational gradient also decreased to almost zero in highly disturbed areas. Pioneer tree species had a wider elevational range than late-successional species. These results suggest that the shift in dominant tree species after logging (from late-successional to pioneer species) was the main driver of the decline in beta diversity along the elevational gradient. We conclude that preserving and restoring beta diversity are important to sustain tropical production forests.
Effects of nitrogen additions on above- and belowground carbon dynamics in two tropical forests			Anthropogenic nitrogen (N) deposition is increasing rapidly in tropical regions, adding N to ecosystems that often have high background N availability. Tropical forests play an important role in the global carbon (C) cycle, yet the effects of N deposition on C cycling in these ecosystems are poorly understood. We used a field N-fertilization experiment in lower and upper elevation tropical rain forests in Puerto Rico to explore the responses of above- and belowground C pools to N addition. As expected, tree stem growth and litterfall productivity did not respond to N fertilization in either of these N-rich forests, indicating a lack of N limitation to net primary productivity (NPP). In contrast, soil C concentrations increased significantly with N fertilization in both forests, leading to larger C stocks in fertilized plots. However, different soil C pools responded to N fertilization differently. Labile (low density) soil C fractions and live fine roots declined with fertilization, while mineral-associated soil C increased in both forests. Decreased soil CO2 fluxes in fertilized plots were correlated with smaller labile soil C pools in the lower elevation forest (R-2 = 0.65, p < 0.05), and with lower live fine root biomass in the upper elevation forest (R-2 = 0.90, p < 0.05). Our results indicate that soil C storage is sensitive to N deposition in tropical forests, even where plant productivity is not N-limited. The mineral-associated soil C pool has the potential to respond relatively quickly to N additions, and can drive increases in bulk soil C stocks in tropical forests.
Effects of nitrogen deposition on carbon cycle in terrestrial ecosystems of China: A meta-analysis			Nitrogen (N) deposition in China has increased greatly, but the general impact of elevated N deposition on carbon (C) dynamics in Chinese terrestrial ecosystems is not well documented. In this study we used a meta-analysis method to compile 88 studies on the effects of N deposition C cycling on Chinese terrestrial ecosystems. Our results showed that N addition did not change soil C pools but increased above-ground plant C pool. A large decrease in below-ground plant C pool was observed. Our result also showed that the impacts of N addition on ecosystem C dynamics depend on ecosystem type and rate of N addition. Overall, our findings suggest that 1) decreased below-ground plant C pool may limit long-term soil C sequestration; and 2) it is better to treat N-rich and N-limited ecosystems differently in modeling effects of N deposition on ecosystem C cycle. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Effects of nitrogen deposition on carbon sequestration in Chinese fir forest ecosystems			Nitrogen deposition and its ecological effects on forest ecosystems have received global attention. We used the ecosystem model FORECAST to assess the effects of nitrogen deposition on carbon sequestration in Chinese fir planted forests in SE China. This topic is important as China is intensifying its reforestation efforts to increase forest carbon sequestration for combating climate change impacts, using Chinese fir as the most important plantation species. A series of scenarios including seven N deposition levels (1, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 kg ha(-1) y(-1)), three management regime (rotation lengths of 15, 30 and 50 years) and two site qualities (nutrient poor and fertile sites) were defined for the simulations. Our results showed that N deposition increased carbon sequestration in Chinese fir forests, but the efficiency of the increasing effect is reduced as N deposition levels increase. When N deposition levels exceeded 20-30 kg ha(-1) y(-1), the incremental effects of N deposition on forest C pools were marginal. This suggests that N deposition levels above 20-30 kg ha(-1) y(-1) could lead to N saturation in Chinese fir forest soils. Any additional amounts of N input from deposition would likely be leached out. Total above-ground C was more sensitive to N deposition than to rotation length and site quality. It was also estimated that the contributions of N deposition to C sequestration in all Chinese fir forests in South-East China are 7.4 x 10(6) Mg Cy-1 under the current N deposition levels (5 to 10 kg ha(-1) y(-1)) and could reach up to 16 x 10(6) Mg Cy-1 if N deposition continues increasing and reaches levels of 7.5 to 15 kg N ha(-1) y(-1). (C) 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Effects of non-native grass invasion on aboveground carbon pools and tree population structure in a tropical dry forest of Hawaii			Hawaiian tropical dry forests are a unique and highly endangered ecosystem. Remaining fragments are heavily impacted by invasive plant species, particularly the perennial bunchgrass Pennisetum setaceum (Forssk.) Chiov. (fountain grass). Little is known about the impact of invasive species on carbon cycling in terrestrial ecosystems. Biomass estimates are a critical first step in understanding the effects of invasive species on carbon dynamics. Biomass data can be used to quantify carbon pools and fluxes, as well as the impacts of land cover change on carbon sequestration. The objectives of our work were to compare: (1) population structure of the dominant native tree species and (2) carbon pools in aboveground live biomass among three land cover types: native-native dominated, largely intact dry forest; invaded-intact overstory, but understory heavily invaded by P. setaceum; and converted-a formerly forested site that has been converted to grassland dominated by P. setaceum. Invasion of Hawaiian tropical dry forest by R setaceum leads to an unsustainable population of native trees characterized by a conspicuous absence of saplings and smaller diameter individuals. Aboveground tree biomass did not differ between native (108.1 Mg ha(-1)) and invaded (107.0 Mg ha(-1)) forests due to the preponderance of wood biomass in large Diospyros sandwicensis trees at both sites. Grass invaded forest had similar to 7x more understory biomass than the native forest, but no differences were observed in total aboveground live biomass (tree + understory) between native (108.9 Mg ha(-1)) and invaded forests (112.1 Mg ha(-1)). However, total aboveground live biomass was similar to 93% lower at the converted site (7.8 Mg ha(-1)), which is the eventual fate of invaded forests with no natural regeneration of native canopy species. Native forests contained significantly more individuals and leaf biomass for the mid-canopy tree Psydrax odorata, which increased overall stand leaf area index. This structural difference appears to have prevented P. setaceum from invading the native site by reducing understory light levels. These results indicate that large changes in the sequestration of carbon in aboveground biomass have occurred across the landscape following widespread grass invasion and conversion of Hawaiian dry forests to grasslands. These large losses of carbon have important implications for quantifying the effects of invasive species and land cover change on ecosystem carbon storage at landscape and regional scales. Crown Copyright (c) 2006 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Effects of Nutrient Limitation on Understory Communities in a Tropical Forest			0
Effects of Pine Plantation on Native Ecuadorian Paramo Vegetation			Exotic pine plantations, installed mainly for timber production and carbon sequestration purposes, cover an ever-expanding area of equatorial and tropical regions; however, their economic and environmental benefits are under debate due to their potential negative effects on native plant species conservation. The native understory plant species richness and cover under pine (Pinus radiata D. Don) plantations were compared with natural grasslands in the Ecuadorian Paramo. We analyzed the vegetation in four zones: Antisana (8-year-old pines), Cajas (16-year-old pines), Tisaleo (41-year-old pines) and Cotopaxi (53-year-old pines). The total understory plant cover decreased between 29% and 90% under pine plantations in all zones. The mean species richness in the pine plantations decreased by 44% in Antisana, Cajas and Tisaleo but not in Cotopaxi. Pine plantations strongly reduced the abundance of herbaceous light-demanding species (59%), except small herbs whose cover increased under pine (17.6%). Shrub cover was also negatively affected in Tisaleo and Cotopaxi (7.4%). Pine afforestation effects on Paramo vegetation depend mainly on canopy cover which changes with age and growing conditions (altitude) and secondarily on the vegetation state at the time of planting, resulting from land use history and ecological conditions. The pine effect was therefore more pronounced in the young and dense plantations of Antisana and Cajas than in the old and open stand of Cotopaxi, whose understory vegetation was more similar to that of grasslands.
Effects of plant carbon inputs and soil microbe on soil organic carbon accumulation in different tropical vegetation restoration strategies			Vegetation restoration is an important measure for improving soil carbon sequestration in degraded agricultural ecosystems. However, the soil organic carbon (SOC) dynamics under different vegetation restoration strategies in tropical regions are understood well. This study investigated SOC, biotic, and abiotic factors across the soil profile (0-20 cm, 20-40 cm, and 40-60 cm) for four vegetation restoration strategies, including Hopea hainanensis x Homalium ceylanicum (HH), Syzygium cumini x Dalbergia odorifera (SD), Aquilaria sinensis x Hopea hainanensis (AH), and Syzygium cumini x Hopea hainanensis (SH), with barren land (CK) and secondary forest (SF) as the control and reference groups, respectively. Our findings demonstrated that vegetation restoration effectively increased the SOC content. In comparison to CK, the SOC content was relatively high in SD (12.82 f 0.59 g/kg-18.50 f 0.97 g/kg) and SH (14.67 f 0.22 g/kg-20.15 f 0.91 g/kg) following vegetation restoration in the 0-20 and 20-40 cm soil layers (P < 0.05). This depends on the difference in biomass produced by different tree species' combinations, and high plant carbon inputs in SD (388.45 f 44.61 g/kg) and SH (424.88 f 18.92 g/kg) treatments will accelerate the return of carbon to soil. The results of the random forest and PLS-PM models identified that microbial biomass carbon (MBC) and microbial necromass carbon (MNC) were the two most important SOC predictors, which promote SOC accumulation in conjunction with plant-derived carbon. Further, it was also found that soil nutrient availability enhanced SOC accumulation by promoting the production of MNC. This process was negatively associated with carbon-acquiring enzyme activities. This study could provide a reference for the selection of SOC sequestration vegetation restoration strategies in tropical forests of southern China.
Effects of restoration on tree communities and carbon storage in rainforest fragments of the Western Ghats, India			Ecological restoration is a leading strategy for reversing biodiversity losses and enhancing terrestrial carbon sequestration in degraded tropical forests. There have been few comprehensive assessments of recovery following restoration in fragmented forest landscapes, and the efficacy of active versus passive (i.e., natural regeneration) restoration remains unclear. We examined 11 indicators of forest structure, tree diversity and composition (adult and sapling), and aboveground carbon storage in 25 pairs of actively restored (AR; 7-15 yr after weed removal and mixed-native tree species planting) and naturally regenerating (NR) plots within degraded rainforest fragments, and in 17 less-disturbed benchmark (BM) rainforest plots in the Western Ghats, India. We assessed the effects of active restoration on the 11 indicators and tested the hypothesis that the effects of active restoration increase with isolation from contiguous and relatively intact rainforests. Active restoration significantly increased canopy cover, adult tree and sapling density, adult and sapling species density (overall and late-successional), compositional similarity to benchmarks, and aboveground carbon storage, which recovered 14-82% toward BM targets relative to NR baselines. By contrast, tree height-diameter ratios and the proportion of native saplings did not recover consistently in actively restored forests. The effects of active restoration on canopy cover, species density (adult), late-successional species density (adult and sapling), and species composition, but not carbon storage, increased with isolation across the fragmented landscape. Our findings show that active restoration can promote recovery of forest structure, composition, and carbon storage within 7-15 yr of restoration in degraded tropical rainforest fragments, although the benefits of active over passive restoration across fragmented landscapes would depend on indicator type and may increase with site isolation. These findings on early stages of recovery suggest that active restoration in ubiquitous fragmented landscapes of the tropics could complement passive restoration of degraded forests in less fragmented landscapes, and protection of intact forests, as a key strategy for conserving biodiversity and mitigating climate change.
Effects of silvicultural intensification on timber yields, carbon dynamics, and tree species composition in a dipterocarp forest in Kalimantan, Indonesia: An individual-tree-based model simulation			Nature conservation through sustainable forest management is challenged in the tropics by unnecessarily destructive but selective logging and diminishing timber yields. Silvicultural treatments beyond reduced impact logging are often recommended to increase timber stocking, tree growth, and profits. Despite lack of large-scale and long-term scientific support, Indonesia has embarked on large-scale silvicultural intensification, To fill this information gap, we assessed the timber, carbon, and tree species composition consequences of different silvicultural practices in dipterocarp forests in Kalimantan, Indonesia.With data from 30 1-ha sample plots monitored for up to 20 years after silvicultural intervention coupled with a new forest growth and yield model simulation (SILFOR), we evaluated the long-term consequences of the following silvicultural practices: once logged with a minimum cutting diameter (MCD) of 60 cm (L60); once logged followed by under-planting with seedlings of commercial timber species (L6OUP); twice logged with MCDs of 60 cm and then 40 cm (L60L40); and, twice logged followed by strip planting along cleared lines (L60L4OSP).The results indicate that timber yields will not be sustained by L60 or L60L40 even if cutting cycles are extended from the current minimum of 30 years to 60 years. In contrast, yields from enrichment planted logged-over forests will recover to levels higher than the first cut if cutting cycles are extended to 50 years for 1.60UP and to 40 years for L60L4OSP. Under these intensive silvicultural regimes, biomass carbon stocks also recover to primary forests levels, but with increased representation of commercial species. Although silviculturally successful, the financial consequences of these approaches to management intensification remain to be scrutinized. ( C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Effects of syn-pandemic fire reduction and reforestation in the tropical Americas on atmospheric CO2 during European conquest			A new reconstruction of Late Holocene biomass burning in the tropical Americas is consistent with the expansion of fire use by Mesoamerican and Amazonian agriculturalists and a subsequent period of fire reduction beginning similar to 500 years BP. The marked reduction of biomass burning after similar to 500 years BP, a unique feature of the fire history of the tropical Americas relative to other regions of the globe, is synchronous with the collapse of the American indigenous population during pandemics accompanying European conquest. We predict that fire reduction contemporaneous with pandemics in the tropical Americas was associated with massive forest regeneration on similar to 5 x 10(5) km(2) of land and sequestration of 5-10 Gt C into the terrestrial biosphere, which contributed to the similar to 2% global reduction in atmospheric CO2 levels and the 0.1%. increase in delta C-13 of atmospheric CO2 from 1500 to 1750 A.D. This study 1) builds upon prior fire history reconstructions by synthesizing a substantially greater number of stratigraphic charcoal accumulation records and soil charcoal 14 C dates to resolve features of the Late Holocene biomass burning record in the tropical Americas; and 2) corroborates the hypothesis advanced by Ruddiman [Ruddiman, W.F., 2003. The Anthropogenic Era began thousands of years ago. Climatic Change 61, 261-293, Ruddiman, W.F., 2005. Plows, Plagues, and Petroleum. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey] that biospheric carbon sequestration via reforestation of cropland abandoned during pandemics contributed to changes in atmospheric CO2 concentration during the past millennium. (c) 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Effects of topography and forest change on soil nutrient dynamics in wet tropical forests			0
Effects of Tree Functional Traits on Soil Respiration in Tropical Forest Plantations			Fast-growing tree species, including Eucalyptus sp. and Acacia sp., are widely used to rehabilitate degraded tropical forestland quickly, while mitigating climate change. However, the extent of carbon losses through soil respiration (R-S) often remains unknown. Moreover, the promotion of these non-native species has raised concerns over their impact on other ecosystem services, including N-2-fixation-induced soil acidification and nutrient cycling. This study compared two non-native and native species, with one of each being N-2-fixing, growing in 11-year-old monospecific plantations in NE Thailand. Hourly R-S was measured monthly over one year and combined with stand characteristics, as well as soil microclimatic and chemical properties. Mixed-effects models were used to capture this hierarchical, diurnal, and seasonal dataset. R-S rates were influenced by soil temperature and moisture following a parabolic relation, and negatively affected by acidity. Overall, R-S varied significantly according to species-specific microclimates and productivity. Despite the high input of organic matter, non-native species failed to ameliorate extreme soil moisture or temperature; limiting microbial decomposition and reducing R-S. Hopea odorata produced moderate levels of carbon sequestration, but maintained soil fertility. The choice of tree species can significantly affect carbon sequestration and storage, as well as nutrient cycling, and careful species selection could optimize these ecosystem services.
Effects of trees on infiltrability and preferential flow in two contrasting agroecosystems in Central America			We tested the hypothesis that trees have measurable effects on infiltrability, macroporosity, and preferential flows in agrosilvopastoral systems. Managing agricultural systems for water conservation is a critical component of sustainable systems. We investigated the relationship between infiltrability and the distance to the nearest tree, and whether differences in macroporosity can account for differences in infiltrability.In both systems, preferential soil water flows were dominant compared to matrix flow. Trees in the pasture landscape improved infiltrability and preferential flow but had no significant effect in the coffee agroforestry system. After comparing rainfall intensity and frequency data to the measured infiltrability values, we conclude that trees in the pasture system reduce surface runoff at the highest observed rainfall intensities (>50 mm h(-1)). The volcanic soils of the coffee plantation are less degraded and their high natural permeability has been maintained. Since the coffee plants at this site are established (40 years) perennial vegetation with substantial residues and extensive root systems like trees, they improve soil physical properties similarly to trees.Trees increase hydrologic services in pasture lands, a rapidly expanding land use type across Latin America, and therefore may be a viable land management option for mitigating some of the negative environmental impacts associated with land clearing and animal husbandry. However, in land management practices where understorey perennial vegetation makes up a large proportion of the cover, such as for coffee agroforestry systems, the effect of trees on infiltration-related ecosystem services could be less pronounced (C) 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Effects of tropical montane forest restoration on the ecohydrological functioning of watersheds			At the global level, ecological restoration is becoming increasingly important due to the degraded conditions of ecosystems, which requires urgent efforts to recover these ecosystems and reestablish ecosystem services and forest biodiversity. However, there is a scarcity of studies evaluating the effects of forest restoration programs on soil properties and ecohydrological functioning of tropical ecosystems, which are in rapid decline. This research aims to evaluate ecohydrological processes in two low montane moist forest (bh-MB) watersheds subjected to ecological restoration (El Silencio and Montanita), compared to one with pastures (Pastos), and to characterize the variables influencing these processes in emerging ecosystems. In each watershed, climatic variables were monitored, and the physical, hydraulic and organic matter properties of the soil were measured, along with ecohydrological variables. The results indicate that watersheds under the restoration program exhibit a tendency to recover the initial conditions of soil properties, favoring the regulation of summer flows and reducing storm flows. In contrast, the pasture watershed shows a tendency towards degraded soils. The natural regeneration process of the forest in areas dedicated to extensive cattle raising contributes to improving the physical conditions of the soil. This improvement, in turn, facilitates water recharge to the aquifers and sustains the base flow during periods of low precipitation.
Effects of vegetation restoration on soil carbon dynamics in Karst and non-karst regions in Southwest China: a synthesis of multi-source data			Backgrounds A large-scale ecological restoration project was initiated in the 1990s in southwest China, which is one of the largest areas of rocky desertification globally. However, the influence and potential mechanisms of vegetation restoration on soil carbon(C) sequestration in karst and non-karst regions remains unclear. Methods Based on field investigation and multi-source data synthesis, the mechanisms of soil C sequestration were investigated to determine the most important variables affecting the rate of soil C change (Rs) in southwest China. Results Our results show significant differences in soil C sequestration between karst and non-karst regions with faster and longer C sequestration occurring in karst regions. In these areas, Rs was approximately 31% higher than in non-karst soils. The Rs of shrubland, grassland and cropland sites in karst areas was significantly higher than that observed in non-karst areas. We found that temperatures were the primary factor inhibiting soil C sequestration instead of precipitation. The total effect of nitrogen (N) on Rs was positive in both karst and non-karst regions. Conclusions Phosphorus was the dominant factor limiting the use of N by vegetation in karst regions and then resulting in limitation of C sequestration. The results indicated that soil C storage may increase intermittently due to combination of karst environment and climate change in southwest China in future.
Effects of Vegetation Thinning on Above- and Belowground Carbon in a Seasonally Dry Tropical Forest in Mexico			Mature tropical forests are disappearing and secondary forests are becoming more abundant, thus there is an increasing need to understand the ecology and management of secondary forests. In the Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico, seasonally dry tropical forests are subject to frequent fire, and early-successional stands are extremely dense. We applied vegetation thinning (removal of all stems < 2 cm in diameter) to hasten secondary succession and open the understory to reduce the fire ladder in an 11-yr-old stand. We quantified the effect of vegetation thinning on above- and belowground carbon over 5 yr. Aboveground carbon included all standing vegetation and belowground carbon included fine roots and organic carbon in the Oi, Oe, and Oa soil horizons. Trees with diameter of 2-10 cm and > 10 cm had higher carbon accumulation rates in thinned plots than in control plots. Carbon stored in the Oi-horizon and the Oe > 2 mm fraction remained significantly higher in thinned plots even 5 yr after treatment. Carbon in fine roots was significantly higher in thinned plots, and radiocarbon (C-14) data suggest that fine roots in thinned plots were recently produced in comparison with fine roots in control plots. We did not find significant differences in total ecosystem carbon after 5 yr (126 +/- 6 and 136 +/- 8 Mg C/ha, respectively). These results suggest rapid carbon recovery and support the hypothesis that young tropical forests thinned to hasten succession and reduce the fire hazard may have only a short-term negative impact on carbon accumulation in vegetation and soils.
Efficiency of different planted forests in recovering biodiversity and ecological interactions in Brazilian Amazon			In tropical forests, several reforestation programs have been created to recover biological diversity in deforested environments. However, most of these studies have focused on the loss of species and ignored the loss of ecological interactions and ecosystem services that these species provide in their natural environment. Here, we assess how reforestation (including both native and exotic species) and the distance from the forest matrix could recover the following parameters: richness, composition, and ant-plant interactions in the southern Brazilian Amazon. For this, we collected data in five different agroforestry landscapes: primary and secondary forests, reforestations of teak and fig, and pasture. In general, we observed that the distance from the forest matrix was not an important factor for the recovery of ant-plant interactions at the scale of this study. Ant plant interactions were more specialized in the pasture, possibly due to the low richness and high dominance in pastures, which generates a high ant-plant dependency. Moreover, none of the strategies employed for the recovery of diversity (teak and fig reforestation) increased the recovery rate of the studied parameters: richness, composition, and the patterns of ant plant interactions, when compared to primary forests. These results indicate that regardless of species richness and composition, secondary forests and reforestation lands are functionally different from pastures. In conclusion, our results represent a valuable tool to conservation planners, mainly because we show that secondary forests created by natural regeneration can be an efficient and economical method for restoring the disruption of ant plant interactions in tropical forests. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Efficient C sequestration and benefits of medicinal vetiver cropping in tropical regions			The increase of atmospheric CO2 concentration is a major cause of global warming. This issue may be effectively addressed through sequestration of carbon in plants and soils. Here we studied the potential of vetiver, Vetiveria zizanioides L., to sequester carbon in field plots in Bangalore, India. Vetiver is a perennial and economically viable crop growing in tropical and subtropical regions. Vetiver has medicinal and aromatic properties. Vetiver shoot and root C amounts were measured. Results show that vetiver sequesters 15.24 Mg C ha(-1) year(-1) in shoot and roots, much higher than that for lemongrass with 5.38, palmarosa with 6.14, and trees with 2.92. In addition the benefit/cost ratio of vetiver, 2.3, is higher than that of rice, 1.97. We estimate that vetiver cropping could sequester 150 Tg per year in India, which is nearly 46 % of C emissions in India.
Elements for the expected mechanisms on 'reduced emissions from deforestation and degradation, REDD' under UNFCCC			Carbon emissions from deforestation and degradation account for about 20% of global anthropogenic emissions. Strategies and incentives for reduced emissions from deforestation and degradation (REDD) have emerged as one of the most active areas in the international climate change negotiations under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). While the current negotiations focus on a REDD mechanism in developing countries, it should be recognized that risks of carbon losses from forests occur in all climate zones and also in industrialized countries. A future climate change agreement would be more effective if it included all carbon losses and gains from land use in all countries and climate zones. The REDD mechanism will be an important step towards reducing emissions from land use change in developing countries, but needs to be followed by steps in other land use systems and regions. A national approach to REDD and significant coverage globally are needed to deal with the risk that deforestation and degradation activities are displaced rather than avoided. Favourable institutional and governance conditions need to be established that guarantee in the long-term a stable incentive and control system for maintaining forest carbon stocks. Ambitious emission reductions from deforestation and forest degradation need sustained financial incentives, which go beyond positive incentives for reduced emissions but also give incentives for sustainable forest management. Current data limitations need-and can be-overcome in the coming years to allow accurate accounting of reduced emissions from deforestation and degradation. A proper application of the conservativeness approach in the REDD context could allow a simplified reporting of emissions from deforestation in a first phase, consistent with the already agreed UNFCCC reporting principles.
Elevational clines predict genetically determined variation in tropical forest seedling performance in Borneo: implications for seed sourcing to support reforestation			While much research has focused on genetic variation in plants in relation to abiotic clines in temperate and boreal forests, few studies have examined similar relationships in tropical forests. Genetic variation in desirable performance traits of trees, such as drought tolerance, fast-growth, and carbon sequestration rates, is widely used to improve reforestation efforts in nontropical systems. However, evolutionary processes such as local adaptation are poorly understood in tropical forests making it difficult to locate desired phenotypes. To test for genetic variation in growth rate in relationship to climatic clines, we conducted a common garden study over 18 months in a nursery using four dipterocarp tree species, represented by 9-12 half-sib families, sourced across an elevational gradient ranging from lowland to hill forests (circa 130-470 m above sea-level) in Malaysian Borneo. We found genetic variation in growth for all four species with fast-growing half-sib families growing 42-88% faster than poorly performing half-sib families. Furthermore, in three species we found that elevation of seedling origin predicted seedling performance; in Shorea fallax and S. johorensis, half-sib families originating from low elevations performed the best. In S. argentifolia half-sib families' seedlings from low elevations grew slowly. Because elevation is a good proxy for climate, the finding of elevational clines predicting genetic variation in growth provides evidence of evolution affecting the function of tropical tree species. Our research highlights opportunities to better understand evolutionary processes in tropical forests and to use such information to improve seed source selection in reforestation.
Emerging Evidence on the Effectiveness of Tropical Forest Conservation			The PLOS ONE Collection "Measuring forest conservation effectiveness" brings together a series of studies that evaluate the effectiveness of tropical forest conservation policies and programs with the goal of measuring conservation success and associated co-benefits. This overview piece describes the geographic and methodological scope of these studies, as well as the policy instruments covered in the Collection as of June 2016. Focusing on forest cover change, we systematically compare the conservation effects estimated by the studies and discuss them in the light of previous findings in the literature. Nine studies estimated that annual conservation impacts on forest cover were below one percent, with two exceptions in Mexico and Indonesia. Differences in effect sizes are not only driven by the choice of conservation measures. One key lesson from the studies is the need to move beyond the current scientific focus of estimating average effects of undifferentiated conservation programs. The specific elements of the program design and the implementation context are equally important factors for understanding the effectiveness of conservation programs. Particularly critical will be a better understanding of the causal mechanisms through which conservation programs have impacts. To achieve this understanding we need advances in both theory and methods.
Emerging Hotspots of Deforestation in Southeast Asia			0
Emerging Threats and Opportunities for Large-Scale Ecological Restoration in the Atlantic Forest of Brazil			Over the past 150 years, Brazil has played a pioneering role in developing environmental policies and pursuing forest conservation and ecological restoration of degraded ecosystems. In particular, the Brazilian Forest Act, first drafted in 1934, has been fundamental in reducing deforestation and engaging private land owners in forest restoration initiatives. At the time of writing (December 2010), however, a proposal for major revision of the Brazilian Forest Act is under intense debate in the National Assembly, and we are deeply concerned about the outcome. On the basis of the analysis of detailed vegetation and hydrographic maps, we estimate that the proposed changes may reduce the total amount of potential areas for restoration in the Atlantic Forest by approximately 6 million hectares. As a radically different policy model, we present the Atlantic Forest Restoration Pact (AFRP), which is a group of more than 160 members that represents one of the most important and ambitious ecological restoration programs in the world. The AFRP aims to restore 15 million hectares of degraded lands in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest biome by 2050 and increase the current forest cover of the biome from 17% to at least 30%. We argue that not only should Brazilian lawmakers refrain from revising the existing Forest Law, but also greatly step up investments in the science, business, and practice of ecological restoration throughout the country, including the Atlantic Forest. The AFRP provides a template that could be adapted to other forest biomes in Brazil and to other megadiversity countries around the world.
Emission Removal Capability of India's Forest and Tree Cover			India is the world's tenth most forested nation with 76.87 M ha of forest and tree cover occupying 23.4% of its geographical area. Forests-with their intrinsic of carbon sequestration and storage values-are in the front line of India's climate change mitigation strategies. This paper provides estimates of sequestered carbon in India's forest and tree cover for the years 1995 and 2005 as per the IPCC good practice guidelines method. It is based on the primary data for the soil carbon pool through collecting soil samples by laying out quadrats across the country and secondary data for the growing stock of all forest and tree cover in the country. The estimates are compared with current and future projected emissions. It is found that conservation policies have resulted in increase of the country's forest carbon stocks from 6244.8 to 6621.6 Mt with an annual increment of 37.7 Mt of the carbon from 1995 to 2005. Annual CO2 removal by the forests is enough to neutralise 9.3% of the country's 2000 level emissions. Continued removals by the forest and tree cover would offset 6.5 and 4.9% of India's projected annual emissions in 2010 and 2020 respectively. Economically, the annual value of this forest carbon in the international market is about US $188 million. The result is of use in the REDD and REDD+ context for India.
Emission savings through the COP26 declaration of deforestation could come at the expense of non-forest land conversion			The majority of signatories to The United Nations Climate Change Conference in 2021 (COP26) made a declaration to end deforestation by 2030. Here, we quantify future changes in land use and associated CO2 emissions to examine the impact of ending deforestation by 2030 on global land dynamics and emissions using an open-source land-use model. We show that if the COP26 declaration to end deforestation is fully implemented globally, about 167 Mha of deforestation could be avoided until 2050, compared to a baseline scenario which does not have extended forest protection. However, avoided deforestation and associated emissions come at the cost of strongly increased conversion of unprotected non-forested land to agricultural land, while land-use intensification in most regions is similar compared to a baseline scenario. Global initiatives are needed to facilitate a common dialogue on addressing the possible carbon emissions and non-forest leakage effects due to the expedited loss of non-forested land under a policy aimed at halting deforestation by 2030.
Empowering indigenous wisdom: co-creating forest inventory through citizen science in Royal Belum State Park, Malaysia			Democratising science and bridging scientific data gaps with the reduction of emissions from deforestation and degradation (REDD+) framework to strengthen the conservation capacity of forest communities requires empowering the indigenous people with the necessary technical competencies. Considering the value of indigenous knowledge, involving local communities in scientific data collection might benefit science and society. Nevertheless, the output quality has raised scepticism. This study aims to empower indigenous wisdom in citizen science by co-creating forest tree inventories in the Royal Belum State Park in Perak, Malaysia. The objectives are to identify the potential of involving indigenous communities in remote locations in scientific tree data collection, a locally-based tree census for carbon assessment, and to demonstrate the feasibility of location-based mobile smartphones in forest tree inventories. An established tropical forest protocol was adopted to estimate the above-ground biomass (AGB). A pantropic allometric model was employed, with tree diameter at breast height (DBH) and height. Unsupervised tree naming and tree positioning data collection was also performed with a smartphone. The information provided by the indigenous communities and professionals was compared. Trees that were taller and recorded bigger DBH demonstrated the lowest root mean square error (RMSE) of 0.965 cm and 4.616 m, respectively. Although the DBH measurements were of sufficient quality, the tree heights and names were subpar due to the different strategies employed. The mean absolute error (MAE) of the absolute positions recorded with the smartphone in relation to traverse surveying was 4.907 m (northing) and 5.817 m (easting). The percentage of trees that fall within the 20-m and 30-m quadrants is 67% and 79%, respectively. The results revealed that location-based smartphones might not be the best equipment for precise tagging individual tree positions. The equipment required established quadrants to confirm the tree locations. Nevertheless, the findings could contribute to Malaysian indigenous forest communities’ ability to meet the REDD+ forest conservation targets, which is of international interest. The data procured in this study could also address the challenges of implementing locally-based carbon stock assessments in remote forests. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2024.
Encouraging the reconversion of rubber plantations by developing a combined payment system			Rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) has been introduced to Southeast Asia for over a century. In various regions throughout Southeast Asia, over the past two decades, natural tropical forests have rapidly been converted into rubber monoculture. To encourage the reconversion of rubber plantations back to close-to-nature rainforests, we developed a theoretical combined market and government pay-ment system. To evaluate the potential impacts of the system, we carried out a simulation study from 2020 to 2050 in Xishuangbanna, Southwest China. The results suggest that the payment system may encourage a total reconversion area of 198,490 ha with a total government payment of US$0.377 billion in net present value (NPV) by 2050. The total carbon sequestration benefit resulting from the replacement of rubber plantations would be 14.83 million tons of carbon over the modelled period. Sensitivity analyses revealed that rubber price was the most sensitive factor on the total NPV of compensatory payments, and followed by the discount rate. The rubber price increased by 96.8% could enhance the compensatory payments in NPV by 272%, whereas a 10% decrease in the dis-count rate resulted in a 18.9% increase of the compensatory payments in NPV. This new integrated payment system holds the potential of stimulating restoration of cash crop monoculture-dominated landscapes to multifunctional forest ecosystems.
Enhanced mitigation of N2O and NO emissions through co-application of biochar with nitrapyrin in an intensive tropical vegetable field			Vegetable fields in tropical regions characterized by intensive cultivation have the potential to be significant sources of gaseous nitrogen (N) emissions. This is primarily due to human-induced input of N fertilizer and the naturally abundant water and heat resources in these areas. While biochar and nitrification inhibitors are recognized as effective measures for mitigating soil nitrous oxide (N2O) and nitric oxide (NO) emissions, there is limited research on their combined effectiveness in intensively managed tropical croplands. In a 2-year field experiment conducted in a tropical vegetable ecosystem, we investigated the impact of single and combined applications of peanut biochar and nitrapyrin (a nitrification inhibitor) on N2O and NO emissions, N-cycling associated gene abundances, and bacterial community structure. Under conventional fertilization, cumulative N2O and NO emissions were 1.96 kg N ha(-1) yr(-1) and 1.76 kg N ha(-1) yr(-1), with emission factors of N fertilizer for N2O (EFN2O) and NO (EFNO) at 0.29% and 0.30%, respectively. The random forest model indicated that soil organic carbon (SOC) was key in regulating N2O+NO emissions. Biochar alone decreased cumulative N2O and NO emissions by 6.1 % and 13.0 %, respectively. When biochar was co-applied with nitrapyrin, the mitigation of N2O and NO reached up to 23.4 % and 18.6 %, respectively. This enhanced effect was attributed to the strong inhibitory impact of nitrapyrin on nitrifiers (AOA and AOB) and denitrifiers (nirK/S) in biochar-amended soils. Additionally, biochar co-application increased SOC levels in nitrapyrin-applied soils. Analysis of bacterial community structure revealed that nitrapyrin decreased the relative abundance of Nitrospirae, while biochar increased the relative abundance of Acidobacteria, Chloroflexi, Gemmatimonadetes and Nitrospirae to varying extents. Considering the carbon sequestration ability of biochar and the effective mitigation potential of nitrapyrin, the combined application of biochar with a nitrification inhibitor emerges as a promising strategy for dual objectives - reducing gaseous N emissions and enhancing soil carbon storage - in intensive vegetable ecosystems in the tropical region of China.
Enhanced rock weathering boosts ecosystem multifunctionality via improving microbial networks complexity in a tropical forest plantation			Afforestation is expected to contribute to mitigate global change by promoting carbon stocks and multiple ecosystem services. However, the success of plantations may be limited by the availability of soil nutrients. This is especially critical for plantations in tropical ecosystems which are known to be nutrient poor ecosystems. Enhanced rock weathering (ERW) represents a promising strategy for improving soil health and carbon sequestration in such ecosystems. We added wollastonite skarn, a calcium silicate rock, to soils in a rubber plantation in Yunnan, China, as part of an ERW strategy aimed at promoting soil functioning and biodiversity. Statistical significance was determined using a linear mixed-effects model, with p-values indicating the level of significance. The addition of wollastonite skarn significantly enhanced key ecosystem functions related to carbon, nitrogen, phosphorous, silicon, biodiversity, and pathogen control. However, it did not significantly affect soil enzyme activity. Some of these responses to the addition of wollastonite skarn may be associated with an increase in soil pH. Microbial network complexity played a critical role in explaining the changes in ecosystem multifunctionality in response to ERW, through both direct and indirect pathways. Synthesis and applications: Our findings suggest that ERW is a viable strategy for improving soil health and ecosystem resilience in tropical plantations, which are limited in nutrients. Thus, ERW has implications for carbon management and climate change mitigation.
Enhanced rock weathering increased soil phosphorus availability and altered root phosphorus-acquisition strategies			Enhanced rock weathering (ERW) has been proposed as a measure to enhance the carbon (C)-sequestration potential and fertility of soils. The effects of this practice on the soil phosphorus (P) pools and the general mechanisms affecting microbial P cycling, as well as plant P uptake are not well understood. Here, the impact of ERW on soil P availability and microbial P cycling functional groups and root P-acquisition traits were explored through a 2-year wollastonite field addition experiment in a tropical rubber plantation. The results show that ERW significantly increased soil microbial carbon-use efficiency and total P concentrations and indirectly increased soil P availability by enhancing organic P mobilization and mineralization of rhizosheath carboxylates and phosphatase, respectively. Also, ERW stimulated the activities of P-solubilizing (gcd, ppa and ppx) and mineralizing enzymes (phoADN and phnAPHLFXIM), thus contributing to the inorganic P solubilization and organic P mineralization. Accompanying the increase in soil P availability, the P-acquisition strategy of the rubber fine roots changed from do-it-yourself acquisition by roots to dependence on mycorrhizal collaboration and the release of root exudates. In addition, the direct effects of ERW on root P-acquisition traits (such as root diameter, specific root length, and mycorrhizal colonization rate) may also be related to changes in the pattern of belowground carbon investments in plants. Our study provides a new insight that ERW increases carbon-sequestration potential and P availability in tropical forests and profoundly affects belowground plant resource-use strategies.Enhanced rock weathering significantly increased soil microbial carbon-use efficiency and total P concentrations, and indirectly increased soil P availability by enhancing organic P mobilization and mineralization of rhizosheath carboxylates and phosphatase, respectively. The P-acquisition strategy of the rubber fine roots changed from do-it-yourself acquisition by roots to dependence on mycorrhizal collaboration and the release of root exudates.image
Enhancement effects of mangrove restoration on blue carbon storage in Qinzhou Bay			Introduction: Mangroves are the main carbon sinks in tropical regions and have high capabilities for carbon sequestration. Protection and restoration of mangroves are necessary to reduce carbon emissions and fight climate change. While the Qinzhou Bay as the main area of national mangrove restoration plan in the future, studies on its carbon pools, especially assessment of the carbon sink enhancement effect of restored mangroves along forest chronosequence, are lacking.Methods: This study aimed to quantify the changes in restored mangrove soil carbon stock, vegetation and root carbon stocks along the forest age sequence in Qinzhou Bay through field survey.Results: The results revealed that the carbon stocks of vegetation and roots significantly increased with the developing forest age. Only in the soil layer above 30 cm, the soil carbon storage apparently increased with the developing forest age in non-cofferdam area, and then decreased slowly after reaching the peak (at 6 similar to 8 years). Moreover, the soil carbon storage of mangroves was greater in the cofferdam area than in the non-cofferdam area.Discussion: This implied that the cofferdam restoration efforts may be more effective in enhancing blue carbon storage, during the initial stages of the restoration process. The results of this study suggested that mangrove restoration has substantial potential capacity in carbon storage and nutrient cycling, providing a reference for the protection and restoration efforts concerning mangroves.
Enhancement of biodiversity and ecosystem services by ecological restoration: A meta-analysis			Ecological restoration is widely used to reverse the environmental degradation caused by human activities. However, the effectiveness of restoration actions in increasing provision of both biodiversity and ecosystem services has not been evaluated systematically. A meta-analysis of 89 restoration assessments in a wide range of ecosystem types across the globe indicates that ecological restoration increased provision of biodiversity and ecosystem services by 44 and 25%, respectively. However, values of both remained lower in restored versus intact reference ecosystems. Increases in biodiversity and ecosystem service measures after restoration were positively correlated. Results indicate that restoration actions focused on enhancing biodiversity should support increased provision of ecosystem services, particularly in tropical terrestrial biomes.
Enhancing Ecosystem Services to Minimize Impact of Climate Variability in a Dry Tropical Forest with Vertisols			Increased droughts and variable rainfall patterns may alter the capacity to provide ecosystem services, such as biomass production and clean water provision. The impact of these factors in a semi-arid region, especially on a dry tropical forest with Vertisols and under different land uses such as regenerated vegetation and thinned vegetation, is still unclear. This study analyzes hydrologic processes under precipitation pulses and intra-seasonal droughts, and suggests management practices for ecosystem services improvement. A local 43-year dataset showed a varying climate with a decrease in number of small events, and an increase in the number of dry days and in event rainfall intensity, in two catchments with different land use patterns and with Vertisols, a major soil order in semi-arid tropics. The onset of runoff depends on the expansive characteristics of the soil rather than land use, as dry spells promote micro-cracks that delay the runoff process. Forest thinning enhances groundcover development and is a better management practice for biomass production. This management practice shows a lower water yield when compared to a regenerated forest, supporting the decision of investing in forest regeneration in order to attend to an increasing water storage demand.
Enhancing feasibility: Incorporating a socio-ecological systems framework into restoration planning			Forest restoration is the counterforce to deforestation. In many parts of the world it mitigates forest loss and degradation, but success rates vary. Socio-political variables are important predictors of effectiveness of restoration activities, indicating that restoration strategies need to be locally adapted. Yet, contextual assessments of the biophysical, social and political characteristics of forest restoration are rare. Here, we integrate a social-ecological systems framework with systematic decision-making to inform forest restoration planning. We illustrate this approach through a prioritization analysis in a community-based forest restoration context in Paser District, East Kalimantan, Indonesia. We compare the solutions of our integrated framework with those identified on the basis of biophysical criteria alone. We discover that incorporating a socio-political context alters the selection of priority areas. While the social feasibility and political permissibility can be enhanced, ecological benefits are likely to be reduced and/or opportunity costs of alternative land uses are to be increased. Our conceptual framework allows the appraisal of potential trade-offs between social and ecological outcomes of alternative options, and has the potential to evaluate the efficiency of existing policies. Empirical testing in a range of contexts is required to ensure broad applicability and transferability of our conceptual framework. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Enhancing the ecological value of oil palm agriculture through set-asides			Agricultural expansion is the primary driver of ecological degradation across the tropics. Set-asides-uncultivated parts of agricultural landscapes, often on steep slopes and alongside rivers-may alleviate environmental impacts but can reduce the area cultivated. Here we model an approach to configuring set-asides aimed at optimizing ecological outcomes (biodiversity, above-ground carbon storage and nutrient cycling) without reducing net cultivation area. We compare set-asides in an oil palm landscape where all plantations adopt the same configuration ('uniform' approach) with a scenario where there can be variation in configuration among plantations ('variable' approach). We find that all set-aside configurations support substantial ecological values but that the best strategies involve set-asides, particularly alongside rivers, that are spatially targeted and variable among plantations. This 'variable' approach can increase ecological outcomes twofold over the 'uniform' approach without reducing net cultivation area. Our findings underscore the potential importance of well-planned set-asides for enhancing agricultural sustainability.Agriculture is the largest threat to tropical ecosystems. This study finds that setting aside land for nature in targeted fashion, especially alongside rivers, can increase biodiversity and ecosystem services without reducing the net area cultivated.
Enriched silvopastoral systems: a proposal for integrating conservation into livestock production in rural communities in Los Tuxtlas, Mexico			Background and Aims: Livestock production is the main cause of habitat destruction and species extinction worldwide. It is also a strong contributor to greenhouse gas emissions. In Latin America, cattle ranching is the main economic activity of many rural communities, so establishing restoration plantations in pastures could provide ecosystem services with direct and indirect benefits for cattle production. Silvopastoral systems reach production levels equal to or higher than conventional systems and prolong the useful life of productive land. This paper examines the integration of silvopastoral systems with restoration with native trees of economic and conservation importance. We refer to these plots as enriched silvopastoral systems (ESPS). We present the results of the first stages of establishment of these systems which seek to improve the livelihoods of ranchers and to maintain landscape connectivity, ecosystem services, and the conservation of tropical forest species. Methods: In 2016, we established ESPS in a pilot plot in Los Tuxtlas, Mexico, planting 16 native tree species and Leucaena esculenta (DC.) Benth. as a fodder tree. At the same time, workshops on livestock alternatives were held in the ejido of Balzapote to increase the possibilities of social incidence. Key results: The survival of the planted trees was on average 40.7%. The demonstration plot has served to bring farmers closer to different more productive alternatives. We observe a reduction in maintenance costs because the producers are not dependent on external supplies. Conclusions: As a result of the implementation of the ESPS, livestock production improved, resulting in a decrease in the use of agrochemicals. ESPS will bring complexity to the landscape resulting in more resilient systems in the face of climate change.
Enrichment planting in logging gaps with Schizolobium parahyba var. amazonicum (Huber ex Ducke) Barneby: A financially profitable alternative for degraded tropical forests in the Amazon			Conservation of degraded forests is a challenging issue in the tropics, since the maintenance of environmental services and economic demands must be conciliated. Environmental services must be conserved while degraded tropical forests are demanded to be competitive against more financially profitable land uses as crop fields and pastures. The objective of this study was to evaluate productivity and financial profitability of enrichment planting in degraded forests. Seeds of Schizolobium parahyba var. amazonicum were planted in logging gaps of a 108-ha degraded forest in southeast Para (Brazil) in February 1995 (average = 91.7 seeds ha(-1) and 15.3 seeds gap(-1)). After 13 years (2008), S. parahyba presented a volume increase of 3.1 m(3) ha(-1) yr(-1) for individuals >= 25 cm in DBH. More than 30% of the planted seeds were able to germinate, establish, and grow up to sizes >= 25 cm in DBH. A cost-benefit analysis through Net Present Value (NPV) and a sensitivity analysis with different interest rates were performed to compare financial profitability of the treated and control area under roundwood and laminated plus sawnwood production. Enrichment planting using S. parahyba seeds presented higher NPVs in the treated than in control area for all simulations, except roundwood under interest rate of 9% per year. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Enrichment Planting in Secondary Forests: a Promising Clean Development Mechanism to Increase Terrestrial Carbon Sinks			With the increasing need to reduce greenhouse gas concentrations, afforestation and reforestation (A/R) projects are being implemented under the Kyoto Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and under the voluntary carbon (C) market. The specific objective of A/R C projects is to enhance terrestrial sinks. They could also provide low-income communities in developing countries with a source of revenue, as well as a number of ecological and social services. However, feasibility issues have hindered implementation of A/R CDMs. We propose enrichment planting (EP) in old fallow using high-value native timber species as a land-use alternative and a small-scale C projects opportunity. We present EP in the context of ongoing work in a poor indigenous community in eastern Panama. We consider economic risks and advantages and concordance with existing modalities under the compliance market. The potential storage capacity for EP at the site of our study was similar to 113 Mg C ha(-1), which is comparable to other land uses with high C storage, such as industrial teak plantations and primary forest. Because secondary forests show high aboveground biomass production, C projects using EP could harness large amounts of atmospheric C while improving diversity. Carbon projects using EP can also provide high levels of social, cultural, and ecological services by planting native tree species of traditional importance to local communities and preserving most of the secondary forest's ecological attributes. Therefore, EP planting could be considered as a way to promote synergies between two UN Conventions: climate change and biodiversity.
Environment and agricultural practices regulate enhanced biochar-induced soil carbon pools and crop yield: A meta-analysis			Using biochar in agriculture to enhance soil carbon storage and productivity has been recognized as an effective means of carbon sequestration. However, the effects on crop yield and soil carbon and nitrogen can vary depending on environmental conditions, field management, and biochar conditions. Thus, we conducted a meta-analysis to identify the factors contributing to these inconsistencies. We found that biochar application significantly increased soil organic carbon (SOC), microbial biomass carbon (MBC), dissolved organic carbon (DOC), easily oxidized carbon (EOC), particulate organic carbon (POC), total nitrogen (TN), and the C:N ratio in topsoil (0-20 cm) and crop yields. Biochar was most effective in tropical regions, increasing SOC, Soil TN, and crop yield the most, with relatively moderate pyrolysis temperatures (550-650 C) more conducive to SOC accumulation and relatively low pyrolysis temperatures (<350 C-o) more conducive to increasing soil carbon components and crop yields. Biochar made from manure effectively increased soil carbon components and TN. Soil with low fertility (original SOC < 5 g kg(-1); original TN < 0.6 g kg(-1)), coarse texture, and acidity (pH < 5.5) showed more effective results. However, biochar application rates should not be too high and should be combined with appropriate nitrogen fertilizer. And biochar application had long-term positive effects on soil carbon storage and crop yield. Overall, we recommend using small amounts of biochar with lower pyrolysis temperatures in soils with low fertility, coarse texture, and tropical regions for optimal economic and environmental benefits.
Environmental dynamics and carbon accumulation rate of a tropical peatland in Central Sumatra, Indonesia			Tropical peatlands are important for the global carbon cycle as they store 18% of the total global peat carbon. As they are vulnerable to changes in temperature and precipitation, a rapidly changing environment endangers peatlands and their carbon storage potential. Understanding the mechanisms of peatland carbon accumulation from studying past developments may, therefore, help to assess the future role of tropical peatlands. Using a multi-proxy palaeoecological approach, a peat core taken from the Sungai Buluh peatland in Central Sumatra has been analyzed for its pollen and spore, macro charcoal and biogeochemical composition. The result suggests that peat and C accumulation rates were driven mainly by sea level change, river water level, climatic variability and anthropogenic activities. It is also suggested that peat C accumulation in Sungai Buluh is correlated to the abundance of Freycinetia, Myrtaceae, Calophyllum, Stemonuraceae, Ficus and Euphorbiaceae. Sungai Buluh has reasonable potential for being a future global tropical peat C sinks. However, considering the impact of rapid global climate change in addition to land-use change following rapid economic growth in Indonesia, such potential may be lost. Taking advantage of available palaeoecological records and advances made in Quaternary studies, some considerations for management practice such as identification of priority taxa and conservation sites are suggested. © 2017 Elsevier Ltd
Environmental factors predict community functional composition in Amazonian forests			The consequences of biodiversity loss for ecosystem services largely depend on the functional identities of extirpated species. However, poor descriptions of spatial patterns of community functional composition across landscapes hamper accurate predictions, particularly in highly diverse tropical regions. Therefore, understanding how community functional composition varies across environmental gradients remains an important challenge. We sampled 15 functional traits in 800 Neotropical tree species across 13 forest plots representative of the broad climatic and soil gradients encompassed by three widespread lowland forest habitats (terra firme forests on clay-rich soils, seasonally flooded forests and white-sand forests) at opposite ends of Amazonia (Peru and French Guiana). We combined univariate and multivariate approaches to test the magnitude and predictability of environmental filtering on community leaf and wood functional composition. Directional shifts in community functional composition correlated with environmental changes across the 13 plots, with denser leaves, stems and roots in forests occurring in environments with limited water and soil-nutrient availability. Critically, these relationships allowed us to accurately predict the functional composition of 61 additional forest plots from environmental data alone.Synthesis. Environmental filtering consistently shapes the functional composition of highly diverse tropical forests at large scales across the terra firme, seasonally flooded and white-sand forests of lowland Amazonia. Environmental factors drive and allow the prediction of variation in community functional composition among habitat types in Amazonian forests.
Environmental impacts as affected by different oil palm cropping systems in tropical peatlands			Tropical peatlands are globally important for their high carbon storage and unique biodiversity, but are currently under severe threat in South East Asia from expansion of oil palm plantations. A large part of this expansion in Peninsular Malaysia arises from small-holder oil palm plantations that follow varied cropping practices, yet their impact on the environment is largely unexplored. This research aimed to study and evaluate the environmental and belowground microbial impacts of different smallholder cropping systems relative to forested peatlands in North Selangor, Peninsular Malaysia. Specifically, GHG measurements using closed chambers, and peat sampling were carried out in both wet and dry seasons. Microbial phenotypic community structure was determined using phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) analysis. Relative to forested peatlands, the agricultural plantations had increased pH, temperature and bulk density, decreased organic content, and peat moisture, with a pineapple intercropping site as the only exception. These effects were most pronounced in 2                             nd                              generation mono-cropping systems. Soil microbial community structure, dominated by Gram-positive bacteria under all land-use types, differed significantly between agricultural sites and forest, and also showed significant seasonal variation. There was a general increase in non-specific fatty acids and a decrease in Gram-positive fatty acids in agricultural sites from forest, however microbial community structure were similar in most agricultural sites. CO                             2                              emissions were greatest at the forest site and showed no seasonal variations, however most of the forest CO                             2                              emissions were most likely due to high autotrophic contribution from roots. CH                             4                              emissions were under 1 mg m                             −2                              h                             −1                              for all the agricultural sites, while forest peat surface absorbed similar low quantity of CH                             4                             . Overall, the changes in peat properties and loss of C was greatest in the 2                             nd                              generation mono-cropping, while the intercropping systems ameliorated these effects by maintaining most of the forest peat organic content and causing relatively smaller changes in pH, moisture and bulk density. It is clear that oil palm intercropping have an ameliorating effect on environmental impacts caused by the expansion of oil palm plantations into peatlands.                          © 2019 Elsevier B.V.
Environmental Services of Agroforestry Systems			Get cutting-edge agroforestry research and data Deforestation and the rampant use of fossil fuels are major contributors to increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide and are enormous influences on global warming. Agroforestry systems and tree plantations can help mitigate the resulting climate change and degradation of biodiversity and accelerating climate change. Environmental Services of Agroforestry Systems addresses these global concerns with an essential collection of presentations on biodiversity and climate change from the First World Congress in Agroforestry (Orlando, Florida, 2004). Respected experts discuss the latest research and data on how agroforestry systems can help solve environmental problems through carbon sequestration and biodiversity conservation. Years ago, agroforestry’s environmental benefits were mainly seen as being soil amelioration, erosion control, microclimate control, and the alleviation of the effects of drought in semiarid areas. Environmental Services of Agroforestry Systems goes beyond the regional considerations of years past to focus on the challenges of today’s most pressing global environmental concerns. The contributors describe the latest research and concepts in agroforestry systems, reforestation efforts, soils, vegetation, and agriculture while reviewing their economic aspects. Incentives for reforestation and agroforestry are explored in detail. Each chapter is carefully referenced and includes tables to clarify ideas and data. Environmental Services of Agroforestry Systems addresses: • advantages of mixed-species plantations • tropical pasture and silvo-pastoral systems • tropical forest ecosystem management • research on the economic feasibility of various land-use systems • socio-economic considerations of coffee-growing ecosystems • agroforestry systems in Costa Rica Environmental Services of Agroforestry Systems is essential reading for researchers and scientists, as well as professionals in agroforestry, forestry, soils, global change, climate change, and environmental studies, educators, and graduate and undergraduate students. © 2005 by The Haworth Press. Inc. All rights reserved.
Environmentally-friendly forestry systems in Central America			Sustainable logging practices can result in higher seedling regeneration, and higher understory biodiversity than in forests logged by conventional methods. Post-harvest silvicultural treatments increase the diameter growth of crop trees, although the consequences of their effects on forest composition need to be assessed. Management operations affect plant diversity in different ways, over different time scales, but there is no evidence of drastic changes in diversity during the first felling cycle, even in stands whose structure is altered by refinement/liberation treatments. Seed dispersal and germination can also be affected as a result of loss of fauna and changes in the forest microenvironment. In addition to research on technologies for sustainable management of tropical forests and their biodiversity, CATIE is also involved in designing systems for diversified forest management, which includes studies on the ecology and management of non-timber forest species. Many forest management practices are best suited to small farmers, farmer cooperatives, or community forest users. Some farmers' cooperatives in Costa Rica manage forests for ecotourism and non-timber forest products, and also cultivate other portions of their land as well as reforesting degraded land with native or exotic species, often as mixed-species planting schemes. Tropical plantations can supply wood products, contribute to carbon sequestration and land reclamation, as well as accelerating natural regeneration. Domestication of promising species for plantations involves selecting outstanding trees, evaluating genetic variability, seed germination and storage, evaluating the performance of species under different silvicultural systems, and developing seed orchards for the production of genetically improved seeds.
Ephemeral forest regeneration limits carbon sequestration potential in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest			Although deforestation remains widespread in the tropics, many places are now experiencing significant forest recovery (i.e., forest transition), offering an optimistic outlook for natural ecosystem recovery and carbon sequestration. Naturally regenerated forests, however, may not persist, so a more nuanced understanding of the drivers of forest change in the tropics is critical to ensure the success of reforestation efforts and carbon sequestration targets. Here we use 35 years of detailed land cover data to investigate forest trajectories in 3014 municipalities in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest (AF), a biodiversity and conservation hotspot. Although deforestation was evident in some regions, deforestation reversals, the typical forest transition trajectory, were the prevalent trend in the AF, accounting for 38% of municipalities. However, simultaneous reforestation reversals in the region (13% of municipalities) suggest that these short-term increases in native forest cover do not necessarily translate into persistent trends. In the absence of reversals in reforestation, forests in the region could have sequestered 1.75 Pg C, over three times the actual estimated carbon sequestration (0.52 Pg C). We also showed that failure to distinguish native and planted forests would have masked native forest cover loss in the region and overestimated reforestation by 3.2 Mha and carbon sequestration from natural forest regeneration by 0.37 Pg C. Deforestation reversals were prevalent in urbanized municipalities with limited forest cover and high agricultural productivity, highlighting the importance of favorable socioeconomic conditions in promoting reforestation. Successful forest restoration efforts will require development and enforcement of environmental policies that promote forest regeneration and ensure the permanence of regrowing forests. This is crucial not only for the fate and conservation of the AF, but also for other tropical nations to achieve their restoration and carbon sequestration commitments.
Epiphytic algal biomass associated with pneumatophores of various avicennia species: An overview			Mangrove swamps are coastal wetlands found in tropical and subtropical regions. They have different types of special root systems and adaptations to cope with the extreme saline environment. Epiphytic algae associated with the mangroves are significant in increasing the productivity of the ecosystem as well as nutrient cycling. The presence of algae doubles the carbon sequestration power of mangrove forests. Among the mangroves, some species like Avicennia are wide in occurrence and their pneumatophores contains abundant algal microflora. Few studies on mangrove epiphytic algae are available. However the previous studies reported a number of mangrove associated algae belonging to different groups. Recently developed technologies provides a lots of opportunities to utilize and reveal the role of these epiphytic algal forms for a better environment in future. Hence the present paper makes an attempt to review the studies regarding epiphytic algal forms, their distribution, biomass and seasonal occurrence associated with pneumatophores of Avicennia species.
Estimates and determinants of stocks of deep soil carbon in Gabon, Central Africa			Despite the importance of tropical forest carbon to the global carbon cycle, research on carbon stocks is incomplete in major areas of the tropical world. Nowhere in the tropics is this more the case than in Africa, and especially Central Africa, where carbon stocks are known to be high but a scarcity of data limits understanding of carbon stocks and drivers. In this study, we present the first nation-wide measurements and determinants of soil carbon in Gabon, a nation in Central Africa. We estimated soil carbon to a 2-m depth using a systematic, random design of 59 plots located across Gabon. Soil carbon to a 2-m depth averaged 163 Mg ha(-1) with a CV of 61%. These soil carbon stocks accounted for approximately half of the total carbon accumulated in aboveground biomass and soil pools. Nearly a third of soil carbon was stored in the second meter of soil, averaging 58 Mg ha(-1) with a CV of 94%. Lithology, soil type, and terrain attributes were found to be significant predictors of cumulative SOC stocks to a 2-m depth. Current protocols of the IPCC are to sample soil carbon from the surface 30 cm, which in this study would underestimate soil carbon by 60% and underestimate ecosystem carbon by 30%. A nonlinear model using a power function predicted cumulative soil carbon stocks in the second meter with an average error of prediction of 3.2 Mg ha(-1) (CV = 915%) of measured values. The magnitude and turnover of deep soil carbon in tropical forests needs to be estimated as more countries prioritize carbon accounting and monitoring in response to accelerating land-use change.
Estimates of changes in forest biomass using lidar in the area of sustainable forest management in the south-western Amazon			Estimates of biomass and carbon stocks associated with Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD) require information reliability and accuracy. Since obtaining the variables in the field consumes time and resources and, in some cases, is not feasible due to access difficulties, the study of alternative methods has made it possible to extract information from forest areas reliably. The airborne laser systems, based on LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) technology, allow obtaining three-dimensional information about the earth’s surface with high precision. The objective of this study was to test the use of LiDAR data to estimate changes in canopy cover and AGB, associated with forest in the Brazilian South-Western Amazon. Overflying occurred in 2013, 2014 and 2015, before and after the exploration, together with field data collection in ten permanent plots where measurement of the diameter of all individuals with DBH ≥ 10 cm at 1.30 m above the ground was carried out. A regression model to estimate changes in AGB was developed from the LiDAR data and field data. A simple differentiation of the canopy covers, before and after the exploration, identified areas where the canopy with more than 10 m of height was removed. The mean reduction in AGB was 21.36 Mg.ha-1 (8.9%). The reduction in canopy cover was estimated at 0.08 ha (8.2%). The model can be considered satisfactory, since it presented good statistical results as Raj 2 of 0.74, RMSE of 21.10 Mg.ha-1 and test of significance F of 27.19. This work demonstrates the potential of LiDAR for quantification of canopy structural changes in tropical forests. These results indicate that LiDAR can be a valuable tool for REDD-related carbon monitoring systems and may provide a means of quantifying changes in above-ground carbon attributable to logging activities. Due to the difficulties associated with field work in remote areas, it is acceptable that the remeasurements be obtained with from LiDAR data, for the purposes of monitoring AGB changes. © 2020, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. All rights reserved.
Estimating Aboveground Biomass and Carbon Sequestration in Afforestation Areas Using Optical/SAR Data Fusion and Machine Learning			The growing population and the impacts of climate change present a major challenge to forests, which play a crucial role in regulating the carbon cycle. Pakistan, as a Kyoto Protocol signatory, has implemented afforestation initiatives such as the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) government's Billion Tree Afforestation Project (BTAP). Quantifying the environmental impacts of such initiatives is very important; however, carbon pool data for BTAP plantation regions remain unavailable and are underexplored. This study aims to quantify aboveground biomass (AGB) and carbon sequestration potential (CSP) in the BTAP plantation regions using remote sensing and field data. Random sampling of 310 circular plots (17.84 m radius) provided measurements for tree height and diameter, from which AGB was calculated using allometric equations. Remote sensing data from Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2, combined with polarization rasters and vegetation indices, were used to train and evaluate multiple regression models including multiple linear regression (MLR), support vector regression (SVR), and random forest regression (RFR). The RFR model outperformed the others (R2 = 0.766) when using combined optical and radar data, yielding a mean AGB of 4.77 t/ha, carbon stock of 2.24 t/ha, and CO2 equivalent of 10.36 t/ha. For BTAP plantations, the total biomass reached 1.19 million tons, with 2.06 million tons of CO2 equivalent sequestered, corresponding to an annual sequestration of 0.47 tC/ha/yr and a potential of 99.18 +/- 15 tC/ha. This research introduces innovative predictive models and a comprehensive carbon assessment framework for afforestation projects, providing critical insights for policymakers and climate change mitigation efforts.
Estimating Aboveground Biomass and Carbon Stocks in Periurban Andean Secondary Forests Using Very High Resolution Imagery			Periurban forests are key to offsetting anthropogenic carbon emissions, but they are under constant threat from urbanization. In particular, secondary Neotropical forest types in Andean periurban areas have a high potential to store carbon, but are currently poorly characterized. To address this lack of information, we developed a method to estimate periurban aboveground biomass (AGB) a proxy for multiple ecosystem services of secondary Andean forests near Bogota, Colombia, based on very high resolution (VHR) GeoEye-1, Pleiades-1A imagery and field-measured plot data. Specifically, we tested a series of different pre-processing workflows to derive six vegetation indices that were regressed against in situ estimates of AGB. Overall, the coupling of linear models and the Ratio Vegetation Index produced the most satisfactory results. Atmospheric and topographic correction proved to be key in improving model fit, especially in high aerosol and rugged terrain such as the Andes. Methods and findings provide baseline AGB and carbon stock information for little studied periurban Andean secondary forests. The methodological approach can also be used for integrating limited forest monitoring plot AGB data with very high resolution imagery for cost-effective modelling of ecosystem service provision from forests, monitoring reforestation and forest cover change, and for carbon offset assessments.
Estimating Aboveground Biomass of Two Different Forest Types in Myanmar from Sentinel-2 Data with Machine Learning and Geostatistical Algorithms			The accurate estimation of spatially explicit forest aboveground biomass (AGB) provides an essential basis for sustainable forest management and carbon sequestration accounting, especially in Myanmar, where there is a lack of data for forest conservation due to operational limitations. This study mapped the forest AGB using Sentinel-2 (S-2) images and Shuttle Radar Topographic Mission (SRTM) based on random forest (RF), stochastic gradient boosting (SGB) and Kriging algorithms in two forest reserves (Namhton and Yinmar) in Myanmar, and compared their performance against AGB measured by the traditional methods. Specifically, a suite of forest sample plots were deployed in the two forest reserves, and forest attributes were measured to calculate the plot-level AGB based on allometric equations. The spectral bands, vegetation indices (VIs) and textures derived from processed S-2 data and topographic parameters from SRTM were utilized to statistically link with field-based AGB by implementing random forest (RF) and stochastic gradient boosting (SGB) algorithms. Followed by an evaluation of the algorithmic performances, RF-based Kriging (RFK) models were employed to determine the spatial distribution of AGB as an improvement of accuracy against RF models. The study's results showed that textural measures produced from wavelet analysis (WA) and vegetation indices (VIs) from Sentinel-2 were the strongest predictors for evergreen forest reserve (Namhton) AGB prediction and spectral bands and vegetation indices (VIs) showed the highest sensitivity to the deciduous forest reserve (Yinmar) AGB prediction. The fitted models were RF-based ordinary Kriging (RFOK) for Namhton forest reserve and RF-based co-Kriging (RFCK) for Yinmar forest reserve because their respective R-2, whilst the RMSE values were validated as 0.47 and 24.91 AGB t/ha and 0.52 and 34.72 AGB t/ha, respectively. The proposed random forest Kriging framework provides robust AGB maps, which are essential to estimate the carbon sequestration potential in the context of REDD+. From this particular study, we suggest that the protection/disturbance status of forests affects AGB values directly in the study area; thus, community-participated or engaged forest utilization and conservation initiatives are recommended to promote sustainable forest management.
Estimating carbon stock in secondary forests: Decisions and uncertainties associated with allometric biomass models			Secondary forests are a major terrestrial carbon sink and reliable estimates of their carbon stocks are pivotal for understanding the global carbon balance and initiatives to mitigate CO2 emissions through forest management and reforestation. A common method to quantify carbon stocks in forests is the use of allometric regression models to convert forest inventory data to estimates of aboveground biomass (AGB). The use of allometric models implies decisions on the selection of extant models or the development of a local model, the predictor variables included in the selected model, and the number of trees and species for destructive biomass measurements. We assess uncertainties associated with these decisions using data from 94 secondary forest plots in central Panama and 244 harvested trees belonging to 26 locally abundant species. AGB estimates from species-specific models were used to assess relative errors of estimates from multispecies models. To reduce uncertainty in the estimation of plot AGB, including wood specific gravity (WSG) in the model was more important than the number of trees used for model fitting. However, decreasing the number of trees increased uncertainty of landscape-level AGB estimates substantially, while including WSG had limited effects on the accuracy of the landscape-level estimates. Predictions of stand and landscape AGB varied strongly among models, making model choice an important source of uncertainty. Local models provided more accurate AGB estimates than foreign models, but high variability in carbon stocks across the landscape implies that developing local models is only justified when landscape sampling is sufficiently intensive. © 2011 Elsevier B.V.
Estimating deforestation in tropical humid and dry forests in Madagascar from 2000 to 2010 using multi-date Landsat satellite images and the random forests classifier			High resolution and low uncertainty deforestation maps covering large spatial areas in tropical countries are needed to plan efficient forest conservation and management programs such as REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation). Using an open-source free software (R, GRASS and QGis) and an original statistical approach combining multi-date land cover observations based on Landsat satellite images and the random forests classifier, we obtained up-to-date deforestation maps for the periods 2000-2005 and 2005-2010 with a minimum mapping unit of 0.36ha for 7.7M hectares, i.e. 40.3% of the tropical humid forest and 20.6% of the tropical dry forest in Madagascar. Uncertainty in deforestation on the maps was calculated by comparing the results of the classification to more than 30,000 visual interpretation points on a regular grid. We assessed accuracy on a per-pixel basis (confusion matrix) and by measuring the relative surface difference between wall-to-wall approach and point sampling. At the pixel level, user accuracy was 84.7% for stable land cover and 60.7% for land cover change. On average for the whole study area, we obtained a relative difference of 2% for stable land cover categories and 21.1% land cover change categories respectively between the wall-to-wall and the point sampling approach. Depending on the study area, our conservative assessment of annual deforestation rates ranged from 0.93 to 2.33%·yr-1 for the humid forest and from 0.46 to 1.17%·yr-1 for the dry forest. Here we describe an approach to obtain deforestation maps with reliable uncertainty estimates that can be transposed to other regions in the tropical world. © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
Estimating potential preferences for wood products sourced from forests that are managed using sustainable forest management schemes			SUMMARY Deforestation of tropical forest is serious problem around the world. In this study, we aimed to reveal peoples' potential preferences for sustainable forest management such as REDD+ scheme, focusing on a comparison of the attitudes of people in Malaysia to those of people in Japan, through choice experiment survey of the hypothetical choice behavior of consumer purchasing certified wood product. Choice experiment is one of stated preference methods. The results suggest that both the Malaysian and Japanese people are willing to pay a premium for certified wood product made from materials produced under the sustainable forest management as the REDD+ aimed at reducing CO2 emissions and preserving biodiversity. The two peoples shared a common concern about the environmental problem of deforestation, which could contribute to global warming and the destruction of biodiversity. Thus this study indicated the importance of REDD+ and its certification programme for future development of REDD+.
Estimating the full greenhouse gas emissions offset potential and profile between rehabilitating and established mangroves			Mangrove forests are extremely productive, with rates of growth rivaling some terrestrial tropical rainforests. However, our understanding of the full suite of processes underpinning carbon exchange with the atmosphere and near shore-waters, the allocation of carbon in mangroves, and fluxes of non-CO2 greenhouse gases (GHGs) are limited to a handful of studies. This constrains the scientific basis from which to advocate for greater support for and investment in mangrove restoration and conservation. Improving understanding is urgently needed given the on-going landuse pressures mangrove forests face, particularly throughout much of Southeast Asia. The current study reduces uncertainties by providing a holistic synthesis of the net potential GHG mitigation benefits resulting from rehabilitating mangroves and established forests. Rehabilitating sites from two contrasting locations representative of high (Tiwoho) and low (Tanakeke) productivity systems on the island of Sulawesi (Indonesia) were used as case studies to compare against established mangroves. A carbon budget, allocation and pathways model was developed to account for inputs (carbon sequestration) and outputs (GHG emissions of CO2, N2O and CH4) to estimate Net Ecosystem Production (NEP) and Net Ecosystem Carbon Balance (NECB). Our results indicate that while Tiwoho's rehabilitating sites and established mangroves represent a significant carbon sink (-10.6 +/- 0.9 Mg CO(2)e ha(-1) y(-1) and 16.1 Mg CO(2)e ha(-1) y(-1) respectively), the low productivity of Tanakeke has resulted in minimal reductions to date (0.7 +/- 0.3 Mg CO(2)e ha(-1) y(-1)). Including NEP from mangrove-allied primary producer communities (e.g. benthic algae) and the portion of dissolved inorganic carbon exported from mangroves (EXDIC) that remainswithin the water column may drive overall removals considerably upwards in established forests to 37.2 Mg CO(2)e ha(-1) y(-1). These values are higher than terrestrial forests and strengthen the evidence base needed to underpin the use of forest carbon financing mechanisms for mangrove restoration. (c) 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Estimating the impacts of conservation on ecosystem services and poverty by integrating modeling and evaluation			Scholars have made great advances in modeling and mapping ecosystem services, and in assigning economic values to these services. This modeling and valuation scholarship is often disconnected from evidence about how actual conservation programs have affected ecosystem services, however. Without a stronger evidence base, decision makers find it difficult to use the insights from modeling and valuation to design effective policies and programs. To strengthen the evidence base, scholars have advanced our understanding of the causal pathways between conservation actions and environmental outcomes, but their studies measure impacts on imperfect proxies for ecosystem services (e.g., avoidance of deforestation). To be useful to decision makers, these impacts must be translated into changes in ecosystem services and values. To illustrate how this translation can be done, we estimated the impacts of protected areas in Brazil, Costa Rica, Indonesia, and Thailand on carbon storage in forests. We found that protected areas in these conservation hotspots have stored at least an additional 1,000 Mt of CO2 in forests and have delivered ecosystem services worth at least $5 billion. This aggregate impact masks important spatial heterogeneity, however. Moreover, the spatial variability of impacts on carbon storage is the not the same as the spatial variability of impacts on avoided deforestation. These findings lead us to describe a research program that extends our framework to study other ecosystem services, to uncover the mechanisms by which ecosystem protection benefits humans, and to tie cost-benefit analyses to conservation planning so that we can obtain the greatest return on scarce conservation funds.
Estimating woody aboveground biomass in an area of agroforestry using airborne light detection and ranging and compact airborne spectrographic imager hyperspectral data: individual tree analysis incorporating tree species information			Until now, there have been only a few studies that have made estimates of the woody aboveground biomass (AGB) in an area of agroforestry using remote sensing technology. The woody AGB density was estimated using individual tree analysis (ITA) that incorporated tree species information using a combination of airborne light detection and ranging (LiDAR) and compact airborne spectrographic imagery acquired over a typical agroforestry in northwestern China. First, a series of improved LiDAR processing algorithms was applied to achieve individual tree segmentation, and accurate plot-level canopy heights and crown diameters were obtained. The individual tree species were then successfully classified using both spectral and shape characteristics with an overall accuracy of 0.97 and a kappa coefficient of 0.85. Finally, the tree-level AGB (kg) was estimated based on the ITA; the AGB density (Mg/ha) was then upscaled based on the tree-level AGB values. It is concluded that, compared with the commonly used area-based method combining LiDAR and spectral metrics [root mean square error (RMSE) = 19.58 Mg/ha], the ITA method performs better at estimating AGB density (RMSE = 10.56 Mg/ha). The tree species information also improved the accuracy of the AGB estimation even though the species are not well diversified in this study area. (C) 2016 Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE)
Estimation of aboveground net primary productivity in secondary tropical dry forests using the Carnegie-Ames-Stanford approach (CASA) model			Although tropical dry forests (TDFs) cover roughly 42% of all tropical ecosystems, extensive deforestation and habitat fragmentation pose important limitations for their conservation and restoration worldwide. In order to develop conservation policies for this endangered ecosystem, it is necessary to quantify their provision of ecosystems services such as carbon sequestration and primary production. In this paper we explore the potential of the Carnegie-Ames-Stanford approach (CASA) for estimating aboveground net primary productivity (ANPP) in a secondary TDF located at the Santa Rosa National Park (SRNP), Costa Rica. We calculated ANPP using the CASA model (ANPP(CASA)) in three successional stages (early, intermediate, and late). Each stage has a stand age of 21 years, 32 years, and 50+ years, respectively, estimated as the age since land abandonment. Our results showed that the ANPP(CASA) for early, intermediate, and late successional stages were 3.22 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1), 8.90 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1), and 7.59 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1), respectively, which are comparable with rates of carbon uptake in other TDFs. Our results indicate that key variables that influence ANPP in our dry forest site were stand age and precipitation seasonality. Incident photosynthetically active radiation and temperature were not dominant in the ANPP(CASA). The results of this study highlight the potential of the use of remote sensing techniques and the importance of incorporating successional stage in accurate regional TDF ANPP estimation.
Estimation of biomass density and carbon storage in the forests of Andhra Pradesh, India, with emphasis on their deforestation and degradation conditions			The current study evaluates the growing stock, biomass and carbon content of Andhra Pradesh state's forest (India) along with its current status of forest degradation and loss. For this purpose, the study used the growing stock data collected by state forest department in 2010 for the calculation of biomass and carbon storage using the standard conversion and expansion factors given by IPCC. The analysis shows low biomass and carbon values for the state's forest in comparison to the mean values recorded in different studies made for Andhra Pradesh. It is also observed to be lower when compared with the average carbon and biomass for Indian forests. Overall, the analysis showed degradation and loss of forest in the state, coupled with reduction in biomass and carbon sink.
Estimation of carbon stock under different management regimes of tropical forest in the Terai Arc Landscape, Nepal			Carbon (C) stocks in the forests of Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) participating countries have to be estimated and monitored to determine accurate financial incentives and compensation. The research estimated the distribution of C stock across the different pools and management regimes of tropical Sal forest in the Terai Arc Landscape of Nepal. It applied a field measurement-based forest inventory method combined with the best predictive allometric model available, to increase accuracy and precision. Shrub and litter C were estimated by destructive method and Soil Organic Carbon (SOC) up to a depth of 30 cm. Biomass data and samples were collected from 113 plots distributed throughout four different management regimes on 1.1 million ha of forest in the landscape. The estimated average C stock in aboveground biomass, belowground biomass, shrub, litter, SOC and total were 105.58 +/- 17.05, 24.92 +/- 4.15, 0.23 +/- 0.06, 1.49 +/- 0.25, 96.53 +/- 8.76 and 228.76 +/- 19.61 Mg ha(-1) respectively. The mass of total C stock varied from 291.55 +/- 42.51 Mg ha(-1) in protected areas to 237.15 +/- 32.54 Mg ha(-1) in community forests to 189.16 +/- 26.46 Mg ha(-1) in government-managed forests and to 126.76 +/- 56.36 Mg ha(-1) in other forests. These estimates of carbon stocks differed from earlier estimates based on biome-average datasets. They are consistent with those from similar forest type and site-specific earlier studies. Evidence of strong association of C stock with management regime provides valuable information for policy makers to make informed choice of management regime for the landscape. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Estimation of Mangrove Blue Carbon in Three Semi-arid Lagoons in the Gulf of California			Blue carbon ecosystems are recognized as natural climate solutions due to their capacity to store carbon (C) in the vegetation and soil. Thus, the extent of such role by mangrove ecosystems has raised interest in the scientific community. Mangrove carbon stock above ground biomass is higher in humid tropical areas than in dry subtropical ones. However, a lack of information persists when it comes to the belowground C. This research aimed to determine the carbon stock in relation to total mangrove biomass in three semi-arid coastal lagoons in the Gulf of California, Mexico. Different methods were used, tree structure and pneumatophore measurements, litter traps, root and production cores; along with measurements of physicochemical parameters in sediment in surface and interstitial water. Mean carbon in the total mangrove biomass was 54.1 MgCorg center dot ha(-1), with a maximum of 102.1 +/- 14.2 MgCorg center dot ha(-1) at the Lobos site. In arid areas, mangroves are characterized by larger amounts of belowground biomass associated with environmental factors such as pH, redox potential, and temperature, leading to a high C-org content belowground. Root production are high, enhancing the efficiency of belowground C-org storage related to the life cycle of roots (turnover). The presence of Conocarpus erectus (L), a new record of the distribution limit of the species in the Gulf of California (Lobos), attained the highest values of structural development, litter-based primary productivity, and belowground root production and biomass. Therefore, this species is recommended for restoration (reforestation), given its high primary productivity that stabilizes the coastline and increases carbon storage dynamics.
Ethnobotany, rattan agroforestry, and conservation of ecosystem services in Central Kalimantan, Indonesia			Rattan agroforestry is an important land use system in Central Kalimantan, Indonesia, providing a wide range of products for subsistence communities. The ethnobotanical importance of rattan includes heritage values reflecting traditional ecological knowledge. This traditional forestry practice is consistent with necessary conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services currently threatened by expansion of oil palm plantations. We examined species composition and morphology (including life stages) of vegetation associated with rattan agroforests in the Katingan district, Central Kalimantan. An examination of harvested rattan plots revealed 101 species of vegetation of which 90% are considered to be useful (food, construction materials, medicines) and most (97%) were native species, typical of lowland tropical forest vegetation. Vegetation in the rattan agroforests was dominated by trees (in terms of species richness). There were 80 species of trees, representing 79% of the plants surveyed. Vitex pubescens (kaluan) had the highest importance value as it occupied more space, was represented by more individuals and was most frequently found in rattan gardens. These trees in general have a relatively open canopy with strong branches; properties considered ideal to support rattan. Canopy forming species are actively managed to provide for growth of useful understory vegetation (including rattan) important in the livelihoods of village communities. Rattan agroforests also provide cultural services reflecting traditional use (e.g. a sense of belonging and ancestral linkages for local forest-dependent communities). The importance of ethnobotanical approaches to rattan cultivation includes the socio-economic evaluation of land use and the promotion of sustainable land use policies in Indonesia. This is important in the context of oil palm expansion which has a demonstrably adverse impact on ecosystem services.
Evaluating Climate, Environmental and Anthropogenic Influences on Regenerating Tropical and Mangrove Forests Through Remote Sensing: Insights into Nature-Based Solutions			0
Evaluating climber cutting as a strategy to restore degraded tropical forests			A substantial share of the remaining tropical forest cover is represented by historically degraded fragments exposed to severe edge effects, where ruderal plants proliferate vigorously and may arrest succession. We tested climber plant cutting as strategy to restore a semideciduous tropical forest remnant that is dominated by ruderal climbers. We compared control (unmanaged) plots with plots subjected to climber cutting at 1-m height with recutting one (after 8 months) or three times (8, 24 and 36 months). We monitored: 1) tree and shrub biomass gain and canopy openness for three years; 2) tree and shrub growth and recruitment of regenerating seedlings for one year; and 3) planted seedling survival for two years. Climber cutting increased biomass gain by similar to 51% for smaller trees and shrubs (1.58 <= dbh < 5 cm) only, regardless of the number of re-cuts. Canopy openness increased following climber cutting, but recovered after ten months due to rapid growth of the tree canopies. Growth of regenerating seedlings, but not abundance, was favored by climber cutting. Initial cutting of climbers enhanced survival of enrichment plantings, but this benefit declined with canopy re-occupation by tree foliage. Although longer-term research is needed, cutting ruderal climbers in degraded forest remnants was shown to be a promising approach to enhance forest regeneration and carbon sequestration, justifying its consideration in the restoration agenda as a complementary activity to increasing forest cover in former agricultural lands. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Evaluating failures in tropical forest management: incorporating local perspectives into global conservation strategies			0
Evaluating the effectiveness of protected area management in Indonesia			Protected areas worldwide are strongholds for safeguarding biodiversity, natural habitats, ecosystem services and cultural values. Yet despite their importance, the effectiveness of protected area management varies greatly. Indonesia is a biodiversity hotspot, with 554 protected areas that cover 27 million ha across the archipelago. To assess and improve the management effectiveness of these protected areas, the Government of Indonesia applied an adapted version of the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) to assess 422 of the country's protected areas, of which 170 were repeatedly assessed in 2015, 2017 and 2019. We investigated the METT score changes across these protected areas and the factors explaining the varying scores. Over the study years, METT scores significantly improved (mean increase of 44.1%). National parks had the highest mean score, which was 13.4 points higher than other protected area types. After correcting for spatial autocorrelation using a generalized least-squares model, we found that METT score increase was positively influenced by year of assessment and having a well-resourced management authority, with no influence of protected area size or mean protected area budget allocation per ha. The assessments identified five main threats to protected areas: poaching, illegal logging, human settlements, tourism and non-timber cultivation. The widespread and repeated use of METT across the protected areas of Indonesia and the increasing METT scores indicate an overall improvement in management and professionalism. Building on the foundational work in our study, future studies should assess the association between METT scores and progress made towards achieving the conservation objectives of protected areas.
Evaluating the evolution of forest restoration research in a changing world: a "big literature" review			In a rapidly changing world, characterized by novel ecological scenarios and fluctuating socioeconomic and ecological demands, ecological restoration practices must constantly adapt to emerging issues and circumstances. Restoration ecology, the scientific discipline that informs ecological restoration, must therefore evolve and expand its focus to address this need. To describe and evaluate the evolution of research pertaining to the ecological restoration of forests within the field of forestry, we performed a review of all 29,766 abstracts published over the last 35 years (1980-2014) in 15 leading forestry journals using automated content analysis, a machine learning-based tool for automated review of large volumes of literature ("big literature"). We found not only a 50-fold increase in the prominence of restoration ecology in forestry literature from 2000 to 2013, but also an evolution in the focus of forest restoration research. This evolution is likely in response to emerging topics and issues affecting forest restoration, such as exotic species, altered disturbance regimes, degraded tropical forests, and ecosystem services. Our results also revealed a pattern of "cyclic development," in which research in the 1990s was focused on constructing theoretical frameworks, in the 2000s research appeared to be concentrated on restoration practices and programs, while in the 2010s research revisited established theoretical frameworks, possibly indicating a conceptual expansion. Our study highlighted gaps in research on important topics and emerging challenges, such as global climate change, genetic considerations, landscape-level factors, and restoring degraded systems, thus pointing the way for new and necessary research directions.
Evaluating the opportunities and limitations to multiple use of Brazil nuts and timber in Western Amazonia			Multiple-use forest management, which includes timber, non-timber forest products, and environmental services, is considered a promising tropical conservation and development strategy. In the tri-national frontier region of Madre de Dios (Peru), Acre (Brazil), and Pando (Bolivia) in Western Amazonia, we evaluated perceptions of representatives from four stakeholder groups - communities, industries (Brazil nut and timber), non-governmental organizations, and government agencies - on integrated management of timber and Brazil nuts (from the tree species Bertholletia excelsa) at multiple scales. A strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) analysis in combination with an analytic hierarchy process (AHP) was used to accomplish this task. Overall, results showed distinct differences in perceptions among stakeholder groups both within and among countries in pursuing multiple-use forestry strategies. Although many stakeholder groups held positive perceptions about multiple use of Brazil nuts and timber, several limitations were associated with implementation of this model. For instance, policy barriers and high management costs were considered the main weaknesses throughout the region. In Madre de Dios and Pando, logging damage to Brazil nut stands was the dominant threat, whereas in Acre, the main threat was reinvestment of forestry income into cattle. Our work shows that despite the high potential for and positive views of many stakeholders in pursuing integrated management of Brazil nut and timber, specific policy, economic, and technical limitations must first be addressed. To this end, we provide recommendations for promoting this multi-use forestry model in the future. (C) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Evaluating the Role of Community-Managed Forest in Carbon Sequestration and Climate Change Mitigation of Tripura, India			Community-based forest management provides an opportunity to build a sustainable link with ecology for meeting future needs. A study was carried out to understand the effect of management strategies on the biodiversity, soil nutrient, and carbon stock of two community forests practiced by Jamatia (JCF) and Halam (HCF) tribes of Tripura, northeast India. The forest managed by Jamatia is community conserved, whereas the Joint Forest Management (JFM) regulation issued by the Government of India was implemented in Halam community-based forest. JCF showed higher tree diversity (2.741) than HCF (2.176), while there was no significant variation in the total number of species in these forests. Anogeissus acuminata, Schima wallichii, and Terminalia bellirica were the most dominant species in JCF and HCF. A relatively higher amount of organic matter, nitrogen, and phosphorus content was found in JCF soils. JCF showed higher carbon stock (342.9 Mg C ha(-1)) than HCF (158.7 Mg C ha(-1)). A positive and significant correlation of SOC concentration was observed with soil moisture, SOM, and soil nutrient content. The results show that both stands were at developmental stages; however, regular extraction of biomass from HCF was attributable to lower carbon stock. We found that the Jamatia communities are proactively involved in the conservation of forests and sustainable management of biodiversity under their control. The results reveal that the agent of management can play a vital role in enhancing tree diversity, soil properties, and carbon stock in community forests.
Evaluating the role of plantations as carbon sinks: An example of an integrative approach from the humid tropics			Despite their fast growth, tropical plantations are a small sink of atmospheric carbon because they occupy only a small area in relation to other land uses world-wide. Proper design and management of plantations can increase biomass accumulation rates, making them more effective C sinks. However, fast-growing plantations can extract large amounts of nutrients from the soil, and site fertility declines may limit sustained plantation forestry after a few rotations. We measured aboveground biomass accumulation, carbon sequestration, and soil chemistry in three young plantations of 12 indigenous tree species in pure and mixed designs in the humid lowlands of Costa Pica. Annual biomass increments for the three mixed plantations ranged from 10-13 Mg/ha. The mixtures of four species gave higher biomass per hectare than that obtained by the sum of one fourth hectare of each species in pure plots. At this early age of the plantations, estimated annual C sequestration values were comparable to other reports from young plantations of exotic species commonly grown in the tropics. Four years after planting, decreases in soil nutrients were apparent in pure plots of some of the fastest growing species, while beneficial effects on soils were noted under other species. The mixed plots showed intermediate values for the nutrients examined and, sometimes, improved soil conditions. A mixture of fast and slower growing species yields products at different times, with the slower growing species constituting a longer term sink for fixed carbon. Examination of the role of tropical plantations as C sinks necessitates integrative approaches that consider rates of C sequestration, potential deleterious effects on ecosystem nutrients, and economic, social, and environmental constraints.
Evaluation of aerial biomass accumulation and ecological sustainability in Amazonian forests: a case study of the Cotococha community			Amazonian tropical forests have an enormous variety of species and are recognized for their great biodiversity and carbon sequestration, but they are threatened by anthropogenic pressure from land use change. Therefore, the objective of this research was to evaluate the accumulated aerial biomass and ecological sustainability of an Amazonian forest in the Cotococha community. Five 0.1 ha transects (10 x 100 m) separated at 100 m intervals were established and all tree species were recorded with D-1.30 >= 10 cm. Ecological indicators were evaluated based on vegetation, soil, biodiversity and productivity. Aerial biomass was estimated using allometric equations and the biomass importance value index (BIVF) was determined. The families Melastomataceae, Fabaceae, Euphorbiaceae and Salicaceae presented the highest number of species. The distribution of diameter classes showed an inverted J trend. The ecological su stainability diagnosis showed that not all indicators reach the sustainability threshold. An area biomass of 78.67 +/- 5.87 Mg ha(-1) and a carbon stock of 39.33 +/- 2.34 Mg ha(-1) were reported. The three families with the highest BIVF were Melastomataceae with 38.43, Annonaceae with 24.36 and Meliaceae with 22.69 These families could be recommended for restoration programs within the community, due to their high potential to accumulate aerial biomass and carbon stock, contributing to a management that allows them to improve and reach the threshold of sustainability in all ecological indicators.
Evaluation of nature-based climate solutions for agricultural landscapes in the Galápagos Islands			The Galápagos Islands are highly vulnerable to climate and environmental change, and nature-based solutions can help local communities adapt local agricultural systems. Through a comparative analysis, we evaluated the effects of three land management strategies on soil temperature, soil water availability and storage, and carbon stocks in Santa Cruz Island (Galápagos Archipelago). We installed six monitoring sites that consisted of two replicates per pathway: (i) the avoided loss of tropical forest, (ii) the conservation of scattered trees and living fences in at-risk agroforestry system, and (iii) the increase in biomass after a reduction of the grazing intensity. The monitoring sites were equipped with a dense network of rain gauges, air temperature and relative humidity sensors, and capacitance/frequency probes that registered volumetric water content and soil temperature. After pedological characterization of the soil profiles, the soil physico-chemical and hydrophysical properties were determined in laboratory. Over a period of 30 months (July 2019 to December 2021), hydrometeorological and soil environmental data were collected. We assessed differences in soil temperature, moisture availability and soil organic carbon content between native forests, sites under traditional agroforestry and under passive restoration. Forest soils were 12 % cooler;, and soil moisture under forest was 20 % higher than in parcels with silvopastural management. Forest soils had a lower dry bulk density, lower saturated hydraulic conductivity and higher water retention capacity in comparison with the other two management types. In silvopastural systems, a decrease of grazing intensity had a positive effect on soil carbon stocks, that were about 50 % higher than in soils under traditional management. This study shows that avoided loss of tropical forest within an agricultural landscape is a promising strategy to mitigate increasing soil temperatures, agricultural drought, and decline in soil organic carbon content. Continued monitoring of the experimental sites is necessary to corroborate the findings of this investigation at longer temporal scales. © 2024 The Authors
Evaluation of reclamation success in an open-pit coal mine using integrated soil physical, chemical and biological quality indicators			The evaluation and success of ecological reclamation can be assessed by measuring soil physical, chemical and biological variables, either in isolation or combined into composite indicators. In this study we tested the suitability of biological, chemical and physical quality indicators-and their combination in a General Indicator of Soil Quality (GISQ)-to monitor soil quality in restored areas of an open cast coal mine. These composite indicators were computed with principal component analyses (PCA) and co-inertia multivariate analyses (CoIA). Our biological indicator showed a significant recovery of soil invertebrate communities along the chronosequence. Taxonomic richness increased from 7 taxa the 1st year to 13-17 taxa in 6-20-y sites, far less than in forests (19-20). Soil pH, bulk density and proportion of physical and macro aggregates were highest in the 1-y site, while soil organic matter (SOM), total N and proportion of biogenic aggregates were highest in older sites. In general, the three sub-indicators and the GISQ yielded the lowest values in the 1-y site (from 0.1 to 0.3 on a scale of 0.1 to 1.0), intermediate in the 16- and 20-y sites, (0.4-0.7) and reached highest values in the two forests (0.4-1.0). The GISQ methodology proved efficient in assessing progress in the reclamation process which should not be achieved only by monitoring vegetation cover changes.
Evaluation of the Capacity of Agroforestry of Cocoa Trees in Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide Reduction			The emission of greenhouse gases into the earth's atmosphere has been credited as the major cause of climate change which is being experienced all over the world. Climate change mitigation is one of the strategies that have been suggested as a way of stabilising the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. This study assessed the capacity of agroforestry of cocoa trees in reducing atmospheric carbon dioxide. The carbon content in the cocoa plant variables made up of bean, litter, leaf and podhusk were determined in the laboratory through standard procedure. The laboratory results were subjected to descriptive and inferential statistical techniques. The study showed the magnitude order of carbon storage in cocoa agroforestry as cocoa bean (2.86 kg) > pod husk (2.73 kg) >cocoa litter (2.65kg) >cocoa leaves (2.62 kg) > soil (1.14 kg). ).The ability of cocoa and forest soils to retain nitrogen, leaf and litterfall to stock more carbon proved that cocoa agroforestry has a higher potential of mitigating climate change in the tropical region. The study recommended the adoption of agroforestry systems which are capable of sequestering carbon as a means of addressing the challenge of climate change.
Even cooler insights: On the power of forests to (water the Earth and) cool the planet			Scientific innovation is overturning conventional paradigms of forest, water, and energy cycle interactions. This has implications for our understanding of the principal causal pathways by which tree, forest, and vegetation cover (TFVC) influence local and global warming/cooling. Many identify surface albedo and carbon sequestration as the principal causal pathways by which TFVC affects global warming/cooling. Moving toward the outer latitudes, in particular, where snow cover is more important, surface albedo effects are perceived to overpower carbon sequestration. By raising surface albedo, deforestation is thus predicted to lead to surface cooling, while increasing forest cover is assumed to result in warming. Observational data, however, generally support the opposite conclusion, suggesting surface albedo is poorly understood. Most accept that surface temperatures are influenced by the interplay of surface albedo, incoming shortwave (SW) radiation, and the partitioning of the remaining, post-albedo, SW radiation into latent and sensible heat. However, the extent to which the avoidance of sensible heat formation is first and foremost mediated by the presence (absence) of water and TFVC is not well understood. TFVC both mediates the availability of water on the land surface and drives the potential for latent heat production (evapotranspiration, ET). While latent heat is more directly linked to local than global cooling/warming, it is driven by photosynthesis and carbon sequestration and powers additional cloud formation and top-of-cloud reflectivity, both of which drive global cooling. TFVC loss reduces water storage, precipitation recycling, and downwind rainfall potential, thus driving the reduction of both ET (latent heat) and cloud formation. By reducing latent heat, cloud formation, and precipitation, deforestation thus powers warming (sensible heat formation), which further diminishes TFVC growth (carbon sequestration). Large-scale tree and forest restoration could, therefore, contribute significantly to both global and surface temperature cooling through the principal causal pathways of carbon sequestration and cloud formation.We assess the cooling power of forest cover at both the local and global scales. Our differentiated approach based on the use of multiple diagnostic metrics suggests that surface albedo effects are typically overemphasized at the expense of top-of-cloud reflectivity. Our analysis suggests that carbon sequestration and top-of-cloud reflectivity are the principal drivers of the global cooling power of forests, while evapotranspiration moves energy from the surface into the atmosphere, thereby keeping sensible heat from forming on the land surface. While deforestation brings surface warming, wetland restoration and reforestation bring significant cooling, both at the local and the global scale.image
Evidence of forest restoration success and the conservation value of community-owned forests in Southwest China using dung beetles as indicators			Protection of the world's remaining forests and biodiversity is a matter of global concern. Yunnan, China is home to China's only mainland tropical rainforests, and 20% of China's total biodiversity. Despite restoration measures and establishment of new protected areas, this region is still experiencing biodiversity loss due to inadequate management and monitoring. We evaluate restoration success of China's tropical forests in Xishuangbanna National Nature Reserve (XSBN-NNR), Yunnan, China using dung beetles as an indicator taxon. We sampled across a land-use gradient of human alteration: protected forest, restored forest, community owned forest, and rubber plantation. We collected 3,748 dung beetles from 21 species over a 3 month period. Multivariate analyses revealed unique assemblages in each land-use category, but with restored forest most similar to protected areas, suggesting restoration success in this region. Community forests were more diverse than plantations, suggesting that community forests may be a valuable and practical conservation tool in this region. Most species were generalists, although some had dietary and habitat preferences. Furthermore, dietary niche breadths were, on average, higher in disturbed areas, suggesting that disturbance may result in dietary changes. We show that restoration of tropical forests appears to be successful for a key ecological and biological indicator group-dung beetles. Furthermore, community-owned forests appear to be valuable and practical method of maintaining ecosystem health and biodiversity in the region. Future management in this region would likely benefit from encouragement to maintain community-owned forests, economic incentives for restoring farmland to forest, and increased environmental monitoring across the land-use gradient.
Evidence of Incipient Forest Transition in Southern Mexico			Case studies of land use change have suggested that deforestation across Southern Mexico is accelerating. However, forest transition theory predicts that trajectories of change can be modified by economic factors, leading to spatial and temporal heterogeneity in rates of change that may take the form of the Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC). This study aimed to assess the evidence regarding potential forest transition in Southern Mexico by classifying regional forest cover change using Landsat imagery from 1990 through to 2006. Patterns of forest cover change were found to be complex and nonlinear. When rates of forest loss were averaged over 342 municipalities using mixed-effects modelling the results showed a significant (p< 0.001) overall reduction of the mean rate of forest loss from 0.85% per year in the 1990-2000 period to 0.67% in the 2000-2006 period. The overall regional annual rate of deforestation has fallen from 0.33% to 0.28% from the 1990s to 2000s. A high proportion of the spatial variability in forest cover change cannot be explained statistically. However analysis using spline based general additive models detected underlying relationships between forest cover and income or population density of a form consistent with the EKC. The incipient forest transition has not, as yet, resulted in widespread reforestation. Forest recovery remains below 0.20% per year. Reforestation is mostly the result of passive processes associated with reductions in the intensity of land use. Deforestation continues to occur at high rates in some focal areas. A transition could be accelerated if there were a broader recognition among policy makers that the regional rate of forest loss has now begun to fall. The changing trajectory provides an opportunity to actively restore forest cover through stimulating afforestation and stimulating more sustainable land use practices. The results have clear implications for policy aimed at carbon sequestration through reducing deforestation and enhancing forest growth.
Evidence of time-lag in the provision of ecosystem services by tropical regenerating forests to coffee yields			Restoration of native tropical forests is crucial for protecting biodiversity and ecosystem functions, such as carbon stock capacity. However, little is known about the contribution of early stages of forest regeneration to crop productivity through the enhancement of ecosystem services, such as crop pollination and pest control. Using data from 610 municipalities along the Brazilian Atlantic Forest (30 m spatial resolution), we evaluated if young regenerating forests (YRFs) (less than 20 years old) are positively associated with coffee yield and whether such a relationship depends on the amount of preserved forest in the surroundings of the coffee fields. We found that regenerating forest alone was not associated with variations in coffee yields. However, the presence of YRF (within a 500 m buffer) was positively related to higher coffee yields when the amount of preserved forest in a 2 km buffer is above a 20% threshold cover. These results further reinforce that regional coffee yields are influenced by changes in biodiversity-mediated ecosystem services, which are explained by the amount of mature forest in the surrounding of coffee fields. We argue that while regenerating fragments may contribute to increased connectivity between remnants of forest fragments and crop fields in landscapes with a minimum amount of forest (20%), older preserved forests (more than 20 years) are essential for sustaining pollinator and pest enemy's populations. These results highlight the potential time lag of at least 20 years of regenerating forests' in contributing to the provision of ecosystem services that affect coffee yields (e.g. pollination and pest control). We emphasize the need to implement public policies that promote ecosystem restoration and ensure the permanence of these new forests over time.
Evidence Types and Trends in Tropical Forest Conservation Literature			To improve the likelihood of conservation success, donors, policy makers, non-governmental-organizations (NGOs), and researchers are increasingly interested in making conservation decisions based on scientific evidence. A major challenge in doing so has been the wide variability in the methodological rigor of existing studies. We present a simple framework to classify different types of conservation evidence, which can be used to understand the strengths, weaknesses, and biases in the conservation effectiveness literature. We then apply this framework to evaluate the evidence for the efficacy of four important strategies in tropical forest conservation. Even though there has been an increase in methodologically rigorous studies over time, countries that are globally important in terms of their biodiversity are still heavily under-represented by any type of conservation effectiveness evidence.
Evolutionary dynamics of selective logging in the tropics: A systematic review of impact studies and their effectiveness in sustainable forest management			Selective logging is the dominant timber harvesting practice in natural tropical forests. Considering its scale and its contribution to forest management outcome, efficient management of selective logging is crucial to address challenges associated with timber demand, carbon sequestration and biodiversity conservation. Ongoing selective logging has been a key reason for forest degradation despite a set of recommended practices such as reduced-impact logging. With the objective of drawing the attention of scholars and policy makers to answer the question why effectiveness of selective logging practice is still an issue, we tracked the trend and pattern of scholarly research related to the impact of selective logging. Using a systematic review of literature, we explored and discussed the possible factors hindering implementation of improved forest harvesting practices and the overall knowledge gaps yet not explored in this field of research. This review found consensus among scholars that implementation of improved forest harvesting is still rare despite the constant efforts made by researchers since the 1970s. Based on the review findings we concluded that concentration of research on specific countries, insufficient coverage of diversified forest dimensions/thematic areas, and higher concerns relating to ecological impacts of forest management are the reasons behind poor adoption of research outcomes of improved logging practices. Likewise, their implementation is further hindered by limited attention to the interests and needs of the forest managers/owners, lack of coordination and collaboration among stakeholders and negligible support to develop stakeholders' capacity. Our review suggests a broadening of the geographical and thematic focus of the study as well as a consideration of effective engagement and capacity development of the forest managers/owners and stakeholders in selective logging policies and practices.
Evolving frontier land markets and the opportunity cost of sparing forests in western Amazonia			Efforts aimed at sparing forests on tropical forest frontiers through REDD+, PES or conservation initiatives currently rely on a limited understanding of the operation of land markets and their effects on the opportunity cost of forests as frontiers develop. In this paper, we draw on a unique dataset of landholder reported land transactions that includes post-1991 land sales-in three sub-montane frontier forest areas on the eastern slopes of the Peruvian Andes. We analyze reported land sales that took place between 1979 and 2013 among Amazonian frontier farmers and find highly active land markets in all three areas, often in the absence of formal land tenure. As frontiers developed, parcel size fell, as did the portion of remaining forest cover, and land prices rose, reflecting both forest clearing and general land price inflation as the areas became more populated and developed. Across three study districts in 2013, each additional hectare of forest cleared raised the expected price of a parcel of land by US $1371-$2587. Importantly, we estimate the opportunity cost per hectare of frontier forest rose markedly over time: by $124-$226 per year between 2003 and 2013, a rate of increase over that period of 9-27% per year. Forest conservation programs that rely on estimates of landholders' willingness to accept compensation for sparing forest need to take into account that these values change rapidly as frontiers develop. (C) 2016 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Evolving perspectives of the 'difficult economics' of SFM and conservation			This Comment synthesises a PhD by Publications research narrative on the theme of economic incentives for tropical forest management and conservation. The narrative reveals an evolution from a focus on market incentives and non-market benefits to an increasing emphasis on governance and regulatory incentives in explaining stakeholder behaviour to the forest resource. It was found that in general market incentives for timber-based sustainable forest management (SFM) and conservation are weak. It is concluded that key missing ingredients for SFM and conservation are domestic and global governance, including regulations that create payments for ecosystem service (PES) markets and capture public good values, secure property rights for resident stakeholders and more appropriate extra-sectoral policies. Because of their global public good values, the survival of tropical forests is contingent on the actions of the international community and governments.
Expected values for attributes of riparian forests undergoing restoration at different ages			Forest restoration projects have increased in number and extension in Brazil in recent years. Notwithstanding, the difficulty in evaluating if the ecosystem undergoing restoration follows an expected trajectory or is under the expectations; this is an obstacle to be overcome. This study aimed at generating expected values for monitoring community attributes of riparian forests over the ages after planting trees. In this region the semi-deciduous Atlantic Forest was the historical vegetation. The reference values were obtained by modeling the trajectories of 26 riparian forests undergoing restoration at different ages. Among the tree community attributes analyzed, we selected as ecological indicators, those that: 1) followed predictable trajectories through time, and 2) represented the recovery of ecosystem structure, richness and relevant ecosystem services. Expected values for forest restoration projects aging from 4-25 years are presented for the indicators: basal area, aerial biomass, canopy cover (by two different methods), total tree richness (planted + regenerating), density and richness of tree species spontaneously regenerating in two size classes. The result is a robust tool to verify if a riparian forest undergoing restoration follows the expected trajectory or is below the expectations for the time elapsed since the intervention, requiring adaptive management. This tool can be improved, provided that addtional data are obtained for the semi-deciduous forest region. Additionally, the procedure adopted here to generate the reference values can be replicated to other vegetation types, as far as monitoring data are provided.
Experimental ecosystem and climate change research in controlled environments: lessons from the Blosphere 2 Laboratory 1996-2003			It is clear from the project summaries below that the Biosphere 2 Laboratory (B2L) delivered handsomely as a controlled environment facility for experimental ecosystem and global climate change research. Ironically, the short and medium term experiments with model complex systems revealed that some of the most exciting and unexpected questions involved carbon cycling in benthic and soil metabolism, the very same processes that caused the first closed mission in the facility to fail, and eventually made the apparatus available for research. The effects of elevated [CO2] on these processes in the marine and agriforest mesocosms was to stimulate flux and to reduce C-sequestration, by reduced carbonate deposition and enhanced metabolism of soil C reserves, respectively. The extent to which this and other themes that emerged from experiments were products of the initial conditions established in B2L model systems, or are general principles that prevail in natural ecosystems, remains to be seen.
Experimental evidence on payments for forest commons conservation			Payments for Ecosystem Services (PES) represent a popular strategy for environmental protection, and tropical forest conservation in particular. Little is known, however, about their effectiveness. Many argue that even if PES increase conservation while payments last, they may adversely affect other motivations for pro-environmental behaviour in the longer term. We test whether conditional payments also encourage forest users to conserve shared forest resources after payments end. Using a framed field experiment with 1,200 tropical forest users in five countries, we show that (1) during the intervention, conditional payments increased conservation behaviour; (2) after payments stopped, users continued to conserve more on average than they did before the intervention, especially when they were able to communicate with each other; and (3) trust amplified the lasting conservation effects of the interventions. PES effectiveness may increase when interventions facilitate interpersonal communication and when implemented in contexts where forest users enjoy high levels of trust.
Expert review of the science underlying nature-based climate solutions			Viable nature-based climate solutions (NbCS) are needed to achieve climate goals expressed in international agreements like the Paris Accord. Many NbCS pathways have strong scientific foundations and can deliver meaningful climate benefits but effective mitigation is undermined by pathways with less scientific certainty. Here we couple an extensive literature review with an expert elicitation on 43 pathways and find that at present the most used pathways, such as tropical forest conservation, have a solid scientific basis for mitigation. However, the experts suggested that some pathways, many with carbon credit eligibility and market activity, remain uncertain in terms of their climate mitigation efficacy. Sources of uncertainty include incomplete GHG measurement and accounting. We recommend focusing on resolving those uncertainties before broadly scaling implementation of those pathways in quantitative emission or sequestration mitigation plans. If appropriate, those pathways should be supported for their cobenefits, such as biodiversity and food security.Nature-based climate solutions are widely incorporated into climate change mitigation plans and need firm scientific foundations. Through literature review and expert elicitation, this analysis shows that for some major pathways there is strong support, while for others their efficacy remains uncertain.
Exploring livelihood dependency on provisioning ecosystem services in a protected tropical forest area of eastern India: keys to sustainable forest management			The tropical dry deciduous forest in eastern India is well-known for its numerous ecosystem services (ES), which contribute to the regional and national economies. However, a comprehensive evaluation of forest ES (FES) has not been performed in this region. Therefore, we endeavored to assess the provisioning FES (PFES) and the degree of dependence of the local people on it and identified the resource extraction techniques to access the desired goods and services. This study was conducted through a semi-structured questionnaire survey spanning 16 villages in the Medinipur forest division in Eastern India. The level of dependency was estimated through the pebble distribution scoring method and livelihood dependence index (LDI). The study documented 16 distinct PFES, of which 10 were the most commonly collected. Overall, our study revealed that the dependency was primarily salient on fuelwood, timber, fodder, and leaves throughout the study area. Additionally, significant differences in the dependence on PFES were established among the villages and a substantial dependency was observed majorly in the post-monsoon seasons. The primary strategies for extracting resources for gathering the required PFES were collection, lopping, and cutting along with unsustainable resource extraction practices like fire. Although there is a strong relationship between forests and livelihood, therefore, the notion of FES must be considered by environmental sustainability and human welfare and comprehend the connection underlying the notions of FES and livelihood, in the establishment of evidence-based policy. Thus, our study yields insights that are useful to policymakers in maintaining and enhancing the FES supply.
Exploring the role of smallholder perceptions in shaping land-use decisions in a tropical agro-forest frontier in southern Mexico			Conversion of tropical forests into agricultural lands is increasing at a rapid pace. Smallholders are responsible for most of the world's agricultural production, and thus are important land-use decision-makers and land-use change actors. In agro-forest frontiers, land-use changes are dynamic and short-term, and highly influenced by different social-ecological factors. We employed the Photovoice methodology to assess how the perceptions of 20 smallholder families about what they most value in their daily lives, influence farm land-use decisions in two villages in southern Mexico. Results indicate that what farmers perceive as the most valued in their daily lives are the household (including family and food) and the farm. Similar perceptions sometimes result in similar farm land-use composition (land-use type and proportion) decisions (agriculture, reforestation), but sometimes not (pasture, forest). Positive and negative perceptions about oil palm highly influence whether this land-use is adopted or not. In contrast, positive perceptions about rubber do not always translate in this crop being planted. We conclude that perceptions play an important role in smallholder land-use decisions. However, perceptions are influenced and operate along other factors at multiple levels, including survival motivations, culture, economic considerations, markets, farm size, institutional programs, local ecological knowledge, ecosystem services, and risk assessment. We suggest that smallholder perceptions should be taken into account as part of the set of social-ecological factors driving land-use decisions. Involving farmers in the co-design of land-use policies, planning, and rural development initiatives that address their perceptions, values, and livelihood needs will improve the effectiveness of such policies.
Extent and area of swidden in montane mainland Southeast Asia: Estimation by multi-step thresholds with Landsat-8 OLI data			Information on the distribution, area and extent of swidden agriculture landscape is necessary for implementing the program of Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD), biodiversity conservation and local livelihood improvement. To our knowledge, explicit spatial maps and accurate area data on swidden agriculture remain surprisingly lacking. However, this traditional farming practice has been transforming into other profit-driven land use, like tree plantations and permanent cash agriculture. Swidden agriculture is characterized by a rotational and dynamic nature of agroforestry, with land cover changing from natural forests, newly-cleared swiddens to different-aged fallows. The Operational Land Imager (OLI) onboard the Landsat-8 satellite has visible, near-infrared and shortwave infrared bands, which are sensitive to the changes in vegetation cover, land surface moisture content and soil exposure, and therefore, four vegetation indices (VIs) were calculated, including the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), the Normalized Difference Moisture Index (NDMI), the Normalized Burn Ratio (NBR) and the Soil Adjusted Vegetation Index (SAVI). In this study, we developed a multi-step threshold approach that uses a combination of thresholds of four VIs and local elevation range (LER) and applied it to detect and map newly-opened swiddens and different-aged fallows using OLI imagery acquired between 2013 and 2015. The resultant Landsat-derived swidden agriculture maps have high accuracy with an overall accuracy of 86.9% and a Kappa coefficient of 0.864. The results of this study indicated that the Landsat-based multi-step threshold algorithms could potentially be applied to monitor the long-term change pattern of swidden agriculture in montane mainland Southeast Asia since the late 1980s and also in other tropical regions, like insular Southeast Asia, South Asia, Latin America and Central Africa, where swidden agriculture is still common. © 2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Extraction of remote sensing-based forest management units in tropical forests			As a spatial source of forest data, the forest stand is the basic unit for forest management and planning. Computerized segmentation of a diverse range of remote sensing material has been studied for delineating stands in various forest types, but is relatively rare under tropical conditions. In line with REDD+, which advocates sustainable forest management in tropical developing countries, we report here on the delineation of forest stands in Laos using data from Airborne Laser Scanning, Airborne CIR and ALOS AVNIR-2. Rather than using the spectral layers alone, the segmentation was applied to wall-to-wall maps of predicted values from empirical models that retrieve forest stem volume and basal area. The homogeneity of 96 sets of segmentation categorized according to the hierarchical mean sizes of the segments was evaluated quantitatively in terms of the AICvar index and qualitatively by eye. The results show that the quality and performance of the empirical models are duly reflected in the quality and performance of the segmentation, and that the most competitive delineations are provided by models that involve ALS. Finally, the future prospects for using this empirical model-based segmentation approach to detect and quantify deforestation, or even forest degradation, and thereby to provide further support for the development of REDD methodology, are discussed. © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
Factors associated with long-term species composition in dry tropical forests of Central India			The long-term future of species composition in forests depends on regeneration. Many factors can affect regeneration, including human use, environmental conditions, and species' traits. This study examines the influence of these factors in a tropical deciduous forest of Central India, which is heavily used by local, forest-dependent residents for livestock grazing, fuel-wood extraction, construction and other livelihood needs. We measure size-class proportions (the ratio of abundance of a species at a site in a higher size class to total abundance in both lower and higher size classes) for 39 tree species across 20 transects at different intensities of human use. The size-class proportions for medium to large trees and for small to medium-sized trees were negatively associated with species that are used for local construction, while size class proportions for saplings to small trees were positively associated with those species that are fire resistant and negatively associated with livestock density. Results indicate that grazing and fire prevent non-fire resistant species from reaching reproductive age, which can alter the long term composition and future availability of species that are important for local use and ecosystem services. Management efforts to reduce fire and forest grazing could reverse these impacts on long-term forest composition. © 2016 IOP Publishing Ltd.
Factors explaining variability in woody above-ground biomass accumulation in restored tropical forest			Secondary forests comprise an increasing area of the tropics and play an important role in global carbon cycling. We compare above-ground biomass accumulation of both planted and naturally regenerating trees, as well as C in the top soil layer, in three restoration treatments replicated at 14, six to eight year old restoration sites in southern Costa Rica. Restoration strategies include: control (no planting), planting tree islands, and conventional, mixed-species tree plantations. We evaluate the importance of past land-use, soil nutrients, understory cover, and surrounding forest cover in explaining variation in above-ground biomass accumulation (ABA) rate across sites. Total ABA and planted tree ABA rate were highest in plantations, intermediate in islands, and lowest in control treatments, whereas ABA rate of naturally regenerating trees did not differ across treatments. Most ABA in plantations (89%) and islands (70%) was due to growth of planted trees. Soil carbon did not change significantly over the time period of the study in any treatment. The majority of across-site variation in both total and planted tree ABA rate was explained by duration of prior pasture use. Tree growth in the first two years after planting explained approximately two-thirds of the variation in ABA rate after 6-8 years. Soil nutrient concentrations explained relatively little of the variation in planted or naturally recruiting ABA rate. Our results show that planting trees substantially increases biomass accumulation during the first several years of forest recovery in former agricultural lands and that past-land use has a strong effect on the rate of biomass accumulation. Planting tree islands is a cost-effective strategy for increasing ABA and creating more heterogeneous habitat conditions than tree plantations. We recommend small scale planting trials to quickly assess potential biomass accumulation and prioritize sites for ecosystem service payments for carbon sequestration. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Factors influencing early secondary succession and ecosystem carbon stocks in Brazilian Atlantic Forest			Ecologically relevant restoration of secondary Atlantic forest on abandoned land offers a potential means to recover biodiversity and improve crucial ecosystem services, including carbon sequestration. Early secondary successional trajectories are determined by a range of environmental factors that influence plant community development. Context-specific understanding of forest vegetation communities, their dynamics, and underlying drivers is needed for future restoration strategies. In this study we examined relationships between soil (chemical and physical) and environmental (landscape and topographical) characteristics, plant community attributes, and carbon stocks during early secondary succession. Data were collected at two sites undergoing early secondary succession in seasonally-dry Atlantic Forest (Rio de Janeiro State, Brazil). Both sites were previously used for pasture and abandoned at similar times, but showed differing vegetation communities. We found tree biomass and diversity and ecosystem carbon storage to be strongly positively related to the amount of surrounding forest, less steep slopes and clay soils, and negatively to the abundance of the shrub Leandra aurea. Soil carbon pools significantly increased with aboveground tree biomass. The only factor significantly affecting the metric of overall successional development (combining tree biomass and diversity) was total surrounding forest cover. Our findings suggest recovery of secondary forest and below-and aboveground carbon storage is limited by the amount of adjacent forest, some soil properties and dense shrub establishment down-regulating the succession process. Overall we offer evidence of potential to improve recovery of Atlantic forest with ecologically relevant seeding/planting programmes and selective shrub removal that could benefit ecosystem carbon storage.
Factors influencing the expressed willingness to transition from collection to cultivation of non-timber forest products: The case of Caesalpinia spinosa in southern Ecuador			Planting trees with additional non-timber products (NTFPs) (such as fruits) in agricultural lands is emerging as an important strategy in Forest Landscape Restoration (FLR) to enhance the provision of ecosystem services and improve habitat quality. In many cases, the planting of NTFP trees follows a transition from collecting NTFPs in natural forests to integrating the respective trees into agricultural farms with ecological and socio-economic implications. Therefore, understanding the current practice and challenges of current NTFP collection and willingness for cultivation is crucial to effectively use such land-use trajectories for FLR. In this study, we investigate the case of Caesalpinia spinosa (tara), whose fruits provide an emerging NTFP in southern Ecuador. Using household data from 125 households currently collecting tara fruits, we first describe the relatively young production system and then use a Heckman two-step econometric model to identify the factors influencing the expressed willingness to cultivate tara trees on farms and the area to be cultivated. The econometric model results show that the characteristics of tara collection and trade (gender of collectors, distance to the collection site, and management practices) are important determinants of tara cultivation. However, it's the household labor availability and farm characteristics that play a significant role in impacting the willingness to cultivate. The area to be cultivated was mainly influenced by household labor and economic characteristics, and tara collection and trade (management practices) characteristics. Our findings help to understand NTFP-related landuse transitions, thus supporting the design of appropriate and specific policy interventions for the sustainable development of NTFPs.
Fair payments for effective environmental conservation			Global efforts for biodiversity protection and land use -based greenhouse gas mitigation call for increases in the effectiveness and efficiency of environmental conservation. Incentive -based pol- icy instruments are key tools for meeting these goals, yet their effectiveness might be undermined by such factors as social norms regarding whether payments are considered fair. We investigated the causal link between equity and conservation effort with a randomized real -effort experiment in forest conservation with 443 land users near a tropical forest national park in the Vietnam- ese Central Annamites, a global biodiversity hotspot. The experi- ment introduced unjustified payment inequality based on luck, in contradiction of local fairness norms that were measured through responses to vignettes. Payment inequality was perceived as less fair than payment equality. In agreement with our preregistered hypotheses, participants who were disadvantaged by unequal payments exerted significantly less conservation effort than other participants receiving the same payment under an equal distribu- tion. No effect was observed for participants advantaged by in- equality. Thus, equity effects on effort can have consequences for the effectiveness and efficiency of incentive -based conservation instruments. Furthermore, we show that women exerted substan- tially more conservation effort than men, and that increasing pay- ment size unexpectedly reduced effort. This emphasizes the need to consider social comparisons, local equity norms, and gender in environmental policies using monetary incentives to motivate behavioral change.
Farmer's perceptions of silvopastoral system promotion in Quindio, Colombia			Conventional livestock production is one of the most prevalent land uses in Latin America, and often results in rapid land degradation. The adoption of silvopastoral systems (SPS) which combine multipurpose trees and improved pastures, could provide important ecosystem services while reducing the pressure to clear more forests. Investment and information barriers, however, can discourage the widespread adoption of SPS. From 2002 to 2007, the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) funded a pilot project to promote SPS in degraded, pasture-dominated regions of Colombia, Costa Rica and Nicaragua. A substantial transformation of these lands was achieved over a five-year period, through increased vegetation cover and improved land use practices. This study focuses on the Quindio region in Colombia, where the successful project now serves as a model to take the initiative to nation-wide scale. Through semi-structured interviews and field visits, we gathered information on why farmers in this region were receptive to SPS. We assessed the motivations, feedback and difficulties that influenced the farmers' decision-making processes. The results highlight the role of adequate technical assistance (TA) in helping farmers understand the past and future implications of their land use decisions. They also demonstrate how Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES) can help to build initial trust, and to link the adoption of SPS to environmental and economic benefits. The lessons from this project can be applied in designing strategies to promote SPS and other sustainable practices at a larger scale which can potentially help to reduce land degradation and tropical deforestation.
Fast recovery of soil macrofauna in regenerating forests of the Amazon			The emergence of secondary forests in deforested tropical regions represents an opportunity to mitigate biodiversity loss and climate change, but there is still debate on how fast and to which level these forests can recover biodiversity. Recent studies have shown that the recovery of plant and vertebrate species richness is relatively fast, but the pace of recovery for other groups remains unclear. Soil macroinvertebrates play critical roles on litter decomposition and seed dispersal, therefore the pace of their recovery has consequences for the entire forest ecosystem.We investigated how fast broad taxonomic groups of soil macrofauna recover in the first 30 years of forest regeneration using forests older than 50 years as reference.We surveyed the number, diversity and abundance of 19 broad taxonomic groups of soil macrofauna in 85 sites located in Brazilian Amazon, covering forests of different ages and clearing frequencies. Forest age and clearing frequency were obtained accurately from Landsat images in forests up to 30 years old. We used regression analysis to determine (a) the effects forest age and clearing frequency on macrofauna groups in secondary forests up to 30 years old; and (b) the changes in macrofauna groups between young forests (up to 10 years old), median age forests (between 10 and 30 years old) and forests older than 50 years.We found that the number and diversity of macrofauna groups recover rapidly in the first 10 years of forest regrowth, but show slower change among older forests. This rapid recovery was also observed in the abundance of several taxonomic groups and for predators and detritivores as functional groups. Forest clearing frequency had no effect on the number or the diversity of macrofauna groups, but the abundance of ants increased as forest was cleared more often.Our results for soil macrofauna align with those in plant and vertebrate studies showing that secondary forests quickly recover a large part of their biodiversity and ecological functions. Therefore, global-scale conservation strategies are needed to ensure the opportunity for secondary forests to grow.
Feasibility of oil Palm Agroforestry System: Evaluating the Application of oil Palm Ash for Enhancing Cherry Tomato (Solanum Lycopersicum. Var. Nancy Rz) Production Using Brackish Water			0
Feedback mechanisms and regulatory effects of vegetation change on climate			Vegetation mitigates the greenhouse effect by fixing atmospheric CO2 through photosynthesis, while vegetation also affects the greenhouse effect by altering the surface energy balance. In the past climate-vegetation studies, most of them focused on the effects of climate change on vegetation, while relatively few studies on vegetation feedback on climate. Vegetation affects local, regional and even global climate by regulating surface energy balance and water fluxes, and its role in climate change is vital. Therefore, it is extremely important to clarify the mechanisms of vegetation feedback effects on climate and their outcomes and to identify their geographical differences. In this paper, we analyze the mechanisms between vegetation and climate in terms of biogeophysical and biogeochemical processes, and systematically summarize the feedback effects of vegetation restoration / destruction on local, regional, and even global climate in global and key regions. Results show that: (1) the regional characteristics of biogeophysical feedback are obvious, while biogeochemical feedback is manifested at the global scale, and the two interact with each other but are difficult to be unified; (2) The climate effects of vegetation destruction is related to the type and geographical distribution of forest ecosystems in terms of temperature effect: tropical forest destruction brings warming effect, temperate forest destruction will offset the lost carbon sequestration and cooling effect by increasing forest albedo, and boreal forest destruction brings cooling effect; (3) The current study does not consider the critical process mechanisms well enough, the results of different research methods vary widely, and the results lack the validation of high-quality observation data from multiple sources, while the net climate feedback studies considering biogeophysical and biogeochemical are not yet able to support the conventional understanding of the single mitigation effect of afforestation on climate change. It has been widely recognized that afforestation mitigates climate warming by increasing the carbon sink function, but the net climate effect of afforestation depends not only on the carbon cycle process, but also on the surface albedo, evapotranspiration, soil water cycle, heat absorption process by water evaporation and aerosol concentration and process, so the study of the climate feedback effect of afforestation still has many problems to be solved. In this paper, we summarized the problems of the current research on the effect of vegetation on climate feedback, and proposed the future direction of related research, providing a theoretical basis for scientific assessment of the direction and intensity of the effect of afforestation on climate change. © 2023 Science Press. All rights reserved.
Field observed relationships between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning during secondary succession in a tropical lowland rainforest			The relationship between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning (BEF) is one of the most concerned topics in ecology. However, most of the studies have been conducted in controlled experiments in grasslands, few observational, field studies have been carried out in forests. In this paper, we report variations of species diversity, functional diversity and aboveground biomass (AGB) for woody plants (trees and shrubs) along a chronosequence of four successional stages (18-year-old fallow, 30-year-old fallow, 60-year-old fallow, and old-growth forest) in a tropical lowland rainforest recovered after shifting cultivation on Hainan Island, China. Fifty randomly selected sample plots of 20 m x 20 m were investigated in each of the four successional stages. Four functional traits (specific leaf area, wood density, maximum species height and leaf dry matter content) were measured for each woody plants species and the relationships between species/functional diversity and AGB during secondary succession were explored. The results showed that both plant diversity and AGB recovered gradually with the secondary succession. AGB was positively correlated with both species and functional diversity in each stage of succession. Consistent with many controlled experimental results in grasslands, our observational field study confirms that ecosystem functioning is closely related to biodiversity during secondary succession in species rich tropical forests. (C) 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
Filling a void: Analysis of early tropical soil and vegetative recovery under leguminous, post-coal mine reforestation plantations in East Kalimantan, Indonesia			Land degradation in Borneo, one of the world's richest biodiversity hotspots, is extensive. In East Kalimantan, 5,000,000 ha of land are zoned for surface-mined coal. Deforestation from this mining threatens biodiversity and results in soil degradation, erosion, and polluted runoff, all directly impacting human populations. Revegetation methods developed for temperate forests are commonly used globally for mine rehabilitation. However, few empirical studies of native forest restoration as part of mine rehabilitation exist from wet tropical regions. Here, a chronosequence was established to observe forest succession under leguminous plantations at the PT Singlurus Pratama coal mine in East Kalimantan, Indonesia. Soil and natural regeneration data were recorded from samples of ten 20 x 60-m plots randomly located in plantings aged 2, 7, and, 9 years postmining. Linear models (LMEMs) did not reveal greater soil pH, woody plant diversity, or soil phosphorus and nitrogen in older plantings. Rather, they showed higher soil carbon in older plantings, whereas nitrogen and pH were positively correlated with woody species diversity and abundance. Graminoids were less abundant, but ferns were more abundant in older sites in an ordination analysis. The implications are exotic tree plantations shade-out competitive understory herbaceous species (such as graminoids), opening growing space for other vegetation. However, the establishment of woody species is spatially limited possibly by differences in soil degradation among sites. Our results suggest that planting leguminous trees alone may not be sufficient to restore native forests, and future management should conserve and facilitate the establishment of tropical forest topsoil.
Financial Revenues from Timber Harvesting in Secondary Cloud Forests: A Case Study from Mexico			Secondary forests, i.e., those arising after the clearance and abandonment of previously forested land, dominate tropical forest landscapes, rapidly sequester carbon, provide essential ecosystem services and are prone to re-clearance. Secondary cloud forests (SCF) play a particularly critical role for biodiversity and hydrological regulation. To promote their persistence, sustainable management is necessary; however, there is limited information regarding SCF potential for sustainable timber production. We estimated the revenue from selective timber harvesting in a pilot study in a 20-year-old SCF in Mexico. We explored the effect of the harvested timber volume, harvesting costs and price of forest products on the Net Present Value (NPV). Small landowners could only extract 17% of the harvestable standing volume due to a high number of small trees, a high (34%) volume of non-timber species, and their limited capacity to process timber. A third of the income derived from fuelwood, and overall financial returns were negative. A positive NPV may result from a 20% harvesting intensity, a 10% reduction in harvesting costs, or a 20% increase in stumpage price. Our results warrant the development of forest policy instruments and economic incentives for small-scale SCF landowners to alleviate poverty and meet national and global restoration and climate mitigation goals.
Financing conservation by valuing carbon services produced by wild animals			Filling the global biodiversity financing gap will require significant investments from financial markets, which demand credible valuations of ecosystem services and natural capital. However, current valuation approaches discourage investment in conservation because their results cannot be verified using market-determined prices. Here, we bridge the gap between finance and conservation by valuing only wild animals' carbon services for which market prices exist. By projecting the future path of carbon service production using a spatially explicit demographic model, we place a credible value on the carbon capture services produced by African forest elephants. If elephants were protected, their services would be worth $20.8 billion ($10.3 to $29.7 billion) and $25.9 billion ($12.8 to $37.6 billion) for the next 10 and 30 y, respectively, and could finance anti-poaching and conservation programs. Elephant population growth would generate a carbon sink of 109 MtC (64 to 153) across tropical Africa in the next 30 y. Avoided elephant extinction would also prevent the loss of 93 MtC (46 to 130), which is the contribution of the remaining populations. Uncertainties in our projections are controlled mainly by forest regeneration rates and poaching intensity, which indicate that conservation can actively reduce uncertainty for increased financial and biodiversity benefits. Our methodology can also place lower bounds on the social cost of nature degradation. Poaching would result in $2 to $7 billion of lost carbon services within the next 10 to 30 y, suggesting that the benefits of protecting elephants far outweigh the costs. Our methodology enables the integration of animal services into global financial markets with major implications for conservation, local socioeconomies, and conservation.
Finding the money for tropical forest restoration			The article discusses the economic dimension of ecological restoration drawing on experiences in the Brazilian Atlantic forest, which is one of the most biodiverse ecosystems on the planet and also one of the richest in endemism. The looming land crisis has been receiving increasing attention worldwide. In this context, forest restoration could be seen as just another factor in the demand for land, with the potential to reduce food production, increase food prices and have other unwanted consequences. Centuries of deforestation and forest degradation have compromised the delivery of ecosystem services and the production of forest goods in the Atlantic forest. Nevertheless, the region presents a huge opportunity for new approaches to ecological restoration and for establishing forest restoration as an economically viable practice. The Atlantic forest has been exploited to the point where it no longer supplies significant quantities of timber.
Fine root biomass stocks but not the production and turnover rates vary with the age of tropical successional forests in Southern Mexico			Fine root production, turnover, and decomposition are fundamental rhizosphere processes that can vary when young forest ecosystems pass through different phases of succession towards maturity. To assess these changes during succession, we applied ingrowth bag and sequential coring methods for fine root production and a modified negative exponential model for fine root decomposition at four phases of tropical forest chronosequence: 1) young secondary forests of about 8 years, 2) medium secondary forests of 15 years, 3) advanced secondary forests of 25 years, and 4) old-growth primary forests of > 100 years. Primary forests stored higher fine root biomass than secondary forests but the average fine root productivity did not differ statistically between successional phases. Fine root turnover rates were > 1 yr(-1) for all the phases of succession, indicating that the turnover was higher than the standing fine root biomass. Fine root decay models showed that the decomposition rates did not differ significantly between successional phases. Furthermore, fine root production and mortality correlated positively to soil organic carbon concentrations. Our results showed that fine root productivity and turnover rates in secondary forests get to PF level from the younger phases of succession. The results have important implications in understanding the successional patterns regarding belowground resource allocation, nutrient turnover, and soil organic carbon sequestration in the constantly changing tropical forests ecosystems.
Fire and grazing modify grass community response to environmental determinants in savannas: Implications for sustainable use			Tropical dry forests and savannas are important repositories of plant diversity and ecosystem services in the tropics. These ecosystems are also used extensively for grazing by livestock, and represent a critical element of the rural economy of many tropical countries. Fire is considered as a part of co-evolution in these ecosystems across the globe. However, in recent decades, there has been a shift in historical fire regime. Fire has become more frequent in these landscapes, and could be further enhanced under climate change. This poses threats to existing biodiversity, ecosystem processes, and rural economy. We asked how variability in fire frequency has influenced diversity and heterogeneity in grass species composition, and richness and abundance of grass species preferred by large herbivores (referred to as grazing acceptability) in a South Indian tropical savanna forest. We assumed that an increase in fire frequency acts as the active constraint and limits an ecosystem from attaining the maximum heterogeneity, and the maximum grazing acceptability (maximum richness and abundance of grass species preferred by herbivores) in its native settings. We used MODIS active fire and burned area products to estimate fire frequency across the landscape. A nested sampling approach was used to collect information on vegetation and soil at different fire frequencies. Quantile regression analyses indicated that diversity and heterogeneity in grass species composition as well a's grazing acceptability decreased with increasing fire frequencies. We found that livestock grazing intervened with the observed vegetation patterns; grass species diversity and heterogeneity, and grazing acceptability increased with grazing intensity at lower quantiles. Other measured covariates, rainfall, and soil-fertility, alone were not able to explain the observed vegetation patterns in the landscape. The results show a need to control annual fires but allow and manage intermittent fires in this landscape. A complete suppression of fire is not desirable as fire releases nutrients from burning of deeper-rooted vegetation and thus acts as a periodic nutrient pump. It also played an important role in maintaining the grass cover by reducing shrub cover. Hence, it is important to consider the complex interactions between fires-grazers-soil-vegetation to develop effective management practices. We conclude that fire frequency should be managed at low to intermediate levels (one fire in every 5-9 years, resembling the native settings), and grazing regulated, in order to sustain wild and domestic herbivores, biodiversity, and other key ecosystem processes and services over the long-term. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Fire and land use in recent years in the Atlantic Forest in Brazil			The biome Atlantic Forest in Brazil covers a substantial portion of the country, where a large population and major cities are located. In spite of the substantial influence from human activities, the region is one of the most diverse tropical ecosystems with a large number of endemic species, and it is one of the world's biodiversity hotspot. In this region, fire is an important disturbance, due to its strong effects on nutrient cycling, vegetation succession, and atmospheric emissions of gases and aerosols, and therefore must be considered when planning on the sustainability of the region. This study presents a set of initial analyses of fire occurrence in respect to different types of land cover and use as classified by the recent Brazilian MapBiomas Project (http://mapbiomas.org). Information on fire occurrence are from remote-sensing with the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) Collection 6 Active Fire Product. The data on fires data are for years 2001-2017. The selected data on land cover and use are for year 2010, nearly at the middle of the fire data time spam. For analyses, both datasets were aligned in space and aggregated at 0.5-deg spatial resolution. It was found that in average, most of fires happened during months with less precipitation, as expected. In comparison with other major biomes in Brazil, the density of fire detections in the Atlantic Forest was lower, but still a substantial number of fires are detected yearly in the region. Perhaps, more important is the fact that despite of most of fires detected with MODIS occurred in areas dominated by agriculture and pasture (as expected by the general relations between fire and land use in Brazil), a relatively high number of fires were detected in areas dominated by natural forests. That has important consequences for the high interest in conservation of the study region, based on its marked biodiversity and potential for providing relevant ecosystem services to society.
Fire decline in dry tropical ecosystems enhances decadal land carbon sink			The terrestrial carbon sink has significantly increased in the past decades, but the underlying mechanisms are still unclear. The current synthesis of process-based estimates of land and ocean sinks requires an additional sink of 0.6PgC yr(-1) in the last decade to explain the observed airborne fraction. A concurrent global fire decline was observed in association with tropical agriculture expansion and landscape fragmentation. Here we show that a decline of 0.20.1PgC yr(-1) in fire emissions during 2008-2014 relative to 2001-2007 also induced an additional carbon sink enhancement of 0.4 +/- 0.2PgC yr(-1) attributable to carbon cycle feedbacks, amounting to a combined sink increase comparable to the 0.6PgC yr(-1) budget imbalance. Our results suggest that the indirect effects of fire, in addition to the direct emissions, is an overlooked mechanism for explaining decadal-scale changes in the land carbon sink and highlight the importance of fire management in climate mitigation. p id=Par In recent history the amount of carbon captured by terrestrial systems has increased, but the processes driving this process has remained poorly constrained. Here the authors use a global carbon model to show that a decrease in wildfires has caused the land carbon sink to increase in the past few decades.
Fire in the Brazilian Amazon 3. Dynamics of biomass, C, and nutrient pools in regenerating forests			Regenerating forests have become a common land-cover type throughout the Brazilian Amazon. However, the potential for these systems to accumulate and store C and nutrients, and the fluxes resulting from them when they are cut, burned, and converted back to croplands and pastures have not been well quantified. In this study, we quantified pre- and post-fire pools of biomass, C, and nutrients, as well as the emissions of those elements, at a series of second- and third-growth forests located in the states of Para and Rondonia, Brazil. Total aboveground biomass (TAGB) of second- and third-growth forests averaged 134 and 91 Mg ha(-1), respectively. Rates of aboveground biomass accumulation were rapid in these systems, but were not significantly different between second- and third-growth forests, ranging from 9 to 16 Mg ha(-1) year(-1). Residual pools of biomass originating from primary forest vegetation accounted for large portions of TAGB in both forest types and were primarily responsible for TAGB differences between the two forest types. In second-growth forests this pool (82 Mg ha(-1)) represented 58% of TAGB, and in third-growth forests (40 Mg ha(-1)) it represented 40% of TAGB. Amounts of TAGB consumed by burning of second- and third-growth forests averaged 70 and 53 Mg ha(-1), respectively. Aboveground pre-fire pools in second- and third-growth forests averaged 67 and 45 Mg C ha(-1), 821 and 707 kg N ha(-1), 441 and 341 kg P ha(-1), and 46 and 27 kg Ca ha(-1), respectively. While pre-fire pools of C, N, S and K were not significantly different between second- and third-growth forests, pools of both P and Ca were significantly higher in second-growth forests. This suggests that increasing land use has a negative impact on these elemental pools. Site losses of elements resulting from slashing and burning these sites were highly variable: losses of C ranged from 20 to 47 Mg ha(-1); N losses ranged from 306 to 709 kg ha(-1); Ca losses ranged from 10 to 145 kg ha(-1); and P losses ranged from 2 to 20 kg ha(-1). Elemental losses were controlled to a large extent by the relative distribution of elemental mass within biomass components of varying susceptibilities to combustion and the temperatures of volatilization of each element. Due to a relatively low temperature of volatilization and its concentration in highly combustible biomass pools, site losses of N averaged 70% of total pre-fire pools. In contrast, site losses of P and Ca resulting from burning were 33 and 20% of total pre-fire pools, respectively, as much of the mass of those elements was deposited on site as ash. Pre- and post-fire biomass and elemental pools of second- and third-growth forests, as well as the emissions from those systems, were intermediate between those of primary forests and pastures in the Brazilian Amazon. Overall, regenerating forests have the capacity to act as either large terrestrial sinks or sources of C and nutrients, depending on the course of land-use patterns within the Brazilian Amazon. Combining remote sensing techniques with field measures of aboveground C accumulation in regenerating forests and C fluxes from those forests when they are cut and burned, we estimate that during 1990-1991 roughly 104 Tg of C was accumulated by regenerating forests across the Brazilian Amazon. Further, we estimate that approximately 103 Tg of C was lost via the cutting and burning of regenerating forests across the Brazilian Amazon during this same period. Since average C accumulations (5.5 Mg ha(-1) year(-1)) in regenerating forests were 19% of the C lost when such forests are cut and burned (29.3 Mg ha(-1)), our results suggest that when less than 19% of the total area accounted for by secondary forests is cut and burned in a given year, those forests will be net accumulators of C during that year. Conversely, when more than 19% of regenerating forests are burned, those forests will be a net source of C to the atmosphere.
Fire trends in tropical Mexico: A case study of Chiapas			The vast majority of the world's fires today occur in tropical and subtropical areas. The problem of fire in these countries reflects increased human and climatic pressures, which provoke interactions between fire and the transformed landscapes. Chiapas, a tropical state in the Mexican Republic, maintains a fire dataset, and it has similarities with other tropical areas. This study represents a descriptive approach to the problem in Chiapas, where fire is recognized as a major disturbance that degrades habitats and reduces ecosystem services. To date there has been little information about fire trends and contributing factors, but both frequency and intensity of fires appear to increase in El Niño years and to vary with landownership.
First Approach of Abiotic Drivers of Soil CO2 Efflux in Barro Colorado Island, Panama			Soil CO2 fluxes from tropical forests into the atmosphere are expected to increase due to global warming. Studies of environmental conditions that contribute to carbon flux are now an important focus for climate change research. However, carbon flux in tropical areas such as Panama has received less attention. In Panama, water sources, rainforests, and soil conditions are vital natural resources, particularly within the Panama Canal watershed. Mature and secondary forests represent around 60% of Panama land cover. Secondary forests are considered potential carbon sinks and they are of economic interest as a means of mitigating increasing anthropogenic CO2 emissions; however, the dynamics of carbon fluxes in the soil of secondary forests remain poorly understood. This research investigated which environmental factors influence soil CO2 efflux. We used a closed chamber method to measure soil CO2 in the tropical forest of Barro Colorado Island, Panama. During 2016 to 2017, humidity had a significant effect on CO2 flux (average: 4.36 mu mol/m(2)s), which was substantially lower than expected for this type of tropical forest. These findings will contribute to a better understanding of the complex and dynamic interrelationships between the water and carbon cycle, as well as abiotic drivers of soil CO2 fluxes. Our use of soil respiration chambers and infrared gas analyzer systems represents an innovative contribution to the water-carbon nexus of Panama and potentially of other countries.
Floristic composition and ecological relationships of plant species of edge, patches, and remnant trees in a dry tropical forest in Colombia. Implications for ecological restoration			Dry Tropical Forests (DTF), is one of the most endangered ecosystems in the world due to processes such as fragmentation and habitat lost. Ecological restoration is needed to maintain and to recover the functionality of current forested areas and the ecosystem services offered. Fragmentation has produced a heterogeneous landscape with elements like edges, patches and remnant trees which keep plant species with enormous potential in restoration processes. We studied floristic composition of a dry forest, and structural variables were compared between edge and patches through class distributions. Dispersal syndromes were compared for species growing in each landscape element as well. Detrended correspondence analysis (DCA) were set to obtain species clusters for each element. Structure analyses and dispersal syndromes percentages allowed us to hypothesize about how regeneration patches are formed. Based on this hypothesis, species clusters from DCA, and literature about restoration in tropical forests, we propose three strategies to increase connectivity between landscape elements, to restore the vegetal structure and maintain key tropical dry forest (DTF) species for conservation.
Floristic diversity and carbon stocks in the periphery of Deng-Deng National Park, Eastern Cameroon			Carbon is continuously being removed from the atmosphere by photosynthesis and stored in carbon pools (live, dead, and soil carbon) of forest ecosystems. However, carbon stock in dead wood and of trees with diameters at breast height (dbh) between 5 and 10 cm is often not considered in many studies carried out in the Congo Basin Forest. The relationship between tree diversity, life-forms and carbon stocks has received little attention. This study was carried out on the outskirts of Deng Deng National Park (DDNP) to determine tree diversity (dominant families, species richness and Shannon index), assess carbon stocks in the five carbon compartments (living tree, understory, fine roots, dead wood and litter) as well as to analyze the relationship between (1) carbon stocks and tree diversity; and, (2) between carbon stock and life-forms. The Shannon index of trees >= 10 cm dbh ranged from 2.6 in riparian forest to 4.3 in secondary forest; and for the tree between 5 and 10 cm, it ranged to 1.56 in riparian forest to 3.68 in the secondary forest. The study site housed 16 species, 7 genera and 3 families which are only found in trees of dbh between 5 and 10 cm. The average total carbon stock of the five compartments varied from 200.1 t ha(-1) in forest residues to 439.1 t ha(-1) in secondary forest. Dead wood carbon stock varied from 1.2 t ha(-1) in riparian forests to 12.51t ha(-1) in agroforests. The above ground carbon stocks for trees with diameter between 5 and 10 cm varied from 0.7 t ha(-1) in young fallow fields to 5.02 t ha(-1) in old secondary forests. This study reveals a low but positive correlation between species richness and total carbon stocks, as well as a significant positive relationship between life-forms and total carbon stocks. The findings highlight the need for more data concerning carbon content of dead wood, carbon of trees >= 5 cm < 10 cm dbh and the relationship between carbon stocks and tree diversity from other areas of the Congo Basin for a good understanding of the contribution of tropical forests to climate change mitigation.
Flow and rent-based opportunity costs of water ecosystem service provision in a complex farming system			Unsustainable land uses present many challenges for securing ecosystem service provision. It is also difficult to estimate the cost of a transition to more sustainable land-management practices for individual landholders. The main cost to landholders is the opportunity costs, the income foregone when changing land use for continued or enhanced ecosystem service provision. Thus accurate estimation of opportunity costs and understanding their distribution are crucial starting points for determining the economic viability and design of any payment for ecosystem services (PES) scheme. We compare two opportunity cost approaches and examine the distribution of these costs for improving drinking water quality in a complex farming system in a Honduran forest catchment. Data for both approaches was collected through a survey applied to upstream catchment landholders. Our results indicate that the direct flow approach and the proxy rent approach provide comparable and consistent opportunity cost estimates. The mean net flow return ha(-1) was US$1410, but this estimate was skewed, mainly by exceptionally high coffee returns and negative returns of land uses making a loss. This estimate would imply spending over US$ 2 million per annum for water conservation, but a revised estimate comes to US$ 257,057 per annum. Opportunity costs were found to vary according to differences in land use and landholder characteristics. High value cash crops upholding the local economy, such as coffee, entail much higher opportunity costs than for example cattle grazing. These results suggest that discriminate PES payments, that vary according to opportunity costs and thus discriminate between land uses and landholders, are essential. Water quality at our case study site could be managed sustainably by a scheme focusing on high-impact land uses with lower opportunity costs and closer to water sources.
Fluxes and concentrations of dissolved organic carbon in soils			Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in soil solution plays roles in soil C storage and biogeochemical cycles. Factors regulating fluxes and concentrations of DOC still remain unclear.To identify the factors regulating fluxes and concentrations of DOC in the soil profiles, we compiled the data of site information [Country, Region or state, Coordinates, Vegetation, Mean annual air temperature (C), Climate type, Vegetation type, Mycorrhiza type, Soil (USDA, Soil Taxonomy)], soil properties [Litter pH (H2O), Soil pH (H2O), Soil C/N ratio, Clay (%), Alo+1/2Feo (g kg-1), O horizon C stock (Mg C ha-1), Mineral soil C stock (Mg C ha-1)], fluxes and concentrations of DOC [Throughfall DOC flux (kg C ha-1 yr-1), DOC flux at the bottom of the O horizon (kg C ha-1 yr-1), DOC flux at the bottom of the B horizon (kg C ha-1 yr-1), DOC concentration at the bottom of the O horizon (mg C L-1), DOC concentration at the bottom of the B horizon (mg C L-1), DOC/Dissolved organic N (DON) (O horizon), DOC/DON (B horizon), Precipitation (mm yr-1), Water flux at the bottom of the O horizon (mm yr-1), Water flux at the bottom of B horizon (mm yr-1)], plant litter properties [Litterfall C input (Mg C ha-1 yr-1), C/N ratio in litter, Lignin content in litter (%), Lignin/N ratio in litter, Root litter C input (Mg C ha-1 yr-1)], and DOC retention in mineral soil (%), DOC flux relative to C input (%), Contribution of DOC to C input in mineral soil (%), and Turnover time of mineral soil C (yr)]. The data were compiled from data in our study and those from published sources by searching for dissolved organic carbon, solute, flux, leaching, and soil in Google Scholar. We compiled the data of DOC fluxes in throughfall and soil profiles from 91 sites, of which the DOC flux data at 18 sites have been published by our group. The climate was classified into four groups [polar climate (MAT < 0 C), boreal climate (0 C < MAT < 6 C), temperate climate (6 C < MAT < 20 C), tropical climate (20 C < MAT)], based on mean annual air temperature. The other parameters include climatic properties [mean annual precipitation and mean annual air temperature], plant litter properties [litterfall C input, C/N ratio, Klason-lignin (residue after digestion with sulfuric acid; Allen et al., 1974), lignin/N ratio, root litter production] and soil properties [soil C stocks (O horizon and mineral soil (0-30 cm depth)), pH (water extraction), clay content, short-range-order (amorphous) aluminum (Al), iron (Fe) (acid ammonium oxalate extractable Al and Fe; McKeague and Day, 1966)]. The sampling and analytical methods are concisely summarized as follows: Throughfall (canopy leaching) samples were collected by precipitation collector, while soil solution samples were collected using tension-free lysimeters for downward flux of water percolating in the soil profiles. Sample solutions were filtered through a 0.45 m filter (e.g., PTFE syringe filter) and stored at 1°C in the dark prior to analyses. The concentrations of DOC were determined using a total organic carbon and nitrogen analyzer (TOC-VCSH, Shimadzu, Japan). The dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) concentrations were calculated by subtracting dissolved inorganic nitrogen (sum of NH4+ and NO3-) from TDN concentrations (DON = TDN - NH4+ - NO3-) to obtain DOC/DON ratios in soil solution. The DOC flux at the depth of 0 cm (the bottom of organic layers) and the bottom of B horizon (the bottom of rooting zone) was estimated by multiplying DOC concentrations in soil solution and water fluxes at each depth. Soil water fluxes were estimated by hydrological models or precipitation-evapotranspiration water budgets. Annual root production was measured by ingrowth core method, net sheet method, or sequential sampling method and estimated to be equal to annual root litter inputs. Proportion of DOC flux from the O horizon relative to C input via both throughfall and litterfall was calculated by dividing DOC flux from the O horizon by C input via both throughfall and litterfall. DOC retention in the mineral soil was calculated as the percentage of net decrease in DOC flux between O and B horizons relative to DOC flux from the O horizon. The apparent turnover time (yr) of soil C was estimated by dividing soil C stocks (Mg C ha-1) by C inputs (net DOC inputs and root litter inputs into the mineral soil) (Mg C ha-1 yr-1). # Fluxes and concentrations of dissolved organic carbon in soils This README file was generated on 2024-01-30 by Kazumichi Fujii. Site and soil information and fluxes and concentrations of dissolved organic carbon in soils # Principal Investigator Contact Information Name: Kazumichi Fujii Institution: Forestry and Forest Products Research Institute Address: Tsukuba 305-8687, Japan. Email: # Abstract To identify the factors regulating fluxes and concentrations of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in the soil profiles, we compiled the data of site information [Country, Region or state, Coordinates, Vegetation, Mean annual air temperature (C), Climate type, Vegetation type, Mycorrhiza type, Soil (USDA, Soil Taxonomy)], soil properties [Litter pH (H2O), Soil pH (H2O), Soil C/N ratio, Clay (%), Alo+1/2Feo (g kg-1), O horizon C stock (Mg C ha-1), Mineral soil C stock (Mg C ha-1)], fluxes and concentrations of DO C[Throughfall DOC flux (kg C ha-1 yr-1), DOC flux at the bottom of the O horizon (kg C ha-1 yr-1), DOC flux at the bottom of the B horizon (kg C ha-1 yr-1), DOC concentration at the bottom of the O horizon (mg C L-1), DOC concentration at the bottom of the B horizon (mg C L-1), DOC/Dissolved organic N (DON) (O horizon), DOC/DON (B horizon), Precipitation (mm yr-1), Water flux at the bottom of the O horizon (mm yr-1), Water flux at the bottom of B horizon (mm yr-1)], plant litter properties [Litterfall C input (Mg C ha-1 yr-1), C/N ratio in litter, Lignin content in litter (%), Lignin/N ratio in litter, Root litter C input (Mg C ha-1 yr-1)], and DOC retention in mineral soil (%), DOC flux relative to C input (%), Contribution of DOC to C input in mineral soil (%), and Turnover time of mineral soil C (yr)]. ## Description of the data and file structure DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: Table_DOC.xlsx 1. Number of variables: 35 (Table S1) 2. Number of cases/rows: 92 3. Variable List: Table S1: *Country *Region or state *Coordinates *Vegetation *Mean annual air temperature (C) *Climate type *Vegetation type *Mycorrhiza type *Soil (USDA, Soil Taxonomy) *Litter pH (H2O) *Soil pH (H2O) *Soil C/N ratio *Clay (%) *Alo+1/2Feo (g kg-1) *O horizon C stock (Mg C ha-1) *Mineral soil C stock (Mg C ha-1) *Throughfall DOC flux (kg C ha-1 yr-1) *DOC flux at the bottom of the O horizon (kg C ha-1 yr-1) *DOC flux at the bottom of the B horizon (kg C ha-1 yr-1) *DOC concentration at the bottom of the O horizon (mg C L-1) *DOC concentration at the bottom of the B horizon (mg C L-1) *DOC/DON (O horizon) *DOC/DON (B horizon) *Precipitation (mm yr-1) *Water flux at the bottom of the O horizon (mm yr-1) *Water flux at the bottom of B horizon (mm yr-1) *Litterfall C input (Mg C ha-1 yr-1) *C/N ratio in litter *Lignin content in litter (%) *Lignin/N ratio in litter *Root litter C input (Mg C ha-1 yr-1) *DOC retention in mineral soil (%) *DOC flux relative to C input (%) *Contribution of DOC to C input in mineral soil (%) *Turnover time of mineral soil C (yr) 4. Missing data codes: NA (data not available) 5. Specialized formats or other abbreviations used: BOR, TEMP, and TROP represent boreal, temperate, and tropical climates, respectively. C, B, BF, and G represent coniferous forest, broad-leaved forest, leguminous broad-leaved forest, and grassland, respectively. AM, ECM, and ERM represent arbuscular mycorrhizal association, ectomycorrhizal association, and ericoid mycorrhizal association, respectively. ## Sharing/Access information Licenses/restrictions placed on the data: CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Links to other publicly accessible locations of the data: None Data was derived from the following sources: 1. Fujii and Hayakawa (2022b) for DOC, Fujii and Hayakawa (2022a) for lignin 2. Peichl et al. (2007) with modification (DOC flux from the O horizon was calculated using throughfall water flux), Delaney et al. (1996), Nadelhoffer and Raich (1992) for FRP, Kothawala et al. (2009) for Al/Fe 3. Johnson et al. (2000) for DOC, Fahey et al. (2005) for LF, Currie and Aber (1997) for lignin, Bailey et al. (2003) for mean annual air temperature, Porras et al. (2017) for Al/Fe 4. McDowell and Liken (1988) for DOC, Fernandez et al. (2003) for soil pH, Currie and Aber (1997) for lignin 5. Yavitt and Fahey (1986) for DOC, Fahey et al. (1983) for LF, Mccahon and Munn (1991) for soil pH, Chatterjee et al. (2009) for soil C 6. Qualls et al. (1991; 2000) for DOC, Bonito et al. (2003) for soil pH, Currie et al. (1996) for lignin and LF C/N 7. Markewitz and Richter (1998) for DOC, Cybulski III et al. (2000) for lignin, Richter et al. (1999) for soil C 8. Dosskey and Bertsch (1997) for DOC, Megonigal et al. (1997) for LF, Currie et al. (1996) for lignin and LF C/N, McDowell and Liken (1988) for throughfall DOC concentration, Baker III et al. (2001) for FRP 9. Currie et al. (1996) for DOC, Magill et al. (2004) for LF, Aber et. (1995) for FRP, Porras et al. (2017) for Al/Fe 10. Yano et al. (2004, 2005) for DOC, Valachovic et al. (2004) for lignin 11. Sanderman and Amundson (2008), Valachovic et al. (2004) and Henry et al. (2008) for lignin 12. McDowell (1998) for DOC, Hall and Silver (2015) for clay content, Cuevas et al. (1991) for LF and FRP, Bloomfield et al. (1997) for lignin and C/N, Ostertag et al. (2003) for O horizon mass, Wang et al. (2002) for soil C 13. Schwendenmann and Veldcamp (2005) for DOC, Kleber et al. (2007) for soil pH, Raich et al. (2007) for lignin, Russell (2007) for FF, Valverde-Barrantes(2007) for FRP 14. Tobon et al. (2004a) for DOC, Tobon et al. (2004b) for TF, Jimenez et al. (2009) for FRP 15. McClain et al. (1997) for DOC, Cornu et al. (1997) for pH 16. Markewitz et al. (2004) for DOC, Silver et al. (2004) and Trumbore et al. (2006) for FRP, Joslin (2007) for lignin, Martinelli et al. (2007) for C/N, Quesada et al. (2020) for Al/Fe 17. Mulder et al. (1999) for DOC, Johansson (1995) for lignin, Leppalammi-Kujansuu et al. (2014) for FRP 18. Froberg et al. (2005) for DOC, Kleja et al. (2008) for LF, Johansson (1995) for lignin, Leppalammi-Kujansuu et al. (2014) for FRP 19. Piirainen et al. (2002) for DOC, Johansson (1995) for lignin, Piirainen et al. (2015) for FF, Palviainen (2005) for soil C, Leppalammi-Kujansuu et al. (2014) for FRP 20. Gundersen et al. (1998) for DOC, Emmett et al. (1995) for soil pH, Emmett et al. (1998) for TF, Prescott et al. (2000) for lignin, Alexander and Fairley(1983) for FRP 21. Schmidt et al. (2004) for DOC, Field et al. (2017) for LF, Beier et al. (2009) for subsoil DOC and FRP, Van Meeteren et al. (2007) for LF lignin and C/N 22. Gundersen et al. (1998) for DOC, Scarascia-Mugnozza et al. (2000) for FRP 23. Nielsen et al. (1999) for DOC, Pedersen and Bille-Hansen (1999) for LF, Jurksiene et al. (2007) for LF lignin and C/N, Nielsen et al. (2000) for soil C and Al/Fe, Scarascia-Mugnozza et al. (2001) for FRP 24. Mossin et al. (2001) for DOC, Pedersen and Bille-Hansen (1999) for LF, Prescott et al. (2000) for lignin, Scarascia-Mugnozza et al. (2001) for FRP 25. Gundersen et al. (1998) for DOC, de Vries et al. (1995) for soil pH, Field et al. (2017) for LF, Beier et al. (2009) for FRP, Van Meeteren et al. (2007) for LF lignin and C/N 26. Gundersen et al. (1998) for DOC, Johansson (1995) and Prescott et al. (2000) for lignin 27. Guggenberger and Zech (1993) for DOC, Kalbitz et al. (2004) for LF and FF, Johansson (1995) for lignin, Wiesmeier et al. (2012) for SC, Scarascia-Mugnozza et al. (2000) for FRP 28. Kalbitz et al. (2004) for DOC, Johansson (1995) for lignin 29. Michalzik and Matzner (1999), Johansson (1995) for lignin, Wiesmeier et al. (2012) for SC, Scarascia-Mugnozza et al. (2000) for FRP 30. Solinger et al. (2001) for DOC, Staaf (1987) for lignin, Wiesmeier et al. (2012) for SC, Scarascia-Mugnozza et al. (2004) for FRP 31. Don and Schulze (2008) for DOC, Bessler et al. (2009) for root:shoot allocation ratio, Henry et al. (2008) for lignin and C/N 32. Sleutel et al. (2009) for DOC, Van Den Berge et al. (2021) for soil C, Hansson et al. (2013) for FRP 33. Mulder et al. (2000) for DOC, Marcos and Lancho (2002) for soil pH, Gallardo et al. (2000) for Al/Fe, Gallardo and Merino (1992) for LF lignin and C/N 34. Prokushkin et al. (2008; 2011) for DOC, FF and soil pH, Kajimoto et al. (1999) for LF, Mikson and Roshchin (2021) for lignin, Usoltsev et al. (2022) for FRP 35. Prokushkin et al. (2005; 2006; 2011) for DOC, FF and soil pH, Kajimoto et al. (1999) for LF, Mikson and Roshchin (2020) for lignin, Usoltsev et al. (2022) for FRP 36. Fujii et al. (2008) 37. Fujii et al. (2021) 38. Fang et al. (2009) 39. Zhou et al. 2016 for DOC, Zhang et al. 2013 for LF and FF, Barbhuiya et al. (2008) for lignin and C/N, Tang et al. (2012) for soil C, Bibi et al. (2022) for FRP, Kramer et al. (2017) for Al/Fe 40. Schmidt et al. (2010) for DOC, Liu and Chen(2004) for Al/Fe, Hishi and Takeda (2005) for FRP 41. Fujii et al. (2009a) 42. Fujii et al. (2017) 43. Fujii et al. (2009b) 44. Fujii et al. (2020a) 45. Fujii et al. (2011) for Doc, Fujii et al. (2020a) for FRP 46. Schrumpf et al. (2006) for DOC, Rohr (2003) for seepage water flux, Becker et al. (2015) for LF, Sierra Cornejo et al. (2020) for FRP, Gerschlauer et al. (2016) for soil C, Becker et al. (2015), Ostertag et al. (2008), and Bonanomi et al. (2021) for C/N and lignin 47. Versini et al. (2014) for DOC, Epron et al. (2009) for soil C, Bernhard-Reversat et al. (1997) for LF C/N and lignin, Lohese (2021) for Al/Fe 48. Shibata (2017) for DOC, Ibrahima et al. (2016) for FRP 49. Moore (1989a), Daniel and Adams (1984) for LF and FF, Hoorens et al. (2010) for LF C/N and lignin, Tate et al. (1997) for soil C, Santantonio and Santantonio (1987) for FRP 50. Moore (1989b), Daniel and Adams (1984) for LF and FF, Hoorens et al. (2010) for LF C/N and lignin, Tate et al. (1997) for soil C, Santantonio and Santantonio (1987) for FRP References Aber, J. D., Melillo, J. M., Nadelhoffer, K. J., McClaugherty, C. A., & Pastor, J. (1985). Fine root turnover in forest ecosystems in relation to quantity and form of nitrogen availability: a comparison of two methods. Oecologia, 66(3), 317-321. Allen SE, Grimshaw HM, Parkinson JA, Quarmby C (1974) Chemical Analysis of Ecological Materials. Wiley, New York. Alexander, I. J., & Fairley, R. I. (1983). Effects of N fertilisation on populations of fine roots and mycorrhizas in spruce humus. Plant and Soil, 71, 49-53. Bailey AS, Hornbeck JW, Campbell JL, Eager C (2003) Hydrometeorological database for Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest: 1955-2000. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, General technical report NE-305. Baker III, T. T., Conner, W. H., Lockaby, B. G., Stanturf, J. A., & Burke, M. K. (2001). Fine root productivity and dynamics on a forested floodplain in South Carolina. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 65(2), 545-556. Barbhuiya, A. R., Arunachalam, A., Nath, P. C., Khan, M. L., & Arunachalam, K. (2008). Leaf litter decomposition of dominant tree species of Namdapha National Park, Arunachal Pradesh, northeast India. Journal of Forest Research, 13(1), 25-34. Becker, J., Pabst, H., Mnyonga, J., Kuzyakov, Y. (2015) Annual litterfall dynamics and nutrient deposition depending on elevation and land use at Mt. Kilimanjaro. Biogeosciences, 12(19), 5635-5646. Beier, C., Emmett, B. A., Tietema, A., Schmidt, I. K., Penuelas, J., Lang, E. K., ... & Spano, D. (2009). Carbon and nitrogen balances for six shrublands across Europe. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 23(4). Berg B, McClaugherty C (2003) Plant Litter: Decomposition, Humus formation, Carbon sequesteration. Springer-Verlag Berlin Bernhard-Reversat, F., & Schwartz, D. (1997). Change in lignin content during litter decomposition in tropical forest soils (Congo): comparison of exotic plantations and native stands. Comptes Rendus de l'Academie des Sciences-Series IIA-Earth and Planetary Science, 325(6), 427-432. Bessler, H., Temperton, V. M., Roscher, C., Buchmann, N., Schmid, B., Schulze, E. D., Engels, C. (2009) Aboveground overyielding in grassland mixtures is associated with reduced biomass partitioning to belowground organs. Ecology, 90(6), 1520-1530. Bibi, F., Tomlinson, K. W., Liu, C., Liu, C. A., Jin, Y., & Tang, J. (2022). Fine Root Production and Soil Available Nutrients in Rubber Monoculture versus Rubber-Flemingia macrophylla Agroforestry. Forests, 13(6), 830. Bloomfield, J., Vogt, K. A., & Vogt, D. J. (1993). Decay rate and substrate quality of fine roots and foliage of two tropical tree species in the Luquillo Experimental Forest, Puerto Rico. Plant and Soil, 150, 233-245. Bonanomi, G., Idbella, M., Zotti, M., Santorufo, L., Motti, R., Maisto, G., & De Marco, A. (2021). Decomposition and temperature sensitivity of fine root and leaf litter of 43 mediterranean species. Plant and Soil, 464(1-2), 453-465. Bonito GM, Coleman DC, Haines BL, Cabrera ML (2003) Can nitrogen budgets explain differences in soil nitrogen mineralization rates of forest stands along an elevation gradient? For Ecol Manag 176: 563-574 Chatterjee, A., Vance, G. F., & Tinker, D. B. (2009). Carbon pools of managed and unmanaged stands of ponderosa and lodgepole pine forests in Wyoming. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 39(10), 1893-1900. Cornu, S., Ambrosi, J. P., Lucas, Y., Fevrier, D. (1997) A comparative study of the soil solution chemistry of two Amazonian forest soils (Central Amazonia, Brazil). Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 1(2), 313-324. Cronan CS, Aiken GR (1985) Chemistry and transport of soluble humic substances in forested watersheds of Andirondack Park, New York. Geochem Cosmochim Acta 49: 1697-1705 Currie WS, Aber JD, McDowell WH, Richard DB, Magill AH (1996) Vertical transport of dissolved organic C and N under long term N amendments in pine and hardwood forests. Biogeochemistry 35: 471-505 Currie WS, Aber JD (1997) Modelling leaching as a decomposition process in humid montane forests. Ecology 78(1): 1844-1860 Cybulski III WJ, Peterjohn WT, Sullivan JH (2000) The influence of elevated ultraviolet-B radiation (UV-B) on tissue quality and decomposition of loblolly pine (Pinus taeda L.) needles. Environ Experi Bot 44: 231-241 Cuevas, E., Brown, S., & Lugo, A. E. (1991). Above-and belowground organic matter storage and production in a tropical pine plantation and a paired broadleaf secondary forest. Plant and soil, 135, 257-268. Daniel MJ, Adams JA (1984) Nutrient return by litterfall in evergreen podocarp-hardwood forest in New Zealand. New Zealand J Bot 22: 271-283 Delaney, M. T., Fernandez, I. J., Simmons, J. A., & Briggs, R. D. (1996). TB162: Red Maple and White Pine Litter Quality: Initial Changes with Decomposition. De Vries W, Van Grinsven JJM, Van Breemen N, Leeters EEJM, Jansen PC (1995) Impacts of acid deposition on concentrations and fluxes of solutes in acid sandy forest soils in the Netherlands. Geoderma 67: 17-43 Don, A., Schulze, E. D. (2008) Controls on fluxes and export of dissolved organic carbon in grasslands with contrasting soil types. Biogeochemistry, 91(2), 117-131. Dosskey MG, Bertsch PM (1997) Transport of dissolved organic matter through a sandy forest soil. Soil Sci Soc Am J 61: 920-927 Emmett BA, Brittain SA, Hughes S, Gorres J, Kennedy V, Norris D, Rafarel R, Reynolds B, Stevens PA (1995) Nitrogen addition (NaNO3 and NH4NO3) at Aber forest, Wales: I. Response of throughfall and soil water chemistry. For Ecol Manag 71: 45-49 Emmett BA, Reynolds B, Silgram M, Sparks TH, Woods C (1998) The consequences of chronic nitrogen additions on N cycling and soil water chemistry in a Sitka spruce stand, North Wales. For Ecol Manag 101: 165-175 Epron, D., Marsden, C., Thongo MBou, A., Saint-Andre, L., dAnnunzio, R., & Nouvellon, Y. (2009). Soil carbon dynamics following afforestation of a tropical savannah with Eucalyptus in Congo. Plant and Soil, 323, 309-322. Fahey TJ (1983) Nutrient dynamics of aboveground detritus in lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta ssp. Latifolia) ecosystems, southeastern Wyoming. Ecol Monogr 53 (1): 51-72 Fahey TJ, Siccama TG, Driscoll CT, Likens GE, Campbell J, Johnson CE, Battles JJ, Aber JD, Cole JJ, Fisk MC, Groffman PM, Hamburg SP, Holmes RT, Schwarz PA, Yanai RD (2005) The biogeochemistry of carbon at Hubbard Brook. Biogeochemistry 75: 109-176 Fang, Y., Zhu, W., Gundersen, P., Mo, J., Zhou, G., & Yoh, M. (2009). Large loss of dissolved organic nitrogen from nitrogen-saturated forests in subtropical China. Ecosystems, 12(1), 33-45. Fernandez IJ, Rustad LE, Norton SA, Kahl JS, Cosby BJ (2003) Experimental acidification causes soil base-cation depletion at the Bear Brook watershed in Maine. Soil Sci Soc Am J 67: 1909-1919 Field, C. D., Evans, C. D., Dise, N. B., Hall, J. R., Caporn, S. J. (2017) Long-term nitrogen deposition increases heathland carbon sequestration. Science of The Total Environment, 592, 426-435. Finer, L., Ohashi, M., Noguchi, K., Hirano, Y. (2011) Fine root production and turnover in forest ecosystems in relation to stand and environmental characteristics. Forest Ecology and Management, 262(11), 2008-2023. Froberg M, Kleja DB, Bergkvist B, Bryant C, Mulder J (2006) Concentration and fluxes of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in three Norway spruce stands along a climatic gradient in Sweden. Biogeochemistry 77: 1-23 Froberg M, Kleja DB, Hagedorn F (2007) The contribution of fresh litter to dissolved organic carbon leached from a coniferous forest floor. Eur J Soil Sci 58: 108-114 Fujii K, Funakawa S, Hayakawa C, Kosaki T (2008) Contribution of different proton sources to pedogenetic soil acidification in forested ecosystems in Japan. Geoderma 144(3-4): 478-490 Fujii K, Funakawa S, Hayakawa C, Sukartiningsih, Kosaki T (2009a) Quantification of proton budgets in soils of cropland and adjacent forest in Thailand and Indonesia. Plant Soil DOI 10.1007/s11104-008-9776-0 Fujii K, Uemura M, Funakawa S, Hayakawa C, Sukartiningsih, Kosaki T, Ohta S (2009b) Fluxes of dissolved organic carbon in two tropical forest ecosystems of East Kalimantan, Indonesia. Geoderma, 152 (1-2), 127-136. Fujii K, Hartono A, Funakawa S, Uemura M, Kosaki T (2011) Fluxes of dissolved organic carbon in three tropical secondary forests developed on serpentine and mudstone.　Geoderma, 163, 119-126. Fujii K, Uemura M, Hayakawa C, Funakawa S, Kosaki T (2012) Environmental control of lignin peroxidase, manganese peroxidase, and laccase activities in forest floor layers in humid Asia. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 57, 109-115. Fujii, K., Hayakawa, C., Panitkasate, T., Maskhao, I., Funakawa, S., Kosaki, T., & Nawata, E. (2017). Acidification and buffering mechanisms of tropical sandy soil in northeast Thailand. Fujii, K., Hayakawa, C., Inagaki, Y., Kosaki, T. (2020a) Effects of land use change on turnover and storage of soil organic matter in a tropical forest. Plant Soil, 446, 425-439. Fujii, K., Nakada Y, Umezawa K, Yoshida M, Shibata M, Hayakawa C, Inagaki Y, Hangs R. (2020b) A comparison of lignin-degrading enzyme activities in forest floor layers across a global climatic gradient. Soil Ecology Letters, 2(4): 281-294. Fujii, K., Funakawa, S., Hayakawa, C., & Kosaki, T. (2021). Effects of clearcutting and girdling on soil respiration and fluxes of dissolved organic carbon and nitrogen in a Japanese cedar plantation. Forest Ecology and Management, 498, 119520. Fujii K, Hayakawa C (2022a) Recalcitrance of lichen and moss litters increases soil carbon storage on permafrost. Plant and Soil, 472, 595-608.\ Fujii K, Hayakawa C (2022b) Fluxes of dissolved organic matter and nitrate and their contribution to soil acidification across changing permafrost landscapes in northwestern Canada. Geoderma, 430, 116306. Gallardo, A., & Merino, J. (1992). Nitrogen immobilization in leaf litter at two Mediterranean ecosystems of SW Spain. Biogeochemistry, 15, 213-228. Gallardo, J. F., Rico, M., & Gonzalez, M. I. (2000). Some ecological aspects of a chestnut coppice located at the Sierra de Gata mountains (Western Spain) and its relationship with a sustainable management. Ecologia mediterranea, 26(1), 53-69. Godde M, David MB, Christ MJ, Kaupenjohann M, Vance GF (1996) Carbon mobilization from the forest floor under red spruce in the northeastern U.S.A. Soil Biol Biochem 28 (9): 1181-1189 Guggenberger, G., & Zech, W. (1993). Dissolved organic carbon control in acid forest soils of the Fichtelgebirge (Germany) as revealed by distribution patterns and structural composition analyses. Geoderma, 59(1-4), 109-129. Guggenberger G, Zech W (1994) Dissolved organic carbon control in forest floor leachate: simple degradation products or humic substances? Sci Total Environ 152: 37-47 Guggenberger G., Kaiser K (1998) Significance of DOM in the translocation of cations and acidity in acid forest soils. Z Pflanzenernahr Bodenkd 161: 95-99 Gundersen P, Emmett BA, Kjonaas OJ, Koopmans CJ, Tietema A (1998) Impact of nitrogen deposition on nitrogen cycling in forests: a synthesis of NITREX data. For Ecol Manag 101: 37-55 Gerschlauer, F., Dannenmann, M., Kuhnel, A., Meier, R., Kolar, A., Butterbach-Bahl, K., & Kiese, R. (2016). Gross nitrogen turnover of natural and managed tropical ecosystems at Mt. Kilimanjaro, Tanzania. Ecosystems, 19, 1271-1288. Hall, S. J., & Silver, W. L. (2015). Reducing conditions, reactive metals, and their interactions can explain spatial patterns of surface soil carbon in a humid tropical forest. Biogeochemistry, 125, 149-165. Hansson, K., Helmisaari, H. S., Sah, S. P., & Lange, H. (2013). Fine root production and turnover of tree and understorey vegetation in Scots pine, silver birch and Norway spruce stands in SW Sweden. Forest Ecology and Management, 309, 58-65. Henry, H. A., Brizgys, K., & Field, C. B. (2008). Litter decomposition in a California annual grassland: interactions between photodegradation and litter layer thickness. Ecosystems, 11, 545-554. Hishi, T., & Takeda, H. (2005). Dynamics of heterorhizic root systems: protoxylem groups within the fine‐root system of Chamaecyparis obtusa. New Phytologist, 167(2), 509-521. Hoorens, B., Coomes, D., & Aerts, R. (2010). Neighbour identity hardly affects litter-mixture effects on decomposition rates of New Zealand forest species. Oecologia, 162, 479-489. Ibrahima, A., Ntonga, J. C., & ZE, A. D. M. (2016). Litter decomposition and nutrient dynamics in tropical rainforests of Ebom, Southwestern Cameroon: Effects of logging disturbed. Global Journal of Botanical Science, 4(1), 24-36. Jimenez, E. M., Moreno, F. H., Penuela, M. C., Patino, S., & Lloyd, J. (2009). Fine root dynamics for forests on contrasting soils in the Colombian Amazon. Biogeosciences, 6(12), 2809-2827. Johansson MB (1995) The chemical composition of needle and leaf litter from Scots pine, Norway spruce and white birch in Scandinavian forests. Forestry 68 (1): 49-62 Johnson DW (1977) Carbonic acid leaching in a tropical temperate, subalpine, and northern forest soil. Arctic Alpine Res 9(4): 329-343 Johnson DW, Richter DD, Van Miegroet H, Cole DW (1983) Contributions of acid deposition and natural processes to cation leaching from forest soils: a review. J Air Pollut Control Assoc 33(11): 1036-1041 Johnson CE, Driscoll CT, Siccama TG, Likens GE (2000) Element fluxes and landscape position in a northern hardwood forest watershed ecosystem. Ecosystems 3: 159-184 Joslin, A. H. (2007). First-year growth and soil responses of an agroforestry system utilizing five native tree species and Manihot esculenta in the eastern Amazon of Brazil (Doctoral dissertation, University of Georgia). Jurksiene, G., Janusauskaite, D., Armolaitis, K., & Baliuckas, V. (2017). Leaf litterfall decomposition of pedunculate (Quercus robur L.) and sessile (Q. petraea) oaks and their hybrids and its impact on soil microbiota. Dendrobiology, (78), 51-62. Kalbitz K, Solinger S, Park J-H, Michalzik B, Matzner E (2000) Controls on the dynamics of dissolved organic matter in soils: a review. Soil Sci 165(4): 277-304 Kalbitz K, Schwesig D, Schmerwitz J, Kaiser K, Haumaier L, Glaser B, Ellerbrock R, Leinweber P (2003) Changes in properties of soil-derived dissolved organic matter induced by biodegradation. Soil Biol Biochem 35: 1129-1142 Kalbitz K, Glaser B, Bol R (2004) Clear-cutting of a Norway spruce stand: implications for controls on the dynamics of dissolved organic matter in the forest floor. Eur J Soil Sci 55: 401-413 Kalbitz K, Kaiser K, Bargholz J, Dardenne P (2006) Lignin degradation controls the production of dissolved organic matter in decomposing foliar litter. Eur J Soil Sci 57: 504-516 Kalbitz, K., Kaiser, K. (2008) Contribution of dissolved organic matter to carbon storage in forest mineral soils. Journal of Plant Nutrition and Soil Science, 171(1), 52-60. Kemmitt SJ, Wright D, Goulding KWT, Jones DL (2006) pH regulation of carbon and nitrogen dynamics in two agricultural soils. Soil Biol Biochem 38: 898-911 Kleber M, Schwendenmann L, Veldkamp E, Roner J, Jahn R (2007) Halloysite versus gibbsite: Silicon cycling as a pedogenetic process in two lowland neotropical rain forest soils of La Selva, Costa Rica. Geoderma 138: 1-11 Kleja DB, Svensson M, Majdi H, Jansson PE, Langvall O, Bergkvist B, Johansson MB, Weslien P, Truusb L, Lindroth A, Agren GI (2008) Pools and fluxes of carbon in three Norway spruce ecosystems along a climatic gradient in Sweden. Biogeochemistry DOI 10.1007/s10533-007-9136-9 Kramer, M. G., Lajtha, K., & Aufdenkampe, A. K. (2017). Depth trends of soil organic matter C: N and 15N natural abundance controlled by association with minerals. Biogeochemistry, 136, 237-248. Kothawala, D. N., Moore, T. R., & Hendershot, W. H. (2009). Soil properties controlling the adsorption of dissolved organic carbon to mineral soils. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 73(6), 1831-1842. Leppalammi-Kujansuu, J., Aro, L., Salemaa, M., Hansson, K., Kleja, D. B., & Helmisaari, H. S. (2014). Fine root longevity and carbon input into soil from below-and aboveground litter in climatically contrasting forests. Forest ecology and management, 326, 79-90. Liu, J. C., & Chen, Z. S. (2004). Soil characteristics and clay mineralogy of two subalpine forest spodosols with clay accumulation in Taiwan. Soil Science, 169(1), 66-80. Lohese, E. A. (2021). Climatic and vegetative drivers of soil genesis, soil properties, and soil distribution in Sankuru province, Central Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) (Doctoral dissertation, University of Minnesota). Lundstrom US (1993) The role of organic acids in the soil solution chemistry of podzolized soil. J Soil Sci 48: 115-120 Makkonen, K., & Helmisaari, H. S. (1999). Assessing fine-root biomass and production in a Scots pine stand-comparison of soil core and root ingrowth core methods. Plant and soil, 210(1), 43-50. Mikson, D. S., & Roshchin, V. I. (2020). The Siberian larch needle group composition and acids at various vegetation periods. Russian Journal of Bioorganic Chemistry, 46(7), 1396-1402. Magill AH, Aber JD, Currie WS, Nedelhoffer KJ, Martin ME, Mcdowell WH, Melillo JM, Steudler P (2004) Ecosystem response to 15 years of chronic nitrogen additions at the Harvard forest LITER, Massachusetts, USA. For Ecol Manag 196: 7-28 Marcos GM, Lancho JFG (2002) H+ budget in oligotrophic Quercus pyrenaica forests: atmospheric and management-induced soil acidification? Plant Soil 243: 11-22 Markewitz, D., Davidson, E., Moutinho, P., Nepstad, D. (2004) Nutrient loss and redistribution after forest clearing on a highly weathered soil in Amazonia. Ecological Applications, 14(sp4), 177-199. Markewitz D, Richter DD (1998) The bio in aluminum and silicon geochemistry. Biogeochemistry 42: 235-252 Martinelli, L. A., Ometto, J. P. H. B., Ishida, F. Y., Domingues, T. F., Nardoto, G. B., Oliveira, R. S., & Ehleringer, J. R. (2007). The use of carbon and nitrogen stable isotopes to track effects of land‐use changes in the Brazilian Amazon Region. Terrestrial Ecology, 1, 301-318. McClain, M. E., Richey, J. E., Brandes, J. A., & Pimentel, T. P. (1997). Dissolved organic matter and terrestrial‐lotic linkages in the Central Amazon Basin of Brazil. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 11(3), 295-311. Mccahon TJ, Munn CL (1991) Soils developed in lake pleistocene till, Medicine Bow Mountains, Wyoming. Soil Sci 152 (5): 377-388 McDowell WH, Likens GE (1988) Origin, composition and flux of dissolved organic carbon
Foliar methane and nitrous oxide fluxes in tropical tree species			Methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) are critical biogenic greenhouse gases (GHGs) with global warming potentials substantially greater than that of carbon dioxide (CO2). The exchange of these gases in tropical forests, particularly via foliar processes, remains poorly understood. We quantified foliar CH4 and N2O fluxes among tropical tree species and examined their potential association with the leaf economics spectrum (LES) traits. Sampling within Lawachara National Park, Bangladesh, we used in-situ measurements of foliar CH4 and N2O fluxes employing off-axis integrated cavity output spectroscopy (CH4, CO2 and H2O) and optical feedback-cavity enhanced absorption spectroscopy (N2O) analyzers. Leaves were measured under dark, low, and high (0, 100, and 1000 mu mol center dot m(-2)center dot s(-1)) light conditions. Surveyed tree species exhibited both net foliar uptake and efflux of CH4, with a mean flux not different from zero, suggesting negligible net foliar emissions at the stand level. Plant families showed differences in CH4, but not N2O fluxes. Consistent efflux was observed for N2O, with a mean of 0.562 +/- 0.060 pmol center dot m(-2)center dot s(-1). Pioneer species exhibited a higher mean N2O flux (0.81 +/- 0.17 pmol center dot m(-2)center dot s(-1)) compared to late-successional species (0.37 +/- 0.05 pmol center dot m(-2)center dot s(-1)). Pioneer species also showed a trend toward a higher mean CH4 flux (0.24 +/- 0.21 nmol center dot m(-2)center dot s(-1)) compared to mid-successional (-0.01 +/- 0.26 nmol center dot m(-2)center dot s(-1)) and late-successional species (-0.05 +/- 0.28 nmol center dot m(-2)center dot s(-1)). Moreover, among all leaf traits within the leaf economic spectrum, a significant positive relationship was observed between leaf N2O flux and total leaf nitrogen. Our results suggest that pioneer tree species significantly contribute to net CH4 and N2O emissions, potentially counteracting the carbon sequestration benefits in regenerating tropical forests. These findings indicate that accurate GHG budgeting should include direct measurements of foliar CH4 and N2O fluxes. Moreover, the results suggest that forest conservation and management strategies that prioritize late successional species will better mitigate GHG emissions.
Forage-based cropping systems and soil organic carbon storage			Terrestrial ecosystem is the biggest sink storing three times more carbon that is present in the atmosphere. In tropical regions, it is difficult to maintain soil organic carbon comparable to temperate regions. However, agricultural practices such as manuring, cover cropping, intercropping, and inclusion of grass and legumes in cropping systems promote higher carbon sequestration. High-diversity mixtures of perennial grassland plant species store 500-600% more soil C and N than same species under monoculture. Productivity and soil fertility of the natural grassland can be improved by introduction of the range legumes. Inclusion of Macroptilium lathyroides in natural grassland fetched 1.29 times increase in soil organic carbon (SOC) as compared to natural grassland. Productivity of the Cenchrus ciliaris could be improved in association with the range legumes such as Siratro, Stylosanthes, and Clitoria and also by application of nitrogenous fertilizers. In the present chapter, attempts have been made to elucidate the role of forage-based cropping systems, nutrient management, tillage, and silvipasture systems in SOC stock and productivity of different land-use systems. Additionally, the significance of the critical carbon input in maintaining the zero change in SOC values in different cropping systems, soil orders, and agroecological zones are discussed. © Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020.
Forecasted Afrotropical Forest Responses to Climate Change Diverge from Neotropical Predictions with Consequences for Biodiversity Conservation and Carbon Storage			0
Forest and Landscape Restoration: A Review Emphasizing Principles, Concepts, and Practices			Forest and Landscape Restoration (FLR) is considered worldwide as a powerful approach to recover ecological functionality and to improve human well-being in degraded and deforested landscapes. The literature produced by FLR programs could be a valuable tool to understand how they align with the existing principles of FLR. We conducted a systematic qualitative review to identify the main FLR concepts and definitions adopted in the literature from 1980 to 2017 and the underlying actions commonly suggested to enable FLR implementation. We identified three domains and 12 main associated principles-(i) Project management and governance domain contains five principles: (a) Landscape scale, (b) Prioritization, (c) Legal and normative compliance, (d) Participation, (e) Adaptive management; (ii) Human aspect domain with four principles: (a) Enhance livelihoods, (b) Inclusiveness and equity, (c) Economic diversification, (d) Capacity building; (iii) Ecological Aspects domain with three principles: (a) Biodiversity conservation, (b) Landscape heterogeneity and connectivity, (c) Provision of ecosystem goods and services. Our results showcase variations in FLR principles and how they are linked with practice, especially regarding the lack of social aspects in FLR projects. Finally, we provide a starting point for future tools aiming to improve guidance frameworks for FLR.
Forest and trees: Shade management, forest proximity and pollinator communities in southern Costa Rica coffee agriculture			Sustained pollinator services within coffee farms depend substantially on a diverse bee community. While studies have been conducted to understand the impacts of forest proximity and farm level management on pollinators, few have examined the interaction between these two spatial scales. We surveyed pollinator communities within 18 sites on a large organic farm surrounded by native forest in southern Costa Rica. We selected sites 0, 50 and 150 m from the forest edge within shaded and sparsely-shaded (sun) portions of the farm to quantify the influence of both shade management and distance to contiguous forest on pollinator communities. Contrary to similar studies, native bees dominated the composition of pollinators on this farm. Overall, pollinator diversity and activity did not differ significantly neither between the shade management types nor among the sites 0, 50 or 150 m from the forest edge. However, pollinator diversity was found to be significantly higher at sun sites near forest (0 m) compared with further away, whereas the diversity was the same for the shade sites regardless of forest proximity. We found that greater numbers of coffee flowers within each site increased bee abundance and flower visitation frequency. Bee abundance was greater in sites with less ground cover and bee diversity and visitation frequencies were higher in sites with greater amounts of shade canopy cover and trees in flower. Based on our results, we suggest including flowering shade trees that provide high levels of canopy cover, maintaining or re-establishing forested areas within or surrounding farms, and eliminating or reducing agrochemical use to increase native pollinator activity and diversity within coffee farms.
Forest biomass recovery after conventional and reduced-impact logging in Amazonian Brazil			Growing concerns about unnecessarily destructive selective logging of tropical forests and its impacts on greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions motivated this study on post-logging biomass dynamics over a 16-year period in a control plot and in plots subjected to conventional logging (CL) or reduced-impact logging (RIL) in Paragominas, Pará State, Brazil. All trees >25cm were monitored in 25.4ha plots of each treatment, each with a subplot of 5.25ha for trees >10cmdbh. The commercial timber volumes in felled trees were 38.9 and 37.4m3ha-1 in the RIL and CL plots, respectively, but the extracted volumes were 38.6 and 29.7 m3 ha-1, respectively. Immediately after logging, plots subjected to RIL and CL lost 17% and 26% of their above-ground biomass, respectively. Over the 16years after logging, the average annual increments in above-ground biomass (recruitment plus residual tree growth minus mortality) were 2.8Mgha-1 year-1 in the RIL plot but only 0.5Mgha-1year-1 in the CL plot. By 16years post-logging, the RIL plot recovered 100% of its original above-ground biomass while the CL plot recovered only 77%; over the same period, biomass in the control plot maintained 96% of its initial stock. These findings reinforce the claim that conversion from CL to RIL would represent an efficient forest-based strategy to mitigate climate change under the REDD+ and would be an important step towards sustainable forest management. © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
Forest biomass recovery after different anthropogenic disturbances: relative importance of changes in stand structure and wood density			Restoring the functions of disturbed forest to mitigation climate change is a main topic of policy makers. Better understanding of factors that directly influence post-disturbance forest biomass recovery is urgently needed to guide forest restoration and management. In this study, we examine changes in forest stand structure, wood density and biomass of forests recovering from different anthropogenic disturbances that represent forest land-use types in subtropical China: plantation, twice-logged and once-logged secondary forests, and compare them with undisturbed old-growth forest. Stand structure and wood density in all disturbed forests were evidently different from that of old-growth forest, even after 50-year regrowth. Forest biomass increased along plantation, twice-logged, once-logged and old-growth forests, with total living biomass (TLB) ranging from 150.8 +/- A 4.6 to 278.4 +/- A 1.5 Mg ha(-1), aboveground biomass from 111.8 +/- A 4.2 to 204.1 +/- A 1.5 Mg ha(-1) and coarse-root biomass from 33.0 +/- A 0.9 to 71.0 +/- A 0.8 Mg ha(-1). However, fine-root biomass was highest in plantation (5.99 +/- A 0.52 Mg ha(-1)) and lowest in once-logged forest (3.35 +/- A 0.19 Mg ha(-1)). Both changes in stand structure and functional trait (wood density) directly determine forest biomass recovery according to the result that 10.6, 35.5 and 8.2 % of variation in TLB over the disturbance gradient were independently explained by basal area (< 20 cm diameter), basal area (a parts per thousand yen20 cm diameter) and wood density, respectively. Our results suggest that recovery forest structure to the state associated with undisturbed forests will lead to large carbon sink in disturbed forests. In addition, trait-based managing approach should not be overlooked when maximizing carbon storage is a major management objective.
Forest biomass recovery twenty-four years after conventional and reduced-impact logging in Eastern Amazon			Given the mounting global concerns about mitigating climate change and curbing greenhouse gas emissions, it becomes increasingly crucial to comprehend the effects of logging techniques on biomass dynamics in tropical forests. This understanding is essential for fostering greater carbon retention and sequestration, aligning with the objectives of initiatives like REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation plus sustainable forest management and the conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks) and other conservation goals. In this context, this study investigated the effects of two wood harvesting methods, reduced-impact logging (RIL) and conventional logging (CL), on above-ground biomass (AGB) recovery rates 24 years after harvesting. The experimental design was based on three treatments: RIL, CL, and an unlogged control plot, situated in the municipality of Paragominas, State of Pará, in the Eastern Amazon region of Brazil. All trees with diameter at breast height (DBH) ≥25 cm, as well as all trees of commercial species with a DBH ≥10 cm, were monitored in a 24.5 ha plot within each treatment. Additionally, a 5.25 ha subplot within each treatment was designated for the monitoring of all trees with DBH ≥10 cm. The biomass data were generated from 11 measurements carried out from 1993 to 2017 (24-year period). Pre-logging AGB stocks were estimated at 181 Mg ha-1 in the RIL plot, 187 Mg ha-1 in the CL plot, and 174 Mg ha-1 in the control plot. One year after logging, AGB decreased by 19 % under RIL and 30 % under CL, while the control forest remained unchanged. By 13 years after harvest, the RIL plot achieved 102 % AGB recovery, while the CL plot recovered 86 % of the original pre-harvest stock. Over the 24-year post-logging period, AGB stocks recovered to 128 % in the RIL plot compared to only 90 % in the CL plot, while the control forest maintained 93 % of its original stock. The average annual ABG increment rates were 3.56 Mg ha-1 year-1 after RIL and 2.33 Mg ha-1 year-1 after CL. Our findings demonstrate that implementing RIL is a more effective strategy for maintaining post-logging AGB stocks and accelerating AGB recovery rates, serving as a significant mitigation measure against climate change. © 2024 The Author(s)
Forest bolsters bird abundance, pest control and coffee yield			Efforts to maximise crop yields are fuelling agricultural intensification, exacerbating the biodiversity crisis. Low-intensity agricultural practices, however, may not sacrifice yields if they support biodiversity-driven ecosystem services. We quantified the value native predators provide to farmers by consuming coffee's most damaging insect pest, the coffee berry borer beetle (Hypothenemus hampei). Our experiments in Costa Rica showed birds reduced infestation by 50%, bats played a marginal role, and farmland forest cover increased pest removal. We identified borer-consuming bird species by assaying faeces for borer DNA and found higher borer-predator abundances on more forested plantations. Our coarse estimate is that forest patches doubled pest control over 230km(2) by providing habitat for 55000 borer-consuming birds. These pest-control services prevented US$75-US$310ha-year(-1) in damage, a benefit per plantation on par with the average annual income of a Costa Rican citizen. Retaining forest and accounting for pest control demonstrates a win-win for biodiversity and coffee farmers.
Forest canopies as earth’s support systems: Priorities for research and conservation			In this chapter we address three sets of questions about the present and future role of canopy science within the larger context of forest science. First we review research that either promotes or constrains canopy science as a distinct field. Second, we examine what is known about how canopies are being altered by human use of tropical forests, and consider priorities for research in human interactions with forest canopies. Third, we ask how canopy science can help address the urgent need to understand patterns of human impacts and global environmental changes, specifically in tropical forest ecosystems. It is evident from this volume that canopy researchers are shifting their priorities toward forest canopy conservation by embracing whole-forest approaches with reference to ecosystem services, forest health, climate change, sustainability science, economics, education, and the social sciences. © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013.
Forest Canopies, Plant Diversity			The importance of the plants that dwell in forest canopies is becoming increasingly recognized in relation to understanding biodiversity. The upper tree canopy of many forest ecosystems fosters extremely diverse plant communities, which include vascular and nonvascular epiphytes, hemiepiphytes, and parasites. Canopy-dwelling plants contribute substantially to overall forest biodiversity and biocomplexity by providing resources for arboreal vertebrates, invertebrates, and microbes, and by participating in nutrient and water cycling and gas and energy exchanges. © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Forest Carbon Management: a Review of Silvicultural Practices and Management Strategies Across Boreal, Temperate and Tropical Forests			Purpose of Review Carbon sequestration and storage in forest ecosystems is often promoted as a solution for reducing CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere. Yet, our understanding is lacking regarding how forest management strategies affect the net removal of greenhouse gases and contribute to climate change mitigation. Here, we present a review of carbon sequestration and stock dynamics, following three strategies that are widely used in boreal, temperate and tropical forests: extensive forest management, intensive forest management and old-growth forest conservation. Recent Findings Several studies show that specific forest management strategies can improve carbon sequestration capacity and soil carbon storage. Within these studies, the old-growth forest conservation strategy results in greater carbon storage in soils than do extensive and intensive forest management. Intensive forest management enhances forest carbon sequestration capacity through afforestation using fast-growing species, mechanical soil preparation from low to moderate intensity and N fertilization. Extensive forest management is an intermediate compromise regarding carbon sequestration and soil carbon storage, between conservation and intensive forest management strategies. With respect to silvicultural treatments, partial cutting is a practice that increases forest carbon sequestration rates and maintains higher carbon storage in soils compared to clear-cuts. Each silvicultural practice that is discussed in this review showed a similar effect on forest carbon in all biomes, although the magnitude of these effects differs mainly in terms of heterotrophic respiration. To achieve sustainable management and fulfill industrial demand and profitability, specific gaps must be dealt with to improve our scientific knowledge regarding forest carbon sequestration in a climate change context, mainly through the integration of the three aforementioned strategies in a functional zoning approach at the landscape scale. We present a review with promising strategies for guiding sustainable forest management in such a global context.
Forest carbon offsets are failing Analysis reveals emission reductions from forest conservation have been overestimated			0
Forest change detection using Tiangong-1 and Landsat 7 earth observation data			Tropical forest plays an important role in sustainable development, biodiversity conservation, and offers many environmental benefits, including essential ecosystem services such as climate change mitigation and adaptation. Deforestation is one of the main problems in tropical area. In this paper, we used hyperspectral data from Tiangong-1 space station platform and historical Landsat 7 ETM+ data to map forest coverage and detect forest changes in the tropical forests of Xishuangbanna, Yunnan province, China. First, pure forest pixels were extracted according to the characteristic in the histogram of red band. Then spectral similarity was calculated for each pixel with these pure forest pixels. This similarity index was used to generate forest coverage map. Then a forest change map was generated using these multi-temporal coverage maps. After evaluated with field survey data, the results showed that:(1) The hyperspectral data from Tiangong-1 can be used to map forest coverage effectively. The forest distribution pattern agreed well with ground survey data. (2) With the aid of historical forest coverage map, the forest changes can be detected. The deforestation and reforestation patches were characterized well. The recent reforestation stands in low canopy density level can also be detected. ©, 2014, Science Press. All right reserved.
Forest conservation incentives and deforestation in the Ecuadorian Amazon			Forest conservation incentives are a popular approach to combatting tropical deforestation. Here we consider a case where direct economic incentives for forest conservation were offered to newly titled smallholders in a buffer zone of a protected area in the northeastern Ecuadorian Amazon. We used quasi-experimental impact evaluation methods to estimate changes in forest cover for 63 smallholders enrolled in Ecuador's Socio Bosque program compared to similar households that did not enroll. Focus group interviews in 15 communities provided insight into why landowners enrolled in the program and how land use is changing. The conservation incentives program reduced average annual deforestation by 0.4-0.5% between 2011 and 2013 for those enrolled, representing as much as a 70% reduction in deforestation attributable to Socio Bosque. Focus group interviews suggested that some landowners chose to 'invest' in conservation because the agricultural capacity of their land was limited and economic incentives provided an alternative livelihood strategy. Interviews, however, indicated limits to increasing enrollment rates under current conditions, due to lack of trust and liquidity constraints. Overall, a hybrid public-private governance approach can lead to larger conservation outcomes than restrictions alone. © 2016 Foundation for Environmental Conservation.
Forest Conservation Through Voluntary Carbon Offsetting Interventions			0
Forest conservation with deep learning: A deeper understanding of human geography around the betampona nature reserve, madagascar			Documenting the impacts of climate change and human activities on tropical rainforests is imperative for protecting tropical biodiversity and for better implementation of REDD+ and UN Sustainable Development Goals. Recent advances in very high-resolution satellite sensor systems (i.e., WorldView-3), computing power, and machine learning (ML) have provided improved mapping of fine-scale changes in the tropics. However, approaches so far focused on feature extraction or the extensive tuning of ML parameters, hindering the potential of ML in forest conservation mapping by not using textural information, which is found to be powerful for many applications. Additionally, the contribution of shortwave infrared (SWIR) bands in forest cover mapping is unknown. The objectives were to develop end-to-end mapping of the tropical forest using fully convolution neural networks (FCNNs) with WorldView-3 (WV-3) imagery and to evaluate human impact on the environment using the Betampona Nature Reserve (BNR) in Madagascar as the test site. FCNN (U-Net) using spatial/textural information was implemented and compared with feature-fed pixel-based methods including Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest (RF), and Deep Neural Network (DNN). Results show that the FCNN model outperformed other models with an accuracy of 90.9%, while SVM, RF, and DNN provided accuracies of 88.6%, 84.8%, and 86.6%, respectively. When SWIR bands were excluded from the input data, FCNN provided superior performance over other methods with a 1.87% decrease in accuracy, while the accuracies of other models—SVM, RF, and DNN—decreased by 5.42%, 3.18%, and 8.55%, respectively. Spatial–temporal analysis showed a 0.7% increase in Evergreen Forest within the BNR and a 32% increase in tree cover within residential areas likely due to forest regeneration and conservation efforts. Other effects of conservation efforts are also discussed. © 2021 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
FOREST CONVERSION AND PROVISION OF ECOSYSTEM SERVICES IN THE BRAZILIAN ATLANTIC FOREST			The importance of quantifying existing ecosystem services, assessing the impacts of various land use decisions and ultimately evaluating the overall costs and benefits of different land use patterns having internalized ecosystem services, is now widely recognized and such work is at the forefront of current landscape management planning. We aim to quantify ecosystem services derived from different land uses within the Atibainha Reservoir catchment in Brazil, determine the spatial distribution of ecosystem services and quantify the impacts of land use changes on the provision of ecosystem services. Four ecosystem services were considered: carbon sequestration, mitigation of sediment delivery into the reservoir, purification of water and maintenance of soil fertility. Results indicate strong increase in the provision of ecosystem services among the main land uses in the following order: urban area/bare soil; pastures; plantation of eucalyptus and native forests. The most important services provided by native forests, when compared with bare soil, were carbon sequestration and prevention of sedimentation, with an additional 864 569 tons of carbon stored in forest biomass in 30 years, and prevention of 244 5 I 1 tons of sediment delivery into the reservoir per year, respectively, from 7624 ha of lands around the reservoir. Spatial variation in the provision of ecosystem services were mapped to develop a tool to support decision making at the landscape scale. Results and maps from the decision support tool can support policies that ensure effective land-use planning and can serve as the basis for the development of payment for ecosystem service schemes in the region. Copyright (C) 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Forest conversion impacts on the fine and coarse root system, and soil organic matter in tropical lowlands of Sumatera (Indonesia)			Deforestation and land-use change are occurring on an increasing scale throughout Indonesia with profound effects on ecosystem structure and functions marked by consequences in biogeochemical cycles. This study investigates the influence of forest conversion on soil organic matter as well as the fine and coarse root system. Furthermore, the relationships between carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) stocks in the root biomass were related to the total aboveground tree biomass. Root biomass and fine root morphology were investigated in 150 cm-deep soil pits along a gradient of increasing land-use intensity, i.e. in natural forest, rubber under a natural forest cover (‘jungle rubber’), rubber and oil palm monocultures. Total root biomass generally decreased with increasing land-use intensity together with aboveground tree biomass. Subsequently, carbon and nutrient stocks in the root system were over 50% lower in the monoculture plantations compared to the natural forest. Vertical root distribution showed distinct different patterns across the land-use types with a pronounced logarithmic decrease in vertical total root abundance in the natural forest and the jungle rubber plots that was less distinctive in the plantation systems. However, fine root morphology in the jungle rubber system revealed a large specific root area and specific root tip abundance, therefore partly compensating for the reduction in the fine root system after forest conversion. Soil organic matter was particularly low in rubber plantations. In conclusion, the results of our study suggests that conversion of natural forest to agroforestry and monoculture systems has a profound belowground impact reflected in the decrease of root biomass, nutrient stocks in coarse roots, and total soil organic matter. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Forest cover change and flood hazards in India			Forests provide numerous environmental services such as watershed protection, nutrient cycling, pollution control, climatic regulation, carbon sequestration, flood mitigation, and protection from storms, landslides, and soil erosion. Degradation of forest resources is likely to cause adverse effects on the economy and environment both locally and globally. Further, it is observed that the natural forests do reduce the frequency and severity of floods as it traps water during heavy rainfall and releases the same slowly into streams reducing the run off. However, this link between forest covers and flood damages is still unclear and yet to be settled in empirical literatures. Also, the protective role of forests in Indian context has remained largely unexplored and this paper attempts to fill this research gap. The objective of this study is, therefore, to examine the impact of forest cover on the extent of flood damage in India controlling various social, economic and demographic aspects. The study uses secondary data across the Indian states for the period 1998-2011. The data were analyzed using the Poisson and ordinary least square (OLS) regression models. The findings suggest that forest cover in India has an inverse relationship with the flood damages. In addition, socio-economic factors such as literacy, per capita net state domestic product and population size have significant influence on the extent of flood damages. Hence, investments in forest protection and regeneration are necessary to restrict flood damages and protect human lives and properties.
Forest cover loss and recovery in an East African remnant forest area: Understanding its context and drivers for conservation and sustainable ecosystem service provision			Understanding of the often complex forest cover change drivers, and the perceived and observed forest cover changes substantially contributes to the sustainable management of tropical forests. This paper aims at developing an integrated view on tropical forest cover change and its drivers by combining the perception of the stakeholders (farmers, forest guards, and forest managers) and five decades forest cover mapping, based on interview and remote sensing respectively, through a case study in the central highlands of Ethiopia. Afforestation and deforestation occurred when law enforcement was stronger and weaker respectively, depending on political regimes. Since 1937 i.e., the early Imperial period, the position of the forest edge has not changed much over time, it rather became sharper. In the late Imperial era (1972-1975), the forest cover declined only by 1.6%. In the subsequent two governments, the socialist and the current federal rule (1975-2014), the forest cover increased by 17%. There was a 3.9% forest cover decline during the transition between the two governments. This pattern of overall net forest cover increase observed by remote sensing data has been correctly perceived by stakeholders. Stakeholders acknowledged the observed forest cover increase, however, they argued that the forest is declining in terms of its quality for several ecosystem services (ES). The ES decline is believed to have resulted from the gradual shift of pure dense indigenous forest to an increasing share of exotic plantations. In the three political regimes, land policy, illegal encroachments, population pressure and social unrest have been the leading drivers of forest cover change. Communities' involvement in forest management activities and sharing benefits were regarded as positive perception of forest management strategies during the federal administration (1993-2007) of the current government by farmers. Among the factors that determine forest management strategies proposed by stakeholders are gender, landholding size, education level and age. Future conservation and development interventions need to consider stakeholders' concerns. Their involvement in forest management is also necessary for improved biodiversity conservation, ecosystem service provision, and social wellbeing.
Forest cover loss in Paraguay and perception of ecosystem services: A case study of the Upper Parana Forest			The Upper Parana Atlantic Forest (BAAPA) in Paraguay is one of the most threatened tropical forests in the world. Relentless agricultural encroachment has left less than 10% of its original cover intact. Many strategies and programs have been initiated, such as Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES) schemes, to halt forest cover loss. While the approach of ecosystem services (ES) has been continuously applied by policy makers, it has not been perceived strongly by the direct users of the forest. This study provides a comprehensive understanding on how landowners in the BAAPA perceive and benefits from ES derived from the forest and examines the influence of farmers on forest conservation. The results were obtained from an extensive household survey performed in the BAAPA region. An understanding of the high ecological value of the forest is common to all farmers. A strong dependency on forest-related products was observed for small and medium landowners whereas large-scale farmers considered the forest's main value to be mostly recreational and cultural. PES appears to be well accepted by forest owners, but it must receive stronger promotion. Understanding the importance of ecosystem services is a valuable contribution toward to conserving natural resources. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Forest cover maps of China in 2010 from multiple approaches and data sources: PALSAR, Landsat, MODIS, FRA, and NFI			Forests and their changes are important to the regional and global carbon cycle, biodiversity and ecosystem services. Some uncertainty about forest cover area in China calls for an accurate and updated forest cover map. In this study, we combined ALOS PALSAR orthorectified 50-m mosaic images (FED mode with HH and HV polarization) and MODIS time series data in 2010 to map forests in China. We used MODIS-based NDVI dataset (MOD13Q1, 250-m spatial resolution) to generate a map of annual maximum NDVI and used it to mask out built-up lands, barren lands, and sparsely vegetated lands. We developed a decision tree classification algorithm to identify forest and non-forest land cover, based on the signature analysis of PALSAR backscatter coefficient data. The PALSAR-based algorithm was then applied to produce a forest cover map in China in 2010. The resulting forest/non-forest classification map has an overall accuracy of 96.2% and a Kappa Coefficient of 0.91. The resultant 50-m PALSAR-based forest cover map was compared to five forest cover databases. The total forest area (2.02 x 10(6) km(2)) in China from the PALSAR-based forest map is close to the forest area estimates from China National Forestry Inventory (1.95 x 10(6) km(2)), JAXA (2.00 x 10(6) km(2)), and FAO FRA (2.07 x 10(6) km(2)). There are good linear relationships between the PALSAR-based forest map and the forest maps from the JAXA, MCD12Q1, and NLCD-China datasets at the province and county scales. All the forest maps have similar spatial distributions of forest/non-forest at pixel scale. Our PALSAR-based forest map recognizes well the agro-forests in China. The results of this study demonstrate the potential of integrating PALSAR and MODIS images to map forests in large areas. The resultant map of forest cover in China in 2010 can be used for many studies such as forest carbon cycle and ecological restoration. (C) 2015 International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Inc. (ISPRS). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Forest degradation and recovery in a miombo woodland landscape in Zambia: 22 years of observations on permanent sample plots			Because dry tropical forests cover 40% of tropical forest area and contain considerable biomass and carbon stocks, deforestation and forest degradation of these forests have global significance. However, in most developing countries with dry forests there is no quantitative information on past trends of forest degradation so that the development of historical reference levels is virtually impossible. This study assessed impacts of forest practices on forest degradation from 1990 to 2012 using data from destructive tree sampling and permanent sample plots in a miombo woodland landscape in central Zambia. Aboveground live wood biomass was estimated using allometric equations developed from 113 felled trees. Resprouting was a major source of regeneration on clear-cut subplots and the rate of aboveground wood biomass accumulation was much higher on re-growth sites than on old-growth sites. Changes in aboveground live wood biomass on uncut subplots were linked to biomass loss due to fire, harvesting and conversion to crop cultivation on the one hand and biomass increment due to growth of remaining trees on the other hand. Forest degradation was estimated to cause aboveground wood biomass loss of 0.3tha-1year-1 on the least impacted site to 4.0tha-1year-1 on the most impacted site. Control of fire and harvesting for charcoal production is recommended if miombo woodland is to be managed for biomass and carbon storage and sequestration. The study also found that negative trends in woody biomass accumulation rate and standing stocks are good indicators of forest degradation while positive trends in species diversity indices and standing wood biomass are useful indicators of forest recovery. However, the application of these indicators requires repeated inventories at permanent sample plots to establish reference levels against which changes in these indicator variables can be compared. © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
Forest degradation promotes fire during drought in moist tropical forests of Ghana			Forest reserves in Ghana are the only significant refugia of natural tropical forests, but they are threatened by land use pressures that have led to widespread forest degradation. Additional stress from climate perturbations, such as droughts, can reduce fuel moisture and lead to fires that render the reserves more vulnerable to further degradation. Here, we explore recent drought-associated wildfires in the forest zone of Ghana to better understand the combined effects of forest degradation and drought stress on fire in the forest reserves. We used remotely sensed Earth observations from MODIS and Landsat 8 along with Climate Hazards Group Infrared Precipitation with Stations (CHIRPS) precipitation data, to study fires that occurred during drought conditions in 2016. Fires were widespread in 2016, with an estimated 2137 km                             2                              of forest reserve area burned. During the period 2003–2017, forest reserves experienced the most active fire detections in 2016. The majority of these fires were located in the moist semi-deciduous forests, the largest and most economically valuable forest type, accounting for more than 50% of all active fires and burned area. Forest reserves within the moist semi-deciduous forest type also had the highest standardized fire anomalies in 2016. There was a higher percentage of burned area in degraded forest reserves than in more intact reserves. These results underscore the vulnerability of Ghana's forest reserves, particularly in the moist semi-deciduous type, to fires during severe droughts. Although drought predisposes moist tropical forests to fire, forest degradation also influences the spatial pattern and extent of burned forests. Fire-induced forest degradation presents a major challenge for conservation of humid tropical forests in the region. Within the context of REDD+ and other climate change mitigation and adaptation programs in West Africa, it will be imperative to incorporate effective fire management strategies into ongoing efforts to reduce forest degradation and sustain forest resilience.                          © 2019 Elsevier B.V.
Forest disturbances and the attribution derived from yearly Landsat time series over 1990-2020 in the Hengduan Mountains Region of Southwest China			Background Natural forests in the Hengduan Mountains Region (HDMR) have pivotal ecological functions and provide diverse ecosystem services. Capturing long-term forest disturbance and drivers at a regional scale is crucial for sustainable forest management and biodiversity conservation. Methods We used 30-m resolution Landsat time series images and the LandTrendr algorithm on the Google Earth Engine cloud platform to map forest disturbances at an annual time scale between 1990 and 2020 and attributed causal agents of forest disturbance, including fire, logging, road construction and insects, using disturbance properties and spectral and topographic variables in the random forest model. Results The conventional and area-adjusted overall accuracies (OAs) of the forest disturbance map were 92.3% and 97.70% +/- 0.06%, respectively, and the OA of mapping disturbance agents was 85.80%. The estimated disturbed forest area totalled 3313.13 km(2) (approximately 2.31% of the total forest area in 1990) from 1990 to 2020, with considerable interannual fluctuations and significant regional differences. The predominant disturbance agent was fire, which comprised approximately 83.33% of the forest area disturbance, followed by logging (12.2%), insects (2.4%) and road construction (2.0%). Massive forest disturbances occurred mainly before 2000, and the post-2000 annual disturbance area significantly dropped by 55% compared with the pre-2000 value. Conclusions This study provided spatially explicit and retrospective information on annual forest disturbance and associated agents in the HDMR. The findings suggest that China's logging bans in natural forests combined with other forest sustainability programmes have effectively curbed forest disturbances in the HDMR, which has implications for enhancing future forest management and biodiversity conservation.
Forest Dynamics and Climate Change: A Multi-Scale Analysis of Structure, Degradation, Recovery, and Greenhouse Gas Fluxes			0
Forest ecosystem services at landscape level - Why forest transition matters?			Forests in the humid tropics contribute to a wide range of globally demanded forest ecosystem services (FES) and are also beneficial to local communities, which are often highly dependent on natural resources. Approximately one-third of these forests are threatened by resource extraction, logging, and the expanding agricultural frontier. As a result of these developments, forest landscapes are shaped by a transition gradient representing areas with a high forest cover to locations resembling agricultural-forest mosaics. These transition gradients are often char-acterized by different types of forests and successional stages. We used inventory data from 331 plots collected in 24 landscapes in Ecuador and the Philippines, representing five forest-based land-use types. We used mixed linear effect models to analyze how the landscape transition gradient and forest type affect various forest ecosystem services. Additionally, we identified stand structure and landscape transition gradients that influence changes in these FES. Results show country and forest type specific reactions for different FES. For example, aboveground carbon, non-timber forest products, biodiversity, and timber volume in natural forests are not only affected by logging but also decline along the landscape transition gradient. This includes the risk of extinction of high conservation species and long-term depletion of timber resources. We show that tree-based secondary land-use systems may partially compensate for the loss of some FES, especially timber supply, but found evidence for increased nutrient depletion in agroforestry systems. Our results highlight the importance of connected forest landscapes and structurally diverse forest stands in early transition landscapes. We suggest conservation and restoration stra-tegies sensitive to the transition context for FES and to make better use of the various benefits of tropical forests in a sustainable manner.
Forest ecosystem services derived by smallholder farmers in northwestern Madagascar: Storm hazard mitigation and participation in forest management			Tropical dry deciduous forests provide numerous ecosystem services yet their contribution to agricultural production remains underexplored. We address this research gap by quantifying the broader suite of ecosystem services that support small holder farmers and identifying farmers' knowledge of storm hazard reduction benefits provided by forest fragments in Madagascar. We survey 240 households and interview eight key informants to identify household and community responses in two communities with contrasting forest cover trajectories. Using multivariate statistics, results show a heavy dependence on forests for food and raw materials and a majority of the respondents holding a positive view of hazard mitigation services provided by forest fragments. Education levels, earning an income from forest based tourism and honey production are the only predictors of participation in forest management. Positive view of the hazard reduction benefits derived from forests could be due to external influences or personal observations, and together with barriers to participation in forest management need to be further investigated to better link forest management to reduced hazards risks. These findings are significant for forest management policy, as local knowledge and rationale for decisions are instrumental in the success of decentralized forest management and maintenance of vital forest benefits to farmers. (C) 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Forest finance, development cooperation and future options			The scale of conservation projects has dramatically increased to landscape levels. Tremendous experimentation with a number of new approaches to raise finances have resulted in the widespread emergence of markets and payment schemes for forest ecosystem services. The different types of market and payment schemes are organized into four categories: public payment schemes to private forest owners to maintain or enhance ecosystem services, open trading under a regulatory cap or floor, self-organized private deals and eco-labelling of forest or farm products. Debt-reduction measures that promote conservation and sustainable development have the potential for large conservation outcomes. The three debt-treatment mechanisms available under the Tropical Forest Conservation Act (TFCA) legislation include debt restructuring, debt buy backs and debt swaps.
Forest fragmentation affects early successional patterns on shifting cultivation fields near Indian Church, Belize			This study examines whether vegetation and soils sampled in slash-and-burn fields in an agricultural landscape near Indian Church, Belize varied as a function of cropping status (in use, 1-2 year fallow, 3-10 year fallow) and distance to older forest (adjacent to or >150 m from forest). Multi-response permutation procedures (MRPPs) indicated that species composition (woody species density, herbaceous species cover) differed significantly among all treatments (woody: P = 0.006; herbaceous: P = 0.0001) and between distance classes (woody: P = 0.03; herbaceous: P = 0.002). The frequency of herbaceous life forms also differed between distance classes (MANOVA: P = 0.04), with lianas (P = 0.03) and legumes (P = 0.008) being more common at greater distances from forest. Soil macronutrients (P, K) were significantly lower in long-term fallows than in use fields due to sequestration by the regenerating vegetation but ammonium nitrogen was significantly lower far from older forests (two-way ANOVA: P < 0.05). Despite these differences in vegetation and soil characteristics, there were no significant differences in species diversity (richness, evenness) or vegetation structure (woody density, frequency, basal area) as a function of distance to forest (two-way ANOVA: P > 0.05), most likely due to seed inputs from surrounding early successional habitats. This study indicates that changes in landscape structure may influence ecological processes such as succession in fragmented tropical landscapes and underscores the need to reject a conceptualization of the landscape matrix as a featureless, inhospitable habitat in favor of one that recognizes and incorporates the influence of matrix quality and heterogeneity. (C) 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Forest fragmentation in a forest Biosphere Reserve: Implications for the sustainability of natural habitats and forest management policy in Ethiopia			Forest fragmentation is a landscape -level process that comprises forest loss and changes in spatial patterns. Effective forest conservation programs thus require a comprehensive understanding of the relationship between forest cover and the spatial patterns of forest fragments. However, these matters remain less known for ecosystems in tropical regions. Hence, the study examines forest fragmentation of the Kaffa Biosphere Reserve in Ethiopia, which is a forested ecosystem of 744.9 thousand hectares. The study covers 33 years from 1986 to 2019 and forecasts for 2034 and 2049 using Landsat imagery. The land -use and land cover change maps were produced using a supervised classification following the maximum likelihood approach. The study quantified the spatial and temporal trends in forest loss and fragmentation using a multi -temporal satellite and FRAGSTAT raster dataset. The results display the forest areas declined from 46.9 to 30.5% from 1986 to 2019. The fragmentation caused an increase in the number of forest fragments from 4,067 to 8,832 from 1986 to 2019 but is expected to decline to nearly 2,000 in 2049 due to the complete conversion of small size forest fragments into other land use types. In addition, the size of the large core forest areas reduced from 43.7% in 1986 to 6.1% in 2019. The edge density of the forest declined from 30.5 to 27.1 m/ha from 1986 to 2019 and declined to 13 m/ha in 2049. The results confirmed natural and anthropogenic processes (e.g. agricultural and built-up area expansions and road network development) caused forest fragmentation and degradation in the Kaffa Biosphere Reserve. Therefore, the policy -makers should look at new options and revised the existed natural resource conservation strategies to safeguard the remaining natural forest covers.
Forest Islands in an Agricultural Sea			Under the current scenario of continuing human population growth, achieving high agricultural yield while conserving forest biodiversity is challenging scientists and policy makers alike. There is ongoing debate as to whether biodiversity should be integrated on the same land (land sharing) or separated from agriculture (land sparing). Here, we present examples of land-sharing practices (agroforestry systems and multipurpose forests) and demonstrate that forest biodiversity conservation does not necessarily compromise crop yield. There is no simple trade-off between biodiversity and yield, and the complexity of crop yield-biodiversity relationships has not yet been fully investigated, at either the habitat or the landscape scale. We argue that land-sparing management has to be considered at different spatial scales. Agriculture in large-scale land sparing (intensive agriculture separated from forest remnants) generally does not benefit much from ecosystem services mediated by forest biodiversity, but small forest remnants can enhance biodiversity in large agricultural and forestry plantations. Small-scale land sparing (intensive agriculture connected to forest remnants) promotes beneficial organisms and their associated ecosystem services. In such landscapes, wild beneficial organisms, e.g. a diversity of pollinators, can enhance and stabilize crop pollination in intensively managed fields due to spillover from forests into crop fields. Functional connectivity of forest remnants (single trees, treelines, hedgerows and forest patches) in high-input agricultural landscapes can enhance biodiversity and ecosystem services, but future research needs to consider connectivity at various land-sparing scales to evaluate their conservation effectiveness. Furthermore, landscape developments minimizing possible adverse consequences of forest conservation on crop production are currently often overlooked but need to be considered in future research and landscape planning. We argue that both land sharing and land sparing can promote biodiversity without compromising high yields, and that a combination of management strategies at different spatial scales, including the maintenance of forest connectivity, may most effectively safeguard both biodiversity and livelihood security.
Forest landscape dynamics after intentional large-scale fires in western Patagonia reveal unusual temperate forest recovery trends			ContextWestern Chilean Patagonia is an isolated temperate region with an important proportion of intact forest landscapes (IFL) that was subjected to large-scale fires over 60 years ago. However, there is no empirical evaluation of the land cover dynamics to establish the forest loss and recovery, and the effect on the landscape structure and function, and remnant IFL following the fires.ObjectivesThe present study addressed the following questions: (1) What have been the main trends of the land cover dynamics between 1984 and 2018 following earlier fires, and how have these trends shaped the spatial patterns and potential carbon stock of forests in western Patagonia? (2) What proportion of forest landscape remains intact following fires in this region?MethodsWe selected the Coyhaique Province (1,231,910 ha) in western Chilean Patagonia as the study area. Land cover maps for three dates (1984, 2000, 2018) were used to evaluate landscape dynamics after fires. A map of persistence and change occurrence was made to estimate the IFL area over the 1984-2018 period. Landscape metrics were used to assess landscape structure change, and potential carbon stock was estimated based on a literature review.ResultsFollowing fires, the main land cover changes between 1984 and 2018 were loss of similar to 32,600 ha of old-growth forest and a recovery of similar to 69,000 ha of second-growth forest. The increase in second-growth forest area mainly resulted from loss of agricultural cover (similar to 41% of the area). Despite these changes, similar to 61% of the area could potentially remain as IFL after fires. Over the 1984-2018 period, a slight increase in fragmentation of old-growth forest, and a decline in second-growth forest were observed. Coyhaique Province experienced a slight increase (3.6%) in overall potential carbon stock, likely as a result of second-growth forest recovery.ConclusionsOur study provides the first evidence of the western Patagonia landscape state after more than six decades since the large-scale fires. The results provide baseline information on landscape structure and function that could help to make conservation and forest management decisions on specific territory areas.
Forest Landscape Restoration and Local Stakeholders: A Global Bibliometric Mapping Analysis			Forest landscape restoration (FLR) has a central place in current global debates about the sustainability of natural resources, climate change mitigation and adaptation, livelihoods and biodiversity conservation. FLR approaches support the involvement of different social actors in participatory decision-making processes. We conducted a bibliometric analysis research to provide an overview of scientific publications in forest restoration, FLR and local stakeholders (LS) studies, and, specifically, examine if the studies (1) recognised the relevance of the local level actors and (2) collected primary and/or secondary data on LS using different methods from related publications since 2000. We used the Web of Science (WoS) and Scopus as bibliographic sources. We analysed five main research aspects: (1) publication year, (2) most productive countries according to the total number of publications, (3) most influential journals and cited papers, (4) most influential authors ranked by number of publications, their respective organisations and country collaborations, and (5) a co-occurrence analysis of countries' collaborations and keywords. We found that forest restoration, FLR and LS studies have been growing over the years, especially in the last decade. However, only 50% (99 records) of the studies recognised the relevance of the local level actors and also collected primary and/or secondary data through different methods. Authors from organisations in North and South America, and Oceania were the ones with the most publications, with only 20% (4 authors) of the top 20 authors having degrees in social sciences. Studies about "ecosystem services", "ecological restoration", "natural regeneration", "livelihoods", "Bonn challenge" and "governance" have become the main subject of research along the years within the scope of FLR at the local level. Finally, the results showed the gaps that should be considered in future research to improve the involvement and more direct participation of LS, as well as the participation of interdisciplinary and social science researchers in FLR research teams.
Forest landscape restoration: Spectral behavior and diversity of tropical tree cover classes			Forest landscape restoration (FLR) commitments have been established in the past years to restore over 200 million hectares, as part of the global Bonn Challenge goal, mostly through the implementation of several different restorative practices in degraded lands, ranging from com-mercial tree monocultures to restoration plantings. The potential of such contrasting restorative practices to support biodiversity conservation and ecosystem services provision vary over space and time, making the monitoring of FLR programs an emerging challenge. Remote sensing techniques, together with innovative technologies for data acquisition, treatment, and analysis have proven to be strategic for planning and monitoring FLR, yet there are still important un-resolved questions. Here, we evaluated the potential of multispectral orbital images of the high spatial (5 m) and spectral (12 bands) resolution VEN mu S microsatellite, joint project of the Israeli Space Agency and CNES, to classify the spectral behavior and diversity of six tree cover classes (savanna woodlands, old-and second-growth semi-deciduous forests, young restoration plant-ings, and eucalyptus and pine tree monocultures) commonly found in FLR programs in tropical regions. We assessed how these tree cover classes located in a study landscape in southeastern Brazil differ according to their spectral response (winter and summer bands, and vegetation indices), canopy variability (textural features), seasonal behavior (delta layers -difference be-tween summer and winter vegetation indexes), and spectral diversity, and used these attributes as variables to the model. We used the Random Forest algorithm to generate the models and evaluate how the tree cover classes differ in the classification and how the variables supported the model. We achieved high values of global accuracy (91.9%) and "F1 score" (above 0.8) for all tree cover classes, in which second-growth forest presented the lowest accuracy. The textural layers, delta layers, and the spectral diversity layers were the most important attributes to discriminate among tree cover classes. We demonstrate here the potential of using VEN mu S or similar sensor images together with different image processing and machine learning algorithms to monitor FLR programs, allowing further remote sensing approaches and in-deep field assessments to advance evaluation of FLR benefits for nature and people. We demonstrated how the fusion of all these types of data and innovative approaches to data processing, can result in novel ways to assess restoration performance and open new avenues to upscale monitoring, bridging the gap between FLR expectations and achieved goals.
Forest law enforcement in the Brazilian Amazon: Costs and income effects			Despite recent success in reducing forest loss in the Brazilian Amazon, additional forest conservation efforts, for example, through 'Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation' (REDD+), could significantly contribute to global climate-change mitigation. Economic incentives, such as payments for environmental services could promote conservation, but deforestation often occurs on land without crucial tenure-security prerequisites. Improving the enforcement of existing regulatory disincentives thus represents an important element of Brazil's anti-deforestation action plan. However, conservation law enforcement costs and benefits have been much less studied than for conditional payments. We develop a conceptual framework and a spatially explicit model to analyze field-based regulatory enforcement in the Brazilian Amazon. We validate our model, based on historical deforestation and enforcement mission data from 2003 to 2008. By simulating the current conservation law enforcement practice, we analyze the costs of liability establishment and legal coercion for alternative conservation targets, and evaluate corresponding income impacts. Our findings suggest that spatial patterns of both deforestation and inspection costs markedly influence enforcement patterns and their income effects. Field-based enforcement is a highly cost-effective forest conservation instrument from a regulator's point of view, but comes at high opportunity costs for land users. Payments for environmental services could compensate costs, but will increase budget outlays vis-à-vis a command-and-control dominated strategy. Both legal and institutional challenges have to be overcome to make conservation payments work at a larger scale. Decision-makers may have to innovatively combine incentive and disincentive-based policy instruments in order to make tropical forest conservation both financially viable and socially compatible. © 2014 Elsevier Ltd.
FOREST LITTER PRODUCTION VARIES WITH SEASON AND ELEVATION GRADIENT IN CHIAPAS, MEXICO †			Background. Forest litterfall is a fundamental process of ecosystem nutrient cycling, also, it is a source of energy for the development and propagation of wildfire. Understanding the temporal dynamics of litter production and storage is critical for sustainable management and conservation of forest ecosystems. Objective. To quantify the monthly production and storage of forest litter in an elevation gradient. Methodology. We selected forest sites at three elevations: 670, 775, and 1010 masl, corresponding to pine, oak, and tropical lowland forest ecosystems in Nambiyugua hill, Chiapas, Mexico. Sixteen sampling sites with a radius of 11.28 m were established for tree measurements, and 48 litter traps of 0.50 m2 were installed to collect monthly litterfall for a year. To sample ground litter eight 30 by 30 cm2 quadrats were used in each site. The fallen woody material was measured with the planar intersection method. Litter samples were oven-dried at 60 °C for 72 h and separated into leaves and other plant parts. One-way ANOVA was used to test the significant differences between forests. Results. The highest total loads of litter and fallen woody material were obtained in the pine forests of upper elevation with 29.01 t ha-1. The highest litter production was obtained in January and April, with a mean of 1.34 ± 0.19 and 0.74 ± 0.13 t ha-1 respectively in pine forests. In the oak forest, the highest production occurred in March, with 1.08 ± 0.25 t ha-1; while the lowland forest reached the highest production in January with 0.85 ± 0.26 t ha-1, with a decreasing trend in June. Implications. Understanding the seasonal variability in litter production and forest fuel loads is crucial for forest productivity, carbon sequestration, and wildfire prevention Conclusions. The production of forest fuels was different among the ecosystems representing the elevation gradients. The highest monthly production of litter was registered during the January-May period for the pine and oak ecosystems but in November - January in tropical lowland forests. Copyright © the authors.
Forest management and carbon storage: An analysis of 12 key forest nations			Forests of the world sequester and conserve more C than all other terrestrial ecosystems and account for 90% of the annual C flux between the atmosphere and the Earth's land surface. Preliminary estimates indicate that forest and agroforest management practices throughout the world can enhance the capability of forests to sequester C and reduce accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Yet of the 3600 × 106 ha of forests in the world today, only about 10% (350×106 ha) are actively managed. The impetus to expand lands managed for forestry or agroforestry purposes lies primarily with nations having forest resources. In late 1990, an assessment was initiated to evaluate the biological potential and initial site costs of managed forest and agroforest systems to sequester C. Within the assessment, 12 key forested nations were the focus of a special analysis: Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, Germany, India, Malaysia, Mexico, South Africa, former USSR, and USA. These nations contain 59% of the world's natural forests and are representative of the world's boreal, temperate, and tropical forest biomes. Assessment results indicate that though the world's forests are contained in 138 nations, a subset of key nations, such as the 12 selected for this analysis, can significantly contribute to the global capability to sequester C through managed tree crops. Collectively, the 12 nations are estimated to have the potential to store 25.7 Pg C, once expanded levels of practices such as reforestation, afforestation, natural regeneration and agroforestry are implemented and maintained. Initial site costs based upon establishment costs for management practices are less than US$33/Mg C. © 1993 Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Forest Policy Innovation at the Subnational Scale: Insights from Acre, Brazil			REDD+ is often characterised as a ‘global’ environmental framework implemented in tropical forests around the world. Yet studying actual cases of REDD+ can reveal complex interactions between scales, including under-recognised innovations at subnational and local scales. To understand these dynamics, this article brings together academics and policymakers to analyse the System of Incentives for Environmental Services (SISA)—a pioneering subnational policy in the Amazonian state of Acre, Brazil that includes a prominent jurisdictional REDD+ programme. While institutions, people, and ideas from outside of Acre contributed to its formulation, SISA is not a standardised local expression of a global policy. Rather, key aspects of it originated in ongoing and historical Acrean forest-use and governance. This analysis shows how innovative, place-based conservation policy can be influential, both within and beyond specific localities, in ways that challenge analyses of REDD+ that are primarily top-down. Our study of SISA also shows how topics of importance in contemporary REDD+ and forest conservation scholarship—efforts to make the living forest valuable, non-carbon social and environmental “co-benefits,” and landscape- and jurisdiction-wide approaches to combating deforestation—are connected to Acrean forest governance and history. Overall, this analysis elucidates the strengths and challenges of subnational forest governance and the complex inter-scalar dynamics in REDD+ and other conservation and climate policies. © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Medknow Publications. All rights reserved.
Forest protection and permanence of reduced emissions			Tropical forests are essential for climate change mitigation. With growing interest over the use of credits from reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) and other natural climate solutions within both voluntary and compliance carbon markets, key concerns about the long-term durability of the reductions, or their permanence, arise for countries, corporations, regulators, and policy makers. This paper seeks to analyze the longevity of emissions reductions from different policies to slow down and stop deforestation. To establish conditions of permanence, we conduct numerical analyses using a model based on a cellular automata algorithm that learns from historical deforestation patterns and other spatial features in the Brazilian state of Mato Grosso. First, we simulate increased law enforcement to curb deforestation at a jurisdictional scale from 2025 to 2034, followed by potential policy rollbacks from 2035 to 2050. Second, we consider alternative scenarios to avoid potentially legal deforestation coupled with reforestation. We find spatial and path dependence – a successful policy intervention may permanently change the deforestation trajectory even after potential policy reversals. Hence, permanence depends both on the probability of policy reversals and the risk of emissions overshooting. Our results are important for advancing the understanding around the unsettled debate on the permanence of avoided emissions. Further, this paper argues that as policies to prevent deforestation or reduce emissions otherwise are reversible, permanence should be understood and discussed in a probabilistic and time-dependent framework. Copyright © 2022 McCallister, Krasovskiy, Platov, Pietracci, Golub, Lubowski and Leslie.
Forest regeneration can positively contribute to local hydrological ecosystem services: Implications for forest landscape restoration			Governments are increasingly committing to significant forest restoration. While carbon sequestration is a major objective, the case for restoration often includes benefits to local communities. However, the impacts of forest restoration on local hydrological services (e.g. flood and erosion risk, stream flow during dry periods) are surprisingly poorly understood. Particularly limited information is available on the impacts of passive tropical forest restoration following shifting cultivation.The outcome depends on the trade-off between the improved soil infiltration capacity (reducing overland flow and increasing soil and groundwater recharge) and greater evapotranspiration (diminishing local water availability).Using measurements from highly instrumented plots under three vegetation types in the shifting cultivation cycle in Madagascar's eastern rainforests (forest, tree fallow and degraded abandoned agricultural land), and infiltration measurements for the same vegetation types across the landscape, we explore the impacts of forest regeneration on the ecohydrological processes that underpin locally important ecosystem services.Overland flow was minimal for the tree fallow (similar to the forest) and much lower than for the degraded land, likely leading to a lower risk of erosion and flooding compared to the degraded land. Conversely, evapotranspiration losses were lower for the tree fallow than the forest, leading to a higher net recharge, likely resulting in more streamflow between rainfall events.These results demonstrate that young regenerating tropical forest vegetation can positively contribute to locally important hydrological ecosystem services. Allowing tree fallows to recover further is unlikely to further reduce the risk of overland flow but may, at least temporarily, result in less streamflow.Synthesis and applications. Encouraging natural regeneration is increasingly seen as a cost-effective way to deliver forest landscape restoration. Our data suggest that increasing the abundance of young secondary forest in the tropics, by increasing fallow lengths in the shifting cultivation cycle, could make a positive contribution to locally important hydrological ecosystem services (specifically reducing overland flow and therefore erosion and flooding, while maintaining streamflows). Such empirical understanding is needed to inform the models used for planning forest landscape restoration to maximize benefits to local communities.
Forest regeneration on abandoned clearances in central Amazonia			A time-series of Landsat and SPOT sensor data was used to approximate the age of tropical forests regenerating on abandoned agricultural land north of Manaus, Brazil, and to estimate the period of active land use prior to abandonment. Based on field data, two distinct regeneration pathways, dominated by the pioneer genera Cecropia and Vismia, respectively, were described, with the former regenerating on the least intensively used sites. Forests of mixed species composition and lacking numerical dominance by pioneer species were also observed. Transformed Divergence Analysis of Landsat Thematic Mapper (TM) radiance data revealed that forests of varying age and following different regeneration pathways were best discriminated using mid infrared (1.55-1.74 mum) wavelengths. As rates of carbon sequestration by forests vary with age and regeneration pathway, the potential exists for refining spatial estimates of the carbon balance of tropical forests regenerating on abandoned agricultural lands.
Forest rehabilitation after disturbance			0
Forest resilience and tipping points at different spatio-temporal scales: approaches and challenges			1. Anthropogenic global change compromises forest resilience, with profound impacts to ecosystem functions and services. This synthesis paper reflects on the current understanding of forest resilience and potential tipping points under environmental change and explores challenges to assessing responses using experiments, observations and models.2. Forests are changing over a wide range of spatio-temporal scales, but it is often unclear whether these changes reduce resilience or represent a tipping point. Tipping points may arise from interactions across scales, as processes such as climate change, land-use change, invasive species or deforestation gradually erode resilience and increase vulnerability to extreme events. Studies covering interactions across different spatio-temporal scales are needed to further our understanding.3. Combinations of experiments, observations and process-based models could improve our ability to project forest resilience and tipping points under global change. We discuss uncertainties in changing CO2 concentration and quantifying tree mortality as examples.4. Synthesis. As forests change at various scales, it is increasingly important to understand whether and how such changes lead to reduced resilience and potential tipping points. Understanding the mechanisms underlying forest resilience and tipping points would help in assessing risks to ecosystems and presents opportunities for ecosystem restoration and sustainable forest management.
Forest Resource Use and Management in Nigeria: Implications for Implementation of REDD+ for Climate Change Mitigation in West Africa			Forest resources have continued to play a significant role in the livelihood system of rural communities and the ongoing fight against climate change. Consequently, several efforts have been made to preserve forest resources and strengthen sustainable forest resource management. One of such efforts is the REDD+ program – an incentive-based and demand-driven approach to promote forest protection and enhancement of standing forest stocks in developing countries. This chapter examines how Nigeria’s forest governance and land-use system, forest resource use, and forest management practices can affect the successful implementation of the REDD+ program. Drawing from an empirical survey of four hundred and fifty rural households across different ecological zones in Nigeria, the chapter identified the level of dependence of rural households on forest resources for livelihood sustenance, different governance practices such as property rights and access, and management practices such as shifting cultivation and discussed the implications of these for REDD+ implementation. The chapter also examined the potentialities of the REDD+ program to guarantee the protection of the rights of forest dwellers. It questions whether REDD+ is serving the interest of the developed or developing countries, the rich or the poor. It is argued that successful implementation of the REDD+ program in rural West Africa will depend on its ability to support the livelihoods, indigenous rights, and preservation of cultural/religious values of the forest target communities. Without such considerations, such a scheme will not promote substantial forest management and improved carbon storage in tropical ecosystems. Furthermore, agroforestry, due to its widespread practice as a climate change adaptation option, was recommended as a compromise between forest livelihood objectives and forest conservation objectives. © Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021. All rights are reserved.
Forest restoration enhances plant diversity and carbon stock in the sub-tropical forests of western Himalaya			In the present study we compared the community composition, structure, regeneration status and carbon stock of a human managed arboretum (restoration site) during three decades with a natural forest in western Himalaya. Results reveal that ecological restoration activities in the arboretum enhanced the species richness of woody plants by 66.4% with a total of 125 species as compared to 42 species in natural forest. Similarly, above ground carbon stock in the arboretum was similar to 38% higher (49.5 Mg/ha) as compared to the natural forest (30.8 Mg/ha). Plantation success in the arboretum was similar to 52% with a higher survival rate for temperate and Himalayan native species. Tree density in the arboretum was 322.6/ha with 50% higher density of small girth trees (<50 cm gbh) as compared to the natural forest with a tree density of 184/ha. Similarly, basal area was 41.5% higher in the arboretum (23.8 m(2)/ha) as compared to the natural forest (13.9 m(2)/ha). In case of the ground vegetation layer, shrubs, saplings and seedlings show a density of 23.5, 12.2 and 7.6 individuals/25 m(2) in the arboretum as compared to 10.1, 3.0 and 4.1 individuals/25 m(2) in the natural forest. Hence, our results indicate that the ecological restoration in the sub-tropical forests of the western Himalaya contribute 1.36% annual increment of above ground carbon stock in addition to improvement of the community composition, structure and regeneration in the forest. Therefore, similar institutional restoration projects have ample potential for reducing carbon emissions to mitigate the climate change impact. Such projects will aid in the implementation of the national commitment for REDD+ goals in addition to biodiversity conservation in the Himalaya.
Forest Structure, Composition and Above Ground Biomass of Tree Community in Tropical Dry Forests of Eastern Ghats, India			The study of biomass, structure and composition of tropical forests implies also the investigation of forest productivity, protection of biodiversity and removal of CO2 from the atmosphere via C-stocks. The hereby study aimed at understanding the forest structure, composition and above ground biomass (AGB) of tropical dry deciduous forests of Eastern Ghats, India, where as a total of 128 sample plots (20 x 20 meters) were laid. The study showed the presence of 71 tree species belonging to 57 genera and 30 families. Dominant tree species was Shorea robusta with an importance value index (IVI) of 40.72, while Combretaceae had the highest family importance value (FIV) of 39.01. Mean stand density was 479 trees ha-1 and a basal area of 15.20 m2ha-1. Shannon’s diversity index was 2.01 ± 0.22 and Simpson’s index was 0.85 ± 0.03. About 54% individuals were in the size between 10 and 20 cm DBH, indicating growing forests. Mean above ground biomass value was 98.87 ± 68.8 Mg ha-1. Some of the dominant species that contributed to above ground biomass were Shorea robusta (17.2%), Madhuca indica (7.9%), Mangifera indica (6.9%), Terminalia alata (6.9%) and Diospyros melanoxylon (4.4%), warranting extra efforts for their conservation. The results suggested that C-stocks of tropical dry forests can be enhanced by in-situ conserving the high C-density species and also by selecting these species for afforestation and stand improvement programs. Correlations were computed to understand the relationship between above ground biomass, diversity indices, density and basal area, which may be helpful for implementation of REDD+ (reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, and foster conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks) scheme. © 2016. All Rights Reserved.
Forest Structure, Wood Standing Stock, and Tree Biomass in Different Restoration Systems in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest			Reliable estimates of tree growth and wood yield are fundamental to support the management of restored forests and better reconcile the objectives of recovering biodiversity with the provision of ecosystem services. In this study, wood standing volumes and tree biomass stocks were estimated in different ecological restoration systems and at two sites with contrasting soil fertility, in order to evaluate the potential trade-offs between biodiversity and forest production. At each site, a complete randomized block design, with three replications of six treatments, was established in 1997-1998: direct seeding (DIRS), high-diversity tree plantation (HDIV), modified "Taungya" agroforestry system (AFS), mixed plantation with timber and firewood species (MIX), managed agroforestry system (AFSm) and managed mixed plantation (MIXm). We inventoried all trees with diameter at breast height (DBH) >= 5 cm in 450 m(2) per treatment per plot, 19-20 years after establishment, using site-specific allometric models. Significant site effects were found for tree height, tree density and wood volume. Restoration systems (treatments) affected forest structure and forest productivity. Higher wood stock and biomass tree were observed in the less complex system (DIRS), while AFSm and HDIV reconciled higher species richness and diversity with good wood volume yields and tree biomass.
Forest, wetland and biodiversity: Revealing multi-faceted ecological services from ecorestoration of a degraded tropical landscape			With the deterioration of tropical forests, the loss of species, their habitat and linked socio-ecological degradation is regrettably becoming widespread. Although having their own contribution to sustainable development separately, the linkages between wetlands and forests exemplify the importance of managing ecosystems in their entirety to protect their ecological character and related ecosystem services (ES) that are vital to human activity. To explore the role of ecorestoration efforts within forest-wetland ecosystem in conserving biodiversity and maintaining the sustained flow of ES, the multi-decadal recovery of a degraded landscape of Gurguripal forest, West Bengal, India, was tracked with the help of geospatial technology and field surveys of biodiversity and socio-ecological bonds. To evidence the noticeable recovery of the study site over 25 years remote sensing (RS) techniques were used to track forest type and land use land cover (LULC) changes over time, together with an ecological monitoring at site of the sal dominated tropical deciduous forest and the created wetland ecosystems using ground truth data on vegetation, floral and faunal diversity, physicochemical parameters of water and soil, etc. and socio-ecological survey do depict existing ecosystem services (ES) of these ecosystems. The study confirms positive effects of watershed management initiated by the Forest Department, Government of West Bengal, involving local people ultimately causing reduction in the proportion of degraded land and an increase in green coverage that has been strikingly manifested through retaining surface water. In spite of the lower incidence of terrestrial fauna inside the core of secondary forest with respect to fringe areas, the wetlands, so formed, not only serve as vital perennial water sources in this drought-prone lateritic tract and enrich aquatic biodiversity, but also multifariously multiply the value of ES in this otherwise degrading piece of land. (C) 2018 European Regional Centre for Ecohydrology of the Polish Academy of Sciences. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Forestry for rural development, poverty reduction and climate change mitigation: we can help more with wood			Forests are a renewable resource and wood is a valuable and sustainably useable product that contributes to national economies. This value from the forests can be realised in harmony with the functions of forests in the global carbon cycle and as long-term carbon repositories as well as providing other environmental values. This important understanding is missed or ignored in many global forestry forums. After more than two decades of so-called 'pro-poor' forestry policies backed by large amounts of research preferentially targeted to advance non-timber forest products and payment for ecosystem services including Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation, it is difficult to find evidence to back any contention that in any tropical region they have advanced the economic status of forest-dependent or rural communities enabling them to come out of poverty in an enduring way. It is argued here that the sustainable management of native and planted forests, including wood production and processing in rural regions, and greater use of wood products by all of us, can play a much greater role than has been recognised so far for dealing with two major interrelated global challenges. These are poverty reduction in rural forest landscapes, notably in the subtropics and tropics, and to make modest contributions to climate change mitigation globally, especially by recognising the roles of both forests and wood products in the carbon cycle. It is time for a revised narration in the global agenda to raise the potential role of forests as a sustainably manageable resource, free from overzealous calls for forest conservation, but with a more balanced and holistic recognition of the contributions that forests, forestry and the wood-products sector can make to economic and social development. This should be brought effectively into the deliberations of the forthcoming UN Sustainable Development Goals. This would require efforts by the UN and other bodies to bring the private and public sectors into symbiotic partnerships, not as opposing forces as has often been the case.
Forests and climate change: Forcings, feedbacks, and the climate benefits of forests			The world's forests influence climate through physical, chemical, and biological processes that affect planetary energetics, the hydrologic cycle, and atmospheric composition. These complex and nonlinear forest-atmosphere interactions can dampen or amplify anthropogenic climate change. Tropical, temperate, and boreal reforestation and afforestation attenuate global warming through carbon sequestration. Biogeophysical feedbacks can enhance or diminish this negative climate forcing. Tropical forests mitigate warming through evaporative cooling, but the low albedo of boreal forests is a positive climate forcing. The evaporative effect of temperate forests is unclear. The net climate forcing from these and other processes is not known. Forests are under tremendous pressure from global change. Interdisciplinary science that integrates knowledge of the many interacting climate services of forests with the impacts of global change is necessary to identify and understand as yet unexplored feedbacks in the Earth system and the potential of forests to mitigate climate change.
Forests and trees for social adaptation to climate variability and change			Ecosystems provide important services that can help people adapt to climate variability and change. Recognizing this role of ecosystems, several international and nongovernmental organizations have promoted an ecosystem-based approach to adaptation. We review the scientific literature related to ecosystem-based adaptation (EBA) with forests and trees, and highlight five cases in which forests and trees can support adaptation: (1) forests and trees providing goods to local communities facing climatic threats; (2) trees in agricultural fields regulating water, soil, and microclimate for more resilient production; (3) forested watersheds regulating water and protecting soils for reduced climate impacts; (4) forests protecting coastal areas from climate-related threats; and (5) urban forests and trees regulating temperature and water for resilient cities. The literature provides evidence that EBA with forests and trees can reduce social vulnerability to climate hazards; however, uncertainties and knowledge gaps remain, particularly for regulating services in watersheds and coastal areas. Few studies have been undertaken on EBA specifically, but the abundant literature on ecosystem services can be used to fill knowledge gaps. Many studies assess the multiple benefits of ecosystems for human adaptation or well-being, but also recognize trade-offs between ecosystem services. Better understanding is needed of the efficiency, costs, and benefits, and trade-offs of EBA with forests and trees. Pilot projects under implementation could serve as learning sites and existing information could be systematized and revisited with a climate change adaptation lens. WIREs Clim Change 2012, 3:581596. doi: 10.1002/wcc.195 For further resources related to this article, please visit the WIREs website.
Forests and water-Ensuring forest benefits outweigh water costs			Throughout the world forestry programmes are often promoted for their environmental, biodiversity, carbon sequestration, bio-fuel, timber production, amenity and social benefits. Not always are the water resource costs taken into account. This paper discusses the need for an improved forest impact assessment framework to assist policymakers and planners in making evidence-based decisions on forest and land use policy. Although forest hydrology has made major advances in recent years science findings have not always reached the policy domain. Examples of the need for the improved connection of science and policy are given for China, India, Panama, UK and Japan. New tools and approaches are suggested for helping to bridge the research to policy gap and to ensure that forest programmes are set in the context of lone-term sustainable land and water management. The paper echoes the call by the International Union of Forest Research Organisations for a task force on forest and water interactions to address these issues. (C) 2007 Published by Elsevier B.V.
Forests as Capital: Financial Mechanisms for Tropical Forest Conservation			Tropical forest loss and degradation due to human activities have been persistent and intractable global problems. Model estimates suggest that current levels of finance for conservation and sustainable forest management (SFM) are insufficient and may need to increase by an order of magnitude in order to meet this challenge. This special issue presents select articles from the 2014 Yale International Society of Tropical Foresters (ISTF) Annual Conference, which explored diverse finance mechanisms such as REDD+, sustainability certification, ecological compensation, community forestry, and official development assistance. Each finance mechanism has advantages and disadvantages, which render them effective under specific circumstances. Comprehensive tropical forest conservation will require a diverse portfolio of finance strategies appropriate for local institutional and ecological conditions. Hybrid strategies combining elements of multiple schemes could bolster conservation and SFM efforts by leveraging their respective strengths. Clear and realistic targets and baselines, robust monitoring and measurement-reporting-verification, strong governance and institutions, and periodic evaluation can contribute to the successful application of forest conservation finance. Due to the potentially high damages, especially to the world’s poorest communities from continuing current deforestation trends, substantially greater financing of tropical conservation and SFM is a sound global investment. Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
Forests as landscapes of social inequality: tropical forest cover and land distribution among shifting cultivators			Can social inequality be seen imprinted in a forest landscape? We studied the relationship between land holding, land use, and inequality in a peasant community in the Peruvian Amazon where farmers practice swidden-fallow cultivation. Longitudinal data on land holding, land use, and land cover were gathered through field-level surveys ( n = 316) and household interviews ( n = 51) in 1994/1995 and 2007. Forest cover change between 1965 and 2007 was documented through interpretation of air photos and satellite imagery. We introduce the concept of "land use inequality" to capture differences across households in the distribution of forest fallowing and orchard raising as key land uses that affect household welfare and the sustainability of swidden-fallow agriculture. We find that land holding, land use, and forest cover distribution are correlated and that the forest today reflects social inequality a decade prior. Although initially land-poor households may catch up in terms of land holdings, their use and land cover remain impoverished. Differential land use investment through time links social inequality and forest cover. Implications are discussed for the study of forests as landscapes of inequality, the relationship between social inequality and forest composition, and the forest-poverty nexus.
Forests as pathways to prosperity: Empirical insights and conceptual advances			The role of forests in supporting current consumption and helping people cope with seasonal, climatic, and other stressors is increasingly well understood. But can forests help rural households climb out of poverty? And can forests provide a pathway to prosperity that includes more widely shared economic benefits and improvements in other aspects of human well-being? This introduction to the Special Issue on "Forests as Pathways to Prosperity" reviews the literature on forest livelihoods in developing countries to synthesize evidence relating to these questions. We find that available research primarily examines poverty mitigation aspects of forests rather than the potential role of forest conservation, management, and use in alleviating poverty or promoting broader prosperity. To increase understanding of forest-livelihood relationships we propose a framework based on the concept of prosperity, which draws particular attention to human well-being beyond economic and material dimensions. We argue that explicitly taking a more expansive view can enable better accounting for the diverse ways forests contribute to human welfare, expand the constituency for forests, and inform policies to more sustainably manage forests within wider landscapes. Together, our review and the other articles in this volume advance these objectives by providing new analytical frameworks, empirical insights, and theoretical understanding to build knowledge on linkages between forests, poverty, and broader prosperity. (C) 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Forests in climate policy: technical, institutional and economic issues in measurement and monitoring			Despite the economic and environmental significance of the world's forests, we have limited data about them. Estimates of deforestation in tropical countries and rates of reforestation or afforestation in boreal and temperate countries are inconsistent. Accordingly, estimates of emissions released in deforestation vary widely and range from 7% to 17% of all sources of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The lack of good data severely hampers efforts to shape climate policy because it is difficult to model the role of forests both in the physical global carbon (C) cycle and in cost-effective regimes to abate GHG. Data limits strain the capacity of even the best models to estimate marginal cost functions for forest carbon (C) sequestration. It is technically possible to obtain better information, but for institutional and economic reasons these technologies have not yet been fully deployed. The emergence of carbon (C) trading or tax policy in which forest carbon (C) storage becomes valued would strengthen incentives to supply better data, as would nonmarket regulation if it elicited a shadow value of forest carbon (C) in substituting for reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. "Geo-wiki" may provide a short-term solution to at least part of the data problem. The ultimate solution is the development of a comprehensive forest monitoring system involving remote sensing and on-the-ground truthing. This paper briefly discusses the role of forests in climate policy and then describes data gaps, the capability of technology to fill them, the limits of institutions and budgets in realizing this capability, and possible near-term solutions.
Forests, carbon and global climate			This review places into context the role that forest ecosystems play in the global carbon cycle, and their potential interactions with climate change. We first examine the natural, preindustrial carbon cycle. Every year forest gross photosynthesis cycles approximately one-twelfth of the atmospheric stock of carbon dioxide, accounting for 50% of terrestrial photosynthesis. This cycling has remained almost constant since the end of the last ice age, but since the Industrial Revolution it has undergone substantial disruption as a result of the injection of 480 PgC into the atmosphere through fossil-fuel combustion and land-use change, including forest clearance. In the second part of this paper we review this 'carbon disruption', and its impact on the oceans, atmosphere and biosphere. Tropical deforestation is resulting in a release of 1.7 PgC yr(-1) into the atmosphere. However, there is also strong evidence for a 'sink' for carbon in natural vegetation (carbon absorption), which can be explained partly by the regrowth of forests on abandoned lands, and partly by a global change factor, the most likely cause being 'fertilization' resulting from the increase in atmospheric CO2. In the 1990s this biosphere sink was estimated to be sequestering 3.2 PgC yr(-1) and is likely to have substantial effects on the dynamics, structure and biodiversity of all forests. Finally, we examine the potential for forest protection and afforestation to mitigate climate change. An extensive global carbon sequestration programme has the potential to make a particularly significant contribution to controlling the rise in CO2 emissions in the next few decades. In the course of the whole century, however, even the maximum amount of carbon that could be sequestered will be dwarfed by the magnitude of (projected) fossil-fuel emissions. Forest carbon sequestration should only be viewed as a component of a mitigation strategy, not as a substitute for the changes in energy supply, use and technology that will be required if atmospheric CO2 concentrations are to be stabilized.
Fostering a participatory process for ecological restoration of mangroves in Pantanos de Centla Biosphere Reserve (Tabasco, Mexico)			Ecosystem restoration is becoming an urgent global priority to recover degraded areas, especially in tropical regions. Social participation is fundamental for the success of restoration processes, but it needs to be better documented. This article describes a participatory mangrove restoration process developed with two local communities inhabiting Pantanos de Centla Biosphere Reserve (PCBR) in Tabasco, Mexico. Both communities, El Palmar and Tembladeras, rely on numerous ecosystem services provided by mangroves, and the premise of the project was to closely involve them in all phases of the restoration process. During the planning phase, dialogue with PCBR authorities and the participating communities allowed us to: (1) assess local needs and interests to determine the project's viability; (2) perform social and ecological diagnostics; and (3) make decisions regarding restoration actions. With technical accompaniment, community members themselves executed restoration actions during the implementation phase. In El Palmar, people reforested an area equivalent to 160 ha with 17,038 propagules of Rhizophora mangle. In Tembladeras, they manually cleaned 4,942 m of natural channels to reestablish water flow dynamics across 34.7 ha. These activities were done in parallel with four training workshops for community members focusing on ecosystem services, ecological restoration processes, and monitoring techniques. With guidance from the project team, community members conducted initial monitoring of restoration actions four months after implementation. The local communities' participation in all stages was fundamental to promoting an integral and sustainable restoration process of the socio-ecosystem and fostering greater awareness of the full range of services mangroves provide.
Fostering climate change mitigation through a community-based approach: Carbon stock potential of community-managed mangroves in the Philippines			The importance of mangroves has been well documented in the literature. Of recent interest is the capacity of mangroves to trap atmospheric carbon into their biomass and help mitigate the detrimental impacts of climate change such as tidal surges, sea level rise, coastal erosion, and saltwater intrusion. Mangroves are indeed a unique and productive ecosystem that thrives in the nexus of land and sea. Notwithstanding the small space they occupy, they remain a vital carbon sink because they can accumulate more organic material than other tropical forest types. To ensure the delivery of this important ecosystem service, coastal communities that dwell in proximity to mangroves have significant roles to play. In the Philippines, local communities are lauded stewards of mangrove rehabilitation and protection. This chapter therefore aims to showcase some success stories of community-based mangrove management vis-à-vis their potential impacts on carbon stock production. It also highlights current issues and challenges for advancing climate change mitigation through community-based mangrove management. The chapter recommends how such an ecosystem service can be further harnessed to create more benefits that will sustain local commitments on mangrove conservation. © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Fostering natural forest regeneration on former agricultural land through economic and policy interventions			Under suitable conditions, deforested land used for agricultural crops or pastures can revert to forest through the assisted or unassisted process of natural regeneration. These naturally regenerating forests conserve biodiversity, provide a wide array of ecosystem goods and services, and support rural economies and livelihoods. Based on studies in tropical and temperate forest ecosystems, we summarize cases where natural regeneration is occurring in agricultural landscapes around the world and identify the socio-ecological factors that favor its development and affect its qualities, outcomes and persistence. We describe how the economic and policy context creates barriers for the development, persistence, and management of naturally regenerating forests, including perverse outcomes of policies intended to enhance protection of native forests. We conclude with recommendations for specific economic and policy interventions at local, national, and global scales to enhance forest natural regeneration and to promote the sustainable management of regrowth forests on former agricultural land while strengthening rural communities and economies.
Fragmentation increases wind disturbance impacts on forest structure and carbon stocks in a western Amazonian landscape			Tropical second-growth forests could help mitigate climate change, but the degree to which their carbon potential is achieved will depend on exposure to disturbance. Wind disturbance is common in tropical forests, shaping structure, composition, and function, and influencing successional trajectories. However, little is known about the impacts of extreme winds on second-growth forests in fragmented landscapes, though these ecosystems are often located in mosaics of forest, pasture, cropland, and other land cover types. Indirect evidence suggests that fragmentation increases risk of wind damage in tropical forests, but no studies have found such impacts following severe storms. In this study, we ask whether fragmentation and forest type (old vs. second growth) were associated with variation in wind damage after a severe convective storm in a fragmented production landscape in western Amazonia. We applied linear spectral unmixing to Landsat 8 imagery from before and after the storm, and combined it with field observations of damage to map wind effects on forest structure and biomass. We also used Landsat 8 imagery to map land cover with the goals of identifying old-and second-growth forest and characterizing fragmentation. We used these data to assess variation in wind disturbance across 95,596 ha of forest, distributed over 6,110 patches. We find that fragmentation is significantly associated with wind damage, with damage severity higher at forest edges and in edgier, more isolated patches. Damage was also more severe in old-growth than in second-growth forests, but this effect was weaker than that of fragmentation. These results illustrate the importance of considering landscape context in planning tropical forest restoration and natural regeneration projects. Assessments of long-term carbon sequestration potential need to consider spatial variation in disturbance exposure. Where risk of extreme winds is high, minimizing fragmentation and isolation could increase carbon sequestration potential.
Fragmentation is the main driver of residual forest aboveground biomass in West African low forest-high deforestation landscapes			Tropical forests play a crucial role in climate regulation due to their high carbon sequestration capacity. However, degradation and disturbances in these forests may result in significant carbon losses. This study focuses on the impact of various biophysical, anthropogenic, and landscape factors on aboveground biomass (AGB) in heavily disturbed landscapes of Cote d'Ivoire (West Africa), a typical low-forest and high-deforestation country. AGB estimates from a National Forest Inventory dataset have been linked to five categories of variables (Climate, Soil, Topography, Landscape, and Human-related) through a random forest modeling approach that addressed collinearity among variables, selected key variables from each category, and used spatial cross-validation to evaluate model performance. The comprehensive model, combining landscape composition, physical soil properties, and climate variables, demonstrated strong performance with an R-squared of 0.62. Notably, the percentage of landscape occupied by forest within a radius of 1000 m (PLAND1000) had a highly significant impact on AGB, exhibiting a notable increase when PLAND1000 exceeded 80 % and a decrease when it felt below 25 %. Soil properties, both physical (Bulk Density and Coarse Fraction) and chemical (soil pH), significantly influenced AGB, too. Interestingly, climatic, topographic, and other anthropogenic variables had minimal relevance in predicting AGB, suggesting that their effects may have been captured by landscape and soil integrative variables. In order to enhance forest preservation and restoration initiatives in the face of deforestation and fragmentation challenges in the West African region, we recommend (i) evaluating the appropriate landscape scale of effect (a 1000 m radius circle being the most significant in this study); (ii) prioritizing the preservation or restoration of dense forest landscapes; and (iii) integrating landscape composition into forest management policies.
From natural forest to coffee agroforest: implications for communities of large mammals in the Ethiopian highlands			In tropical regions the extent of agricultural land is increasing rapidly at the expense of natural forest, with associated losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services. Agroforestry has long been proposed as a more sustainable agricultural system, conserving biodiversity while providing significant local livelihoods. In this context, camera traps were deployed to compare communities of large mammals between natural forest (22,272 hours across 24 deployments) and extensively managed coffee forest (19,059 hours, 23 deployments) for the first time in the south-west Ethiopian highlands. Mammal communities in the two forest types were similar in species richness and Shannon diversity but differed in community composition. Significant indicator species of coffee forest were the crested porcupineHystrix cristataand the Ethiopian hareLepus fagani, whereas leopardsPanthera pardusand civetsCivettictis civettahad a preference for natural forest. The number of detections of mammals was higher in coffee forest, where activity patterns were predominantly crepuscular and nocturnal, which may be a direct adaptation to frequent human disturbance. In natural forest, mammal activity peaked during daytime. Despite the high mammal diversity in extensively managed coffee forest, it cannot fully replace natural forest as a habitat for large mammals. We suggest that a balanced landscape mosaic of coffee and natural forest may be a valuable combination for both conservation and coffee cultivation.
From Past to Present : Impacts of Fire on Amazonian Forests			0
From Tree Species to Forest Services: Ethnic Differences in Lomami, Democratic Republic of the Congo			From tree species to forest services: ethnic differences in Lomami, Democratic Republic of the Congo. Ethnicity is well-known to affect plant species' utilization, but how ethnicity affects the identification and importance ranking of forest ecosystem services has been less documented, particularly in the Congo Basin. This research investigates how six different ethnic groups (farmers of Bantu origin and Mbote hunter-gatherers) use and value tree species and forest ecosystem services in Lomami National Park, in central Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). Data were collected through 24 focus-group discussions with village elders, four for each ethnic group studied. Considerable variation in preferred tree species was observed: of the 89 morphospecies cited in total only two were cited by all ethnic groups for the same usage. Ethnicity also affected the identification and importance ranking of forest ecosystem services. Mbote hunters-gatherers prioritized bushmeat, honey, and identity, while farmer groups prioritized bushmeat, fish, and microclimate regulation. We discuss the implications of the findings for forest management in the Buffer Zone of the national park.
Frugivores enhance potential carbon recovery in fragmented landscapes			Forest restoration is fundamental to overcoming biodiversity crises and climate change. In tropical forests, animals can improve forest recovery as they disperse >70% of tree species. However, representing animals in restoration and climate change policies remains challenging because a quantitative assessment of their contribution to forest and carbon recovery is lacking. Here we used individual-based models to assess frugivore-mediated seed rain in open areas along a fragmentation gradient. Movements of large birds were limited in landscapes with <40% forest cover, although small birds continued to disperse seeds. Large birds disperse seeds of late-successional species with higher carbon storage potential. Their restricted movement therefore reduced potential biomass in future forests by 38%. Maintaining forest cover >40% is essential to optimizing animals' contribution to restoration success. Active restoration (for example, planting trees) is required in more fragmented landscapes to achieve carbon and biodiversity targets.
Fruit-feeding Butterfly Communities are Influenced by Restoration Age in Tropical Forests			Currently, a large-scale restoration project aims to restore around 15 million hectares of Atlantic Forest in Brazil. This will increase forest cover and connectivity among remnant sites as well as restore environmental services. Currently, studies on recovery of fauna in restored areas of the Atlantic Forest are practically nonexistent. To address this knowledge vacuum, our study compares diversity patterns of fruit-feeding butterflies in three forest areas with different restoration ages (11, 22, and 54 years), and uses a native forest area as reference. Results showed butterfly communities in maturing restored areas becoming more similar to the ones found in the native forest, with an increase in the proportional abundance of forest species, and a decrease of edge and grassland species. Moreover, we found a higher diversity among sites at the intermediate restoration age, with a community composed of both grassland and forest species. Butterfly species composition differed significantly among sites, showing interesting patterns of potential species replacement over time. Our results indicate that, although restored sites were located in a fragmented landscape, they provide suitable habitats for recolonization by fruit-feeding butterfly assemblages. Hence, restored areas can be considered important habitat for forest animal species, increasing local biodiversity and, possibly, restoring some of the ecosystem services provided by them.
Functional diversity and redundancy of amphibians, ants, and dung beetles in passive and active cloud forest restoration			Forest restoration practices have increased globally, with positive consequences for biodiversity conservation. However, our understanding of the variation in ecosystem functioning recovery presented among different restoration strategies remains limited, and few studies have compared the functional diversity of contrasting faunal assemblages. Here, we assessed how the functional diversities and functional redundancies of amphibian, ant, and dung beetle assemblages vary among forests of the same age (23 years) under active (native mixed plantations) and passive (natural regeneration) restoration, cattle pasture (degraded ecosystem), and mature cloud forest (reference ecosystem). We also explored how environmental variables relate to the functional diversity of each animal assemblage. We found that functional diversity (measured as functional richness, functional evenness, and functional divergence) and functional redundancy in the three faunal assemblages were similar between the two restoration strategies. However, some attributes of functional diversity did not reach the values of the reference ecosystem, especially in the amphibians and dung beetles. Environmental variables related to functional diversity also depended on the taxonomic group and the metric of functional diversity, but the most important of these variables were vegetation condition, canopy cover and tree density. In our study system, passive and active restoration produced similar recovery rates of functional diversity of the faunal assemblages. Regardless of the restoration strategy implemented, long-term adaptive management strategies must be implemented to ensure full recovery of biodiversity and functionality in Neotropical cloud forest landscapes.
Functional diversity criteria for selecting urban trees			The lack of technical criteria for tree selection in urban areas generates difficulties for infrastructure development and reduces the benefits obtained from this resource. In the present study the functional diversity approach was used to plan such tree planting. Based on an urban tree census of Ibague city, nine functional traits were characterized in 202 species that responded to different spatial and environmental conditions. Three specific functional indices were determined, and hierarchical clusters were applied. A total of 18 functional types of plants were obtained, which were assigned to 29 subtypes of found places, filtering by average value and coefficient of variation. The analyzed species had functional diversifies that adequately satisfied the conditions of tree planting, 64.36% were ideal for planting on platforms and median strips, 45.04% in parks and along the shores of urban streams, and 11.88% in front yards. These results are recommended for application in tree management in other Andean cities having similar conditions and testing the proposed methodology in other tropical regions is also recommended.
Functional Diversity Explains Ecosystem Carbon Storage in Subtropical Forests			Carbon storage in subtropical forests results from multiple interacting factors, including biodiversity attributes—such as species diversity, functional traits, functional diversity, and stand structural diversity—and environmental conditions like climate, topography, and soil characteristics. Biodiversity typically influences forest carbon through two primary mechanisms: niche complementarity (complementary utilization of resources among species) and selection effects (dominance of species with specific functional traits). However, the relative importance of these mechanisms in involving subtropical forest carbon storage under varying environmental conditions remains unclear. This study assessed diversity attributes within tree, shrub, and herb layers across three subtropical forest types: coniferous, coniferous/broad-leaved mixed, and broad-leaved forests. We quantified forest aboveground, belowground, and total carbon storage and examined the relationships between forest diversity and carbon storage, and the impact of environmental factors on these relationships. Our findings showed that broad-leaved forests were more conducive to creating carbon storage. In subtropical forests, belowground carbon, a major component of carbon storage, was most affected by environmental factors, followed by species diversity. Functional diversity most strongly exerted influences on aboveground and total carbon stocks, followed by functional trait composition and environmental factors. Environmental factors directly affected forest carbon storage and also indirectly influenced it through plant functional attributes. Notably, the biodiversity of the herb layer exhibited a significant linear correlation with carbon storage. Our results indicate that niche complementarity and selection effects contribute to carbon fixation, with selection effects being more predominant. Based on these findings, we recommend that afforestation policies prioritize enhancing broad-leaved tree species to improve carbon sequestration, as evergreen broad-leaved forests represent the zonal climax vegetation, while also acknowledging the importance of understory vegetation. Thus, in the context of global climate change, it is imperative to thoroughly evaluate the impact of environmental factors on biodiversity and carbon sequestration in forest ecosystems. © 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Functional Ecology of Tropical Forest Recovery			0
Functional trait representation differs between restoration plantings and mature tropical rainforest			The planting and attempted restoration of tropical forest landscapes is increasing rapidly across the globe. Two limiting aspects of large-scale forest restoration are the demand for appropriate quantities of seeds and seedlings of native species, and the ability to facilitate succession in planted sites. Species functional traits such as seed type, tree size, germination time, and wood density may influence the quantity of seedlings that can be produced for restoration, and the potential of these seedlings to persist and facilitate site succession. Therefore, it is important to understand the species composition and functional trait representation of restoration plantings. We explored the species composition and functional trait representation of 846 restoration plantings in the Australian Wet Tropics containing > 465,000 seedlings from 599 species, using seedling supply records from six nurseries over a six year period (2012–2017). Despite restoration plantings in the Australian Wet Tropics containing an impressive number of species, just 52 species contributed over half of all individual seedlings. We found that species with small animal-dispersed seeds and low wood density were more abundant, on average, and had greater representation in restoration plantings than in mature rainforest. Despite this, we did not find evidence that restoration plantings had a diminished capacity to grow tall or sequester carbon as there was no significant difference in the relative abundance of tall tree species or species with high wood density. Small seeded and fast growing species may be cheaper to produce in nurseries and may accelerate site succession as these characteristics are associated with pioneer and early successional species, however these traits are also associated with higher mortality rates. Understanding how functional trait representation influences the success of restoration plantings will require further insight into temporal aspects of site succession. © 2020 Elsevier B.V.
Functional traits and ecosystem services in ecological restoration			The application of a functional trait-based approach to ecological restoration is receiving growing attention worldwide, but lack of knowledge on functional traits and how they link to ecosystem services imposes a major barrier to operationalize such approach. Synthesizing the existing knowledge on functional trait-based restoration is thus a timely and important challenge. We systematically reviewed the literature to assess how ecosystem services are associated to functional traits across organisms, ecosystem types, and continents. We also assessed the existing trait-based frameworks to target ecosystem services in restoration ecology. Then, we discussed future perspectives for the field, especially the challenges of applying trait-based frameworks in megadiverse tropical ecosystems, which have ambitious restoration commitments. Most papers focused on plants (72%), terrestrial habitats (69%), and non-tropical ecosystems (68%) and monitored ecosystem services and functional traits after restoration started rather than using them as previous targets. Only 12% of the papers targeted the restoration of both services and traits a priori, and 3.8% presented a clear trait-based framework to target ecosystem services in restoration. The possibility of selecting alternative subsets of complementary species in their provisioning of ecosystem services should make functional restoration more feasible than traditional approaches in species-rich tropical ecosystems. With this review and our critical insights on the perspectives of applying functional trait-based restoration widely, we hope to assist broad-scale restoration programs to obtain higher levels of benefits for nature and human well-being per unit of area undergoing restoration, going beyond the area-based approach that has dominated restoration commitments.
Functionality of methane cycling microbiome during methane flux hot moments from riparian buffer systems			Riparian buffer systems (RBS) are a common agroforestry practice that involves maintaining a forested boundary adjacent to water bodies to protect the aquatic ecosystems in agricultural landscapes. While RBS have potential for carbon sequestration, they also can be sources of methane emissions. Our study site at Washington Creek in Southern Ontario, includes a rehabilitated tree buffer (RH), a grassed buffer (GRB), an undisturbed deciduous forest (UNF), an undisturbed coniferous forest (CF), and an adjacent agricultural field (AGR). The objective of this study was to assess the diversity and activity of CH4 cycling microbial communities in soils sampled during hot moments of methane fluxes (July 04 and August 15). We used qPCR and high-throughput amplicon sequencing from both DNA and cDNA to target methanogen and methanotroph communities. Methanogens, including the archaeal genera Methanosaeta, Methanosarcina, Methanomassiliicoccus, and Methanoreggula, were abundant in all RBSs, but they were significantly more active in UNF soils, where CH4 emissions were highest. Methylocystis was the most prevalent taxon among methanotrophs in all the riparian sites, except for AGR soils where the methanotrophs community was composed primarily of members of rice paddy clusters (RPCs and RPC-1) and upland soil clusters (TUSC and USCα). The main factors influencing the composition and assembly of methane-cycling microbiomes were soil carbon and moisture content. We concluded that the differences in CH4 fluxes observed between RBSs were primarily caused by differences in the presence and activity of methanogens, which were influenced by total soil carbon and water content. Overall, this study emphasizes the importance of understanding the microbial drivers of CH4 fluxes in RBSs in order to maximize RBS environmental benefits. © 2023
Future landscapes: opportunities and challenges			The global magnitude of degraded and deforested areas is best approached by restoring landscapes. Heightened international perception of the importance of forests and trees outside forests (e.g., woodlands, on farms) demands new approaches to future landscapes. The current need for forest restoration is two billion ha; most opportunities are mosaic restoration in the Tropical and Temperate Zones where human pressure is moderate. A rapidly changing global environment introduces uncertainty, however, that questions the usefulness of success criteria based on present or past ecosystems conditions. Considerable uncertainty arises from future climate and the timing of significant departures from current conditions, social system responses to drivers of global change, and ecosystem responses to changes in coupled socio-ecological systems. Three active approaches to reducing vulnerability and increasing adaptive capacity (incremental, anticipatory, transformational adaptation) differ in their future orientation but share similar objectives of favoring genotypes adapted to future conditions; resisting pathogens; managing herbivory to ensure adequate regeneration; encouraging species and structural diversity at the stand-level, landscape-level, or both; and providing connectivity and reducing fragmentation. Integrating attempts to restore landscapes and mitigate and adapt to climate change may synergistically increase adaptive capacity. Behavioral, institutional, and/or social barriers to implementing change can stop or delay adaptation. Stratagems for overcoming these barriers include conducting "risky" research that pushes the bounds of knowledge and practice and developing plant materials adapted to future conditions.
Futures of Tropical Forests (sensu lato)			When net deforestation declines in the tropics, attention will be drawn to the composition and structure of the retained, restored, invaded, and created forests. At that point, the seemingly inexorable trends toward increased intensities of exploitation and management will be recognized as having taken their tolls of biodiversity and other forest values. Celebrations when a country passes this 'forest transition' will then be tempered by realization that what has been accepted as 'forest' spans the gamut from short-rotation mono-clonal stands of genetically engineered trees to fully protected old growth natural forest. With management intensification, climate change, species introductions, landscape fragmentation, fire, and shifts in economics and governance, forests will vary along gradients of biodiversity, novelty of composition, stature, permanence, and the relative roles of natural and anthropogenic forces. Management intensity will increase with the increased availability of financial capital associated with economic globalization, scarcity of wood and other forest products, demand for biofuels, improved governance (e. g., security of property rights), improved accessibility, and technological innovations that lead to new markets for forest products. In a few places, the trend toward land-use intensification will be counterbalanced by recognition of the many benefits of natural and semi-natural forests, especially where forest-fate determiners are compensated for revenues foregone from not intensifying management. Land-use practices informed by research designed and conducted by embedded scientists will help minimize the tradeoffs between the financial profits from forest management and the benefits of retention of biodiversity and the full range of environmental services.
Generalist birds promote tropical forest regeneration and increase plant diversity via rare-biased seed dispersal			Regenerated forests now compose over half of the world's tropical forest cover and are increasingly important as providers of ecosystem services, freshwater, and biodiversity conservation. Much of the value and functionality of regenerating forests depends on the plant diversity they contain. Tropical forest diversity is strongly shaped by mutualistic interactions between plants and fruit-eating animals (frugivores) that disperse seeds. Here we show how seed dispersal by birds can influence the speed and diversity of early successional forests in Puerto Rico. For two years, we monitored the monthly fruit production of bird-dispersed plants on a fragmented landscape, and measured seed dispersal activity of birds and plant establishment in experimental plots located in deforested areas. Two predominantly omnivorous bird species, the Northern Mockingbird (Mimus polyglottos) and the Gray Kingbird (Tyrannus dominicensis), proved critical for speeding up the establishment of woody plants and increasing the species richness and diversity of the seed rain in deforested areas. Seed dispersal by these generalists increased the odds for rare plant species to disperse and establish in experimental forest-regeneration plots. Results indicate that birds that mix fruit and insects in their diets and actively forage across open and forested habitats can play keystone roles in the regeneration of mutualistic plant-animal communities. Furthermore, our analyses reveal that rare-biased (antiapostatic) frugivory and seed dispersal is the mechanism responsible for increasing plant diversity in the early-regenerating community. © 2016 by the Ecological Society of America.
Generating carbon finance through avoided deforestation and its potential to create climatic, conservation and human development benefits			Recent proposals to compensate developing countries for reducing emissions from deforestation (RED) under forthcoming climate change mitigation regimes are receiving increasing attention. Here we demonstrate that if RED credits were traded on international carbon markets, even moderate decreases in deforestation rates could generate billions of Euros annually for tropical forest conservation. We also discuss the main challenges for a RED mechanism that delivers real climatic benefits. These include providing sufficient incentives while only rewarding deforestation reductions beyond business-as-usual scenarios, addressing risks arising from forest degradation and international leakage, and ensuring permanence of emission reductions. Governance may become a formidable challenge for RED because some countries with the highest RED potentials score poorly on governance indices. In addition to climate mitigation, RED funds could help achieve substantial co-benefits for biodiversity conservation and human development. However, this will probably require targeted additional support because the highest biodiversity threats and human development needs may exist in countries that have limited income potentials from RED. In conclusion, how successfully a market-based RED mechanism can contribute to climate change mitigation, conservation and development will strongly depend on accompanying measures and carefully designed incentive structures involving governments, business, as well as the conservation and development communities. © 2008 The Royal Society.
Genetic diversity of reintroduced tree populations in restoration plantations of the Brazilian Atlantic Forest			Long-term ecological success of large-scale restoration programs planned for the next decades will rely on genetic diversity (GD) of reintroduced or colonizing species, a limiting factor in highly fragmented landscapes. In small and isolated natural remnants or restoration areas, substantial reduction in population's size or connectivity may lead to local extinctions due to the accumulation of deleterious recessive alleles and ongoing reduction of fecundity, plant vigor, recruitment success, and adaptive potential. Despite the paramount role of GD for species persistence, its levels in restoration programs are poorly known. We assessed the GD of four model tree species (different succession stages, dispersal, and pollination syndromes) from the Brazilian Atlantic Forest, comparing two high-diversity restoration plantations, one forest fragment and one conserved remnant. Contrary to the expectation that the plantation strategies adopted in the restoration programs could result in genetic composition homogenization, we found that restoration areas established heterogeneous genetic groups with similar levels of neutral GD and inbreeding to those observed in natural forest remnants. This pattern was consistent across the four functionally different tree species, despite some species idiosyncrasies. For instance, we observed lower allelic richness in early successional species in restoration sites, suggesting that some species may be more prone to reintroduction with lower GD. Thus, we advocate the use of high GD levels in restoration to support biodiversity conservation in human-modified landscapes, thus reinforcing the role of ecological restoration for recovering the diversity of genesthe basic constituent of biodiversity.
Geometrid Moth Species Richness, Distribution and Community Composition in Different Forest Types of Papua New Guinea			As the major group of herbivorous insects, moths are highly significant in natural ecosystems. In collaboration with the Papua New Guinea (PNG) multipurpose National Forest Inventory (NFI) survey, this study investigates the species richness, distribution and community composition of Geometrid moths (Lepidoptera) in PNG's tropical forests and analyses environmental drivers of the geometrid community structure. By providing a baseline assessment of an important order of insects that can serve as an indicator for broader biodiversity, this study informs how biodiversity assessments can be better integrated into the planning of forest conservation initiatives, particularly those related to REDD+ and forest carbon offset developments. The research was conducted over 3 years at 38 NFI clusters throughout six provinces: Eastern Highlands, Western Highlands, Morobe, Madang and West New Britain and Central Province. Moths were collected from dusk to before midnight (18:00 h to 22:00 h) using a manual light trapping method for four nights per site, with a total of 152 light trap samples. Results included a total of 11,830 specimens from 1,108 morphological species from lowland and montane forests in disturbed (degraded and/or logged) and primary forests. Elevation and forest disturbance are the main variables that influence the distribution of species. Species richness was low in montane undisturbed forests compared with lowland (disturbed and primary) forests and montane disturbed forests. Species similarity between light trap samples tends to decrease as elevation increases. Geometrid moth species were arranged into two main orders of community composition according to the forest types: montane (disturbed and/or primary) forests species and lowland (disturbed and/or primary forest) species as per the samples.
Getting the message right on nature-based solutions to climate change			Nature-based solutions (NbS)-solutions to societal challenges that involve working with nature-have recently gained popularity as an integrated approach that can address climate change and biodiversity loss, while supporting sustainable development. Although well-designed NbS can deliver multiple benefits for people and nature, much of the recent limelight has been on tree planting for carbon sequestration. There are serious concerns that this is distracting from the need to rapidly phase out use of fossil fuels and protect existing intact ecosystems. There are also concerns that the expansion of forestry framed as a climate change mitigation solution is coming at the cost of carbon rich and biodiverse native ecosystems and local resource rights. Here, we discuss the promise and pitfalls of the NbS framing and its current political traction, and we present recommendations on how to get the message right. We urge policymakers, practitioners and researchers to consider the synergies and trade-offs associated with NbS and to follow four guiding principles to enable NbS to provide sustainable benefits to society: (1) NbS are not a substitute for the rapid phase out of fossil fuels; (2) NbS involve a wide range of ecosystems on land and in the sea, not just forests; (3) NbS are implemented with the full engagement and consent of Indigenous Peoples and local communities in a way that respects their cultural and ecological rights; and (4) NbS should be explicitly designed to provide measurable benefits for biodiversity. Only by following these guidelines will we design robust and resilient NbS that address the urgent challenges of climate change and biodiversity loss, sustaining nature and people together, now and into the future.
Ghg mitigation potential and cost in tropical forestry - Relative role for agroforestry			This paper summarizes studies of carbon mitigation potential (MP) and costs of forestry options in seven developing countries with a focus on the role of agroforestry. A common methodological approach known as comprehensive mitigation assessment process (COMAP) was used in each study to estimate the potential and costs between 2000 and 2030. The approach requires the projection of baseline and mitigation land-use scenarios derived from the demand for forest products and forestland for other uses such as agriculture and pasture. By using data on estimated carbon sequestration, emission avoidance, costs and benefits, the model enables one to estimate cost effectiveness indicators based on monetary benefit pert C, as well as estimates of total mitigation costs and potential when the activities are implemented at equilibrium level. The results show that about half the MP of 6.9 Gt C (an average of 223 Mt C per year) between 2000 and 2030 in the seven countries could be achieved at a negative cost, and the other half at costs not exceeding dollar sign100 pert C. Negative cost indicates that non-carbon revenue is sufficient to offset direct costs of about half of the options. The agroforestry options analyzed bear a significant proportion of the potential at medium to low cost pert C when compared to other options. The role of agroforestry in these countries varied between 6% and 21% of the MP, though the options are much more cost effective than most due to the low wage or opportunity cost of rural labor. Agroforestry options are attractive due to the large number of people and potential area currently engaged in agriculture, but they pose unique challenges for carbon and cost accounting due to the dispersed nature of agricultural activities in the tropics, as well as specific difficulties arising from requirements for monitoring, verification, leakage assessment and the establishment of credible baselines.
GHG mitigation potential, costs and benefits in global forests: A dynamic partial equilibrium approach			This paper reports on the global potential for carbon sequestration inforest plantations, and the reduction of carbon emissions from deforestation, in response to six carbon price scenarios from 2000 to 2100. These carbon price scenarios cover a range typically seen in global integrated assessment models. The world forest sector was disaggregated into ten regions, four largely temperate, developed regions: the European Union, Oceania, Russia, and the United States; and six developing, mostly tropical, regions: Africa, Central America, China, India, Rest of Asia, and South America. Three mitigation options-long- and short-rotation forestry, and the reduction of deforestation-were analyzed using a global dynamic partial equilibrium model (GCOMAP). Key findings of this work are that cumulative carbon gain ranges from 50.9 to 113.2 Gt C by 2100, higher carbon prices early lead to earlier carbon gain and vice versa, and avoided deforestation accounts for 51 to 78% of modeled carbon gains by 2100. The estimated present value of cumulative welfare change in the sector ranges from a decline of $158 billion to a gain of $81 billion by 2100. The decline is associated with a decrease in deforestation.
Global benefits and local costs - The dilemma of tropical forest conservation: A review of the situation in Madagascar			Deforestation is one of the most important conservation problems in tropical developing countries, even though cost-benefit analyses consistently show that forest conservation is economically beneficial. In Madagascar, deforestation continues at alarming rates despite numerous initiatives of international donors to increase incentives for local households to support forest conservation. In this literature review, we contrast cost-benefit analyses for forest conservation with: (1) the actual burdens and (2) the actual gains of forest conservation for rural households, generated mainly in the context of conservation projects. We show that approaches to generating direct benefits deliver less value than expected for rural communities; the benefit transfer mechanisms are insufficient as the majority of benefits are captured by other stakeholders, and increased benefit transfer is limited by structural and institutional limitations in local communities, valuation chains and in terms of governance failure at higher levels.
Global challenges and adaptations in management practices to preserve soil carbon pool with changing climate			Increasing CO2 levels and its consequent effects have been prominent with climate change. Three out of ten transgressed planetary boundaries reflect our planet's status at tipping point. Soil Organic Carbon (SOC) which helps soil supply water and nutrients to plants through roots is inherently related to various ecological systems and needs urgent attention. Although the total SOC globally is more than the total carbon in biosphere and atmosphere, the vulnerability of SOC due to anthropogenic activities is unavoidable. The environmental factors affecting sequestration of SOC, soil fertility, crop production, accelerated SOC removal with rising temperatures, green-house gases emissions and climate change are interrelated. Thus, it is impossible to understand and estimate the various scenarios of impacts on SOC pool with ever-changing ecosystems and related processes in soil environment completely. Based on currently predicted climate change scenarios, if deforestation is controlled and reestablishment is achieved, tropical forests can trap atmospheric CO2 in the cheapest way and function as the largest sink on earth. The agricultural management practices (AMPs), which have been practiced in the last two decades and found helpful are suitable. However, some innovative adaptations such as crop modelling, selecting types of residue to change microbial communities, practices of grassland-grazing and low-C-emission AMPs are also necessary. To achieve the millennium development goals, we must accomplish food security, which relates all 17 sustainable development goals (SDGs) also relays agricultural systems, soil systems, ecosystem services, soil fertility and how best we nurture SOC pool with supportive AMPs.
Global cost estimates of reducing carbon emissions through avoided deforestation			Tropical deforestation is estimated to cause about one-quarter of anthropogenic carbon emissions, loss of biodiversity, and other environmental services. United Nations Framework Convention for Climate Change talks are now considering mechanisms for avoiding deforestation (AD), but the economic potential of AD has yet to be addressed. We use three economic models of global land use and management to analyze the potential contribution of AD activities to reduced greenhouse gas emissions. AD activities are found to be a competitive, low-cost abatement option. A program providing a 10% reduction in deforestation from 2005 to 2030 could provide 0.3-0.6 Gt (1 Gt = 1 x 10(5) g) CO(2)(.)yr(-1) in emission reductions and would require $0.4 billion to $1.7 billion(.)yr(-1) for 30 years. A 50% reduction in deforestation from 2005 to 2030 could provide 1.5-2.7 Gt CO(2)(.)yr(-1) in emission reductions and would require $17.2 billion to $28.0 billion(.)yr(-1). Finally, some caveats to the analysis that could increase costs of AD programs are described.
Global estimates of forest soil methane flux identify a temperate and tropical forest methane sink			Forest ecosystems play an important role in the global CH4 cycle. Understanding and quantifying the contri-bution and distribution of CH4 sinks and sources in global forest soils is vital for assessing realistic approaches to climate change mitigation. Here, we compiled a dataset of in situ global forest soil CH4 fluxes from published data, incorporating 772 case studies covering boreal (n = 12), temperate (n = 369), subtropical (n = 208), and tropical (n = 183) forests and spanning 1991-2020 as a basis to build the mixed-effect model. Using the screened best model, we identified the main drivers and predicted the global distribution of the forest soil CH4 flux. Our research revealed that global forest soil CH4 uptake decreased significantly with increasing mean annual tem-perature (MAT), soil bulk density (BD), soil organic carbon (SOC), and soil total nitrogen (TN) but increased significantly with increasing mean annual precipitation (MAP). The global mean CH4 uptake rate in forest soils was 3.95 & PLUSMN; 1.78 kg CH4 ha  1 yr  1, with the total sink of 14.98 & PLUSMN; 6.75 Tg CH4 yr  1. The soil CH4 sinks in temperate and tropical forests contributed 84 % to the total sink of global forests. The CH4 emission rate in global forest soils averaged 1.12 & PLUSMN; 1.11 kg CH4 ha  1 yr  1, with the total source of 0.14 & PLUSMN; 0.14 Tg CH4 yr  1. Nearly 3 % of the total area of global forest soils was a net CH4 source. In summary, we identified the key drivers of forest soil CH4 flux and improved previous estimates of the global CH4 budget in forest soils. These findings can support decision-making related to forest management and greenhouse gas restrictions.
Global forest fragmentation change from 2000 to 2020			Forest losses and gains are highly dynamic processes. Here, the authors present a forest fragmentation index to map distribution and temporal changes of forest fragments globally, revealing major trends and patterns during the first two decades of the 21st century.A comprehensive quantification of global forest fragmentation is urgently required to guide forest protection, restoration and reforestation policies. Previous efforts focused on the static distribution patterns of forest remnants, potentially neglecting dynamic changes in forest landscapes. Here, we map global distribution of forest fragments and their temporal changes between 2000 and 2020. We find that forest landscapes in the tropics were relatively intact, yet these areas experienced the most severe fragmentation over the past two decades. In contrast, 75.1% of the world's forests experienced a decrease in fragmentation, and forest fragmentation in most fragmented temperate and subtropical regions, mainly in northern Eurasia and South China, declined between 2000 and 2020. We also identify eight modes of fragmentation that indicate different recovery or degradation states. Our findings underscore the need to curb deforestation and increase connectivity among forest fragments, especially in tropical areas.
Global forest restoration and the importance of prioritizing local communities			An analysis of the overlap between tropical forest restoration, human populations, development and national policies for community forest ownership shows that 294.5 million people live within forest restoration opportunity land in the Global South.Forest restoration occupies centre stage in global conversations about carbon removal and biodiversity conservation, but recent research rarely acknowledges social dimensions or environmental justice implications related to its implementation. We find that 294.5 million people live on tropical forest restoration opportunity land in the Global South, including 12% of the total population in low-income countries. Forest landscape restoration that prioritizes local communities by affording them rights to manage and restore forests provides a promising option to align global agendas for climate mitigation, conservation, environmental justice and sustainable development.
Global forest systems: An uncertain response to atmospheric pollutants and global climate change?			Forest systems cover more than 4.1 x 10(9) ha of the Earth's land area. The future response and feedbacks of forest systems to atmospheric pollutants and projected climate change may be significant. Boreal, temperate and tropical forest systems play a prominent role in carbon (C), nitrogen (N) and sulfur (S) biogeochemical cycles at regional and global scales. The timing and magnitude of future changes in forest systems will depend on environmental factors such as a changing global climate, an accumulation of CO2 in the atmosphere, and increase global mineralization of nutrients such as N and S. The interactive effects of all these factors on the world's forest regions are complex and not intuitively obvious and are likely to differ among geographic regions. Although the potential effects of some atmospheric pollutants on forest systems have been observed or simulated, large uncertainty exists in our ability to project future forest distribution, composition and productivity under transient or nontransient global climate change scenarios. The potential to manage and adapt forests to future global environmental conditions varies widely among nations. Mitigation practices, such as liming or fertilization to ameliorate excess NOx or SOx or forest management to sequester CO2 are now being applied in selected nations worldwide.
Global forest transition: Prospects for an end to deforestation			Although global rates of tropical deforestation remain alarmingly high, they have decreased over the period 20002010, and a handful of tropical developing countries have recently been through a forest transitiona shift from net deforestation to net reforestation. This review synthesizes existing knowledge on the occurrence, causes, and ecological impacts of forest transitions and examines the prospects and policy options for a global forest transition. The ecological quality of forest transitions depends on multiple factors, including the importance of natural forest regeneration versus plantations. Given an increased competition for productive land between different land uses, a global forest transition will require major technological and policy innovations to supply wood and agricultural products. In the globalization era, national strategies aimed at forest protection and sustainable use of forest resources may have unintended effects abroad owing to a displacement of land use across countries. Decisions by consumers combined with certification schemes and moratoriums have an increasing influence on the fate of forests. © 2011 by Annual Reviews. All rights reserved.
Global impacts of projected climate changes on the extent and aboveground biomass of mangrove forests			Aim: Over the past 50 years, anthropogenic activities have led to the disappearance of approximately one-third of the world's mangrove forests and their associated ecosystem services. The synergetic combined effect of projected climate change is likely to further impact mangroves in the years to come, whether by range expansions associated with warming at higher latitudes or large-scale diebacks linked to severe droughts. We provide an estimate of future changes in the extent and aboveground biomass (AGB) of mangrove forests at global scales by considering contrasting Representative Concentration Pathway scenarios (decade 2090-2100 under RCP 2.6 in line with the Paris Agreement expectations, and RCP 8.5 of higher emissions).Location: Global.Methods: Boosted regression trees fitted occurrence and AGB of mangroves against high-resolution biologically meaningful data on air temperature, precipitation, wave energy, slope and distance to river Deltas.Results: On the global scale, models produced for present-day conditions retrieved high accuracy scores and estimated a total area of 12,780,356 ha and overall biomass of 2.29 Pg, in line with previous estimates. Model projections showed poleward shifts along temperate regions, which translated into comparable gains in total area, regardless of the RCP scenario (area change RCP 2.6: 17.29%; RCP 8.5: 15.77%). However, biomass changes were dependent on the emission scenario considered, remaining stable or even increasing under RCP 2.6, or undergoing severe losses across tropical regions under RCP 8.5 (overall biomass change RCP 2.6: 12.97%; RCP 8.5: -11.51%). Such losses were particularly aggravated in countries located in the Tropical Atlantic and Eastern Pacific, and the Western and Eastern Indo-Pacific regions (regions with losses above similar to 20% in overall biomass).Conclusions: Our global estimates highlight the potential effect of future climate changes on mangrove forests and how broad compliance with the Paris Agreement may counteract severe trajectories of loss. The projections made, also provided at the country level, serve as new baselines to evaluate changes in mangrove carbon sequestration and ecosystem services, strongly supporting policy-making and management directives, as well as to guide restoration actions considering potential future changes in niche availability.
Global impacts on tropical frontiers: Cocoa boom versus nature protection in Sulawesi/Indonesia			Tropical rainforests and their margins (frontier zones) gain centre stage within the international debate on biodiversity loss and climate change. On the one hand, tropical rainforests harbour the vast majority of the world's terrestrial biodiversity and provide significant ecosystem Services such as carbon Sequestration. On the other hand, they also serves as livelihood for millions of people living in such rural areas engaged in smallholder agriculture. Driven by international market forces, these areas play a central role in the production of the global cash crops cocoa, soybeans or palm oil. The frontier zones of Central Sulawesis mountainous rainforests are part of the Wallacea global biodiversity hotspot and particularly threatened due to forest conversion into agricultural land, mainly cacao plantations. In order to meet the challenge between conservation and utilization an economic and ecological balanced concept needs to be developed. There is no way around compensating local famers for conserving biodiversity and carbon Sequestration through cultivation in less profitable agroforestry Systems. Payments for Environmental Services (PES) are a promising Option.
Global land change from 1982 to 2016			Land change is a cause and consequence of global environmental change(1,2). Changes in land use and land cover considerably alter the Earth's energy balance and biogeochemical cycles, which contributes to climate change and-in turn-affects land surface properties and the provision of ecosystem services(1-4). However, quantification of global land change is lacking. Here we analyse 35 years' worth of satellite data and provide a comprehensive record of global land-change dynamics during the period 1982-2016. We show that-contrary to the prevailing view that forest area has declined globally(5)-tree cover has increased by 2.24 million km(2) (+7.1% relative to the 1982 level). This overall net gain is the result of a net loss in the tropics being outweighed by a net gain in the extratropics. Global bare ground cover has decreased by 1.16 million km(2) (-3.1%), most notably in agricultural regions in Asia. Of all land changes, 60% are associated with direct human activities and 40% with indirect drivers such as climate change. Land-use change exhibits regional dominance, including tropical deforestation and agricultural expansion, temperate reforestation or afforestation, cropland intensification and urbanization. Consistently across all climate domains, montane systems have gained tree cover and many arid and semi-arid ecosystems have lost vegetation cover. The mapped land changes and the driver attributions reflect a human-dominated Earth system. The dataset we developed may be used to improve the modelling of land-use changes, biogeochemical cycles and vegetation-climate interactions to advance our understanding of global environmental change(1-4,6).
Global patterns of soil available N production by mineralization-immobilization turnover in the tropical forest ecosystems			Available N (Navail) is important to nurish plant-microbial system and sequestrate carbon (C) in terrestrial ecosystems. For forest ecosystem, Navail is usually calculated as the sum of N2 fixation (NN2-fixed), N deposition (Ndeposition) and soil available N production (Navail-soil), in which Navail-soil determined the Navail production and its temporal changes. While, there is still a lack of Navail-soil estimation at the global and regional level due to the temporal and spatial variability of influencing factors, such as climate and soil physicochemical properties. By assembling a dataset of gross rates of soil N mineralization (GRmin), immobilization of ammonium (NH4+) (GRac) and nitrate (NO3−) (GRnc), as well as their corresponding geographic information, climate and main soil physicochemical properties, the Navail-soil produced from organic N (Norg) mineralization and inorganic N (Ninorg) immobilization turnover (MIT) was calculated via building a random forest (RF) model in global tropical forests. The results revealed a good fit between the observed and predicted GRmin (R2 = 0.76), GRac (R2 = 0.77) and GRnc (R2 = 0.67). We further estimated that the total mineralized N, immobilized NH4+ and NO3− was 23.97 (10.48–37.46), 17.98 (5.81–30.15) and 4.86 (1.46–8.26) Pg N year−1, respectively, leading to the total Navail-soil of 1.13 (−0.95–3.21) Pg N year−1. Referring to the reported average density of NN2-fixed and Ndeposition, the total NN2-fixed and Ndeposition was 0.03–0.05 and 0.01 Pg N year−1, respectively, by producting density and square meter of global tropic forest. Then the total Navail of global tropic forest ecosystem was 1.18 (−0.91–3.27) Pg N year−1 (Navail-soil + NN2-fixed + Ndeposition). According to the tight stoichiometric relationship between C and N in the production of gross primary productivity (GPP) and soil respiration (Rs), C:N ratio of 31.8–41.9 and 22.7–48.2 was calculated, respectively, which all fall into the C:N ratio range of plants and litter (13.9–75.9) in tropical forest ecosystem. These results confirmed the prediction of Navail-soil production from MIT was in line with theoretic estimates by applying RF machine learning. To our knowledge, this is the first estimation of Navail-soil and the results provide the theoretical basis to evaluate soil C sequestration potential in tropical (e.g. southern America, southeast Asia and Africa) forest ecosystem. © 2023 Elsevier B.V.
Global potential for natural regeneration in deforested tropical regions			Extensive forest restoration is a key strategy to meet nature-based sustainable development goals and provide multiple social and environmental benefits1. Yet achieving forest restoration at scale requires cost-effective methods2. Tree planting in degraded landscapes is a popular but costly forest restoration method that often results in less biodiverse forests when compared to natural regeneration techniques under similar conditions3. Here we assess the current spatial distribution of pantropical natural forest (from 2000 to 2016) and use this to present a model of the potential for natural regeneration across tropical forested countries and biomes at a spatial resolution of 30 m. We estimate that an area of 215 million hectares-an area greater than the entire country of Mexico-has potential for natural forest regeneration, representing an above-ground carbon sequestration potential of 23.4 Gt C (range, 21.1-25.7 Gt) over 30 years. Five countries (Brazil, Indonesia, China, Mexico and Colombia) account for 52% of this estimated potential, showcasing the need for targeting restoration initiatives that leverage natural regeneration potential. Our results facilitate broader equitable decision-making processes that capitalize on the widespread opportunity for natural regeneration to help achieve national and global environmental agendas.
Governing and Delivering a Biome-Wide Restoration Initiative: The Case of Atlantic Forest Restoration Pact in Brazil			In many human-modified tropical landscapes, biodiversity conservation and the provision of ecosystem services require large-scale restoration initiatives. Such initiatives must be able to augment the amount and the quality of remaining natural habitats. There is thus a growing need for long-term, multi-stakeholder and multi-purpose initiatives that result in multiple ecological and socioeconomic benefits at the biome scale. The Atlantic Forest Restoration Pact (AFRP) is a coalition of 260+ stakeholders, including governmental agencies, private sector, NGOs and research institutions, aimed at restoring 15 million ha of degraded and deforested lands by 2050. By articulating, and then integrating common interests, this initiative has allowed different sectors of society to implement an ambitious vision and create a forum for public and private concerns regarding forest restoration. The AFRP adopts a set of governance tools so multiple actors can implement key processes to achieve long-term and visionary restoration goals. Having overcome some initial challenges, AFRP now has to incorporate underrepresented stakeholders and enhance its efforts to make forest restoration more economically viable, including cases where restoration could be less expensive and profitable. The AFRP experience has resulted in many lessons learned, which can be shared to foster similar initiatives across tropical regions.
Governing Congo Basin Forests in a Changing Climate Actors, Discourses and Institutions for Adaptation and Mitigation			0
Governing sustainable forest management in the new climate regime			The newly appreciated role of deforestation and forest degradation as globally significant sources of carbon emissions has focused fresh political attention and large prospective financial flows on tropical forest management.Negotiations at the Thirteenth Conference of the Parties of theUnitedNations Framework Convention on Climate Change produced a 'road map' toward including compensation to tropical countries for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD) in a future global climate agreement. The prospect of a global REDD mechanism has spurred the development of REDD initiatives by national governments, international organizations, and private actors. These new initiatives are facing many of the same forest governance challenges that have stymied past efforts to improve the conservation and management of tropical forests. To be effective, efficient, and equitable, REDD efforts will not only have to reverse the economic incentives that drive forest loss, but will also need to clarify land tenure, link to international efforts to curb illegal logging and trade, and manage trade-offs among competing objectives. They will also need to strengthen the institutional capacity for inclusive REDD design processes, transparent monitoring of carbon emissions and financial flows, and cross-sectoral and cross-scale coordination. At the same time, REDD initiatives could provide opportunities to accelerate the required forest governance reforms. © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Governing the global commons: Linking carbon sequestration and biodiversity conservation in tropical forests			Biodiversity loss will be among the major impacts from climate change. Separate international political processes address climate change and biodiversity, yet the scientific evidence strongly links the two. For conservation groups, addressing climate change is increasingly necessary to protect biodiversity. Protecting tropical forests as biodiversity habitat is important as well to mitigating climate change, as deforestation and forest degradation represent a major source of greenhouse gas emissions. Thus, discussions currently underway on the political and technical feasibility of rewarding countries and their inhabitants financially for protecting their standing forests as carbon sinks are of vital interest to conservation groups. (C) 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Grass vs. tree origin of soil organic carbon under different land-use systems in the Brazilian Cerrado			Silvopastoral management of tree plantations is becoming popular in Brazil. The impact of this practice on carbon dynamics of these soils is unknown, and predicting it is difficult because historical land-use records of the region do not exist. The objective of the study was to quantify the relative soil organic carbon (SOC) contributions of C3 and C4 plants in different land-use system.We evaluated total delta 13C, the contribution of C4 and C3-derived soil organic C in three fraction-size classes of soils in six land-use systems (Eucalyptus hybrid plantations established in 1985 and 2005; a native forest; silvopasture stands of Brachiaria brizantha under eucalyptus established in 1994 and 2004; and an open pasture), and undertook carbon dating (C-14) for three of those systems, an Oxisol in Minas Gerais, Brazil. From each system, soil samples were collected from four depths (0-10, 10-20, 20-50, and 50-100 cm); samples were fractionated into 250-2000, 53-250, and < 53 mu m size classes, and their delta 13C determined. Carbon dating (C-14 analysis) was done for whole soil samples from 0 to 10 cm and 50-100 cm depth classes of three land-use systems.The delta 13C values increased (showing increase in C contribution by C4 plants, i.e., grasses) with soil depth at all sites and all size-classes. The older systems showed a higher contribution of C4-derived SOC at all depths. Carbon dating indicated that the area had been cleared about 300 years ago.Silvopastoral and pasture systems can be considered as good carbon sinks. We infer that the study site was grassland with high proportion of C4 plants in the past, not a forest as it is today.
Grasslands to tree plantations: Forest transition in the andes of Ecuador			Over the past four decades the establishment of pine plantations in high altitude paramo grasslands has been a growing land use change in Ecuador. As a result, plantation forestry has transformed some highland landscapes from grasslands to ones dominated by exotic trees. This transformation is analyzed in the context of forest transition theory, which provides a framework for explaining scenarios of increasing forest cover. Forest transition theory predicts that reforestation and afforestation, encompassing the establishment of secondary forests and plantations, respectively, occur when economic development leads to the abandonment of agricultural land or when forest scarcity prompts increases in plantation establishment. This research demonstrates that projected forest scarcity has played an important role in paramo to pine transitions. However, it also indicates that, in Ecuador, afforestation has been seen as a potential means to economic development rather than a consequence of it. Furthermore, this case brings into question some of the assumptions of forest transition theory with respect to the environmental benefits of transition. The evidence presented indicates that, in the case of paramo to pine transitions, the biophysical response includes a loss of soil carbon, nitrogen, and water retention capacity, implying important trade-offs between the ecosystem services provided by paramos and those provided by pine plantations. These results suggest that both the existing land cover prior to forest transition and the type of forest cover established during transition merit more attention in forest transition theory.
Greener Pastures: Pathways for Sustainable Cattle Production in Colombia			0
Greenhouse Gas Mitigation on Marginal Land: A Quantitative Review of the Relative Benefits of Forest Recovery versus Biofuel Production			Decisions concerning future land-use/land cover change stand at the forefront of ongoing debates on how to best mitigate climate change. In this study, we compare the greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation value over a 30-year time frame for a range of forest recovery and biofuel production scenarios on abandoned agricultural land. Carbon sequestration in recovering forests is estimated based on a statistical analysis of tropical and temperate studies on marginal land. GHGs offset by biofuel production are analyzed for five different production pathways. We find that forest recovery is superior to low-yielding biofuel production scenarios such as oil palm and corn. Biofuel production scenarios with high yields, such as sugarcane or high-yielding energy grasses, can be comparable or superior to natural forest succession and to reforestation in some cases. This result stands in contrast to previous research suggesting that restoring degraded ecosystems to their native state is generally superior to agricultural production in terms of GHG mitigation. Further work is needed on carbon stock changes in forests, soil carbon dynamics, and bioenergy crop production on degraded/abandoned agricultural land. This finding also emphasizes the need to consider the full range of social, economic, and ecological consequences of land-use policies.
Greenhouse gas mitigation potential in smallholder agroecosystem of southern Ethiopia			In developing countries, it is critical that novel and swift strategies are devised to help direct and prioritize potential greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation activities. The Carbon Benefit Project (CBP) analysis tool is a modular, web-based system that allows a consistent comparison of various projects by providing a standardized GHG benefits protocol. In this study, we used the CBP tool to estimate the GHG mitigation potential of the agriculture, forestry, and other land uses (AFOLU) sector and prioritize components for their GHG benefits in three districts of Wolaita Zone, southern Ethiopia. The study area is 90,731 ha of which about 2% was covered by forest, 7% by grassland, 78% by annual crops, 12% by home garden and 1% by settlements. The livestock population in the study area was 512,622 heads. Using the CBP's Detailed Assessment, we estimated mitigation potential in the AFOLU consisting of different managements strategies for a period between 2016 and 2030 in the smallholder agricultural landscape. The results showed an overall GHG benefit of 1,725,052 (±5%) Mg CO2e from the projected scenario in the study area. The GHG benefit was in the order of biomass C (683,757 Mg CO2e) > soil C (619,210 Mg CO2e) > livestock (408,981 Mg CO2e) illustrating the greater mitigation potential of trees in different systems. The soil C plus biomass C was high in agroforestry systems, and this component had the highest priority for GHG mitigation. This was followed by high enteric methane emission reduction in the livestock category. The GHG emission from manure increased by 71,633 Mg CO2e in the project because manure was not managed. The surprisingly low GHG benefit of the forest was primarily because of its low land cover (i.e., about 2%) in the agroecosystem. Despite the low GHG benefit in the cropland from best management practices, the improved soil quality in it can affect GHG benefits from other land uses by contributing to their conservation through food security. Thus, a comprehensive project may be a viable strategy in a mitigation effort at the agroecosystem level because of the interactions amongst the components. The CBP analysis tool is useful in prioritizing mitigation activities and may be an option to quantify GHG benefits if studies collate Teir 2 factors in data scarce areas. © 2022 Elsevier Ltd
Greening the blue Pacific: Lessons on reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD plus )			Across the Pacific, deforestation and forest degradation are driving the loss of ecosystem services. Increasing recognition of the need for mechanisms that can bridge economic development and environmental sustainability has led to the emergence of the broad concept of Nature-based Solutions (NbS), including Payments for Environmental Services (PES) such as 'reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation' (REDD+) of forested areas. REDD+ projects are being piloted in the region, but the scale of adoption remains limited raising doubts about whether the concept has much appeal beyond small-scale government-supported initiatives. Although a relatively simple concept, it is proving difficult to translate into an appealing practice that is widely understood and adopted by rural land managers. We conducted a review of the achievements and challenges of REDD+ projects in Melanesia while drawing on global and regional lessons. Most projects are reaping the benefits of enhanced community development, employment, capacity building, and stronger governance. Perverse incentives, lack of systematic assessments of carbon offsets, poor stakeholder engagement, insufficient feedback mechanisms, marginalisation of women, and the lack of prosperous and sustainable alternative livelihoods remain key challenges. This suggests the need for developing policy mixes, understanding the drivers of deforestation and forest degradation, addressing equity concerns, strengthening tenure security, removing perverse incentives, and ensuring financially competitive conservation incentives for enhancing the appeal of REDD+ to rural communities, policymakers, and the private sector, so its reach across the Pacific can be extended.
Gross rates of nitrogen transformation in soils of a global biodiversity hotspot (Western Ghats, India)			Background:Being one of the important nutrients required by plants during photosynthesis, nitrogen (N) exerts a significant control on primary productivity and carbon dioxide sequestration. Therefore, it is essential to quantify the rates of N cycling processes, such as gross N mineralization and nitrification, to understand the flow and availability of N in different ecosystems. Lack of such data in tropical regions, particularly the Indian subcontinent, has constrained our understanding of N dynamics in soils of the subcontinent. Aims:Here, we report the results of gross N transformation rates from the hot and humid tropical forest soils of the Western Ghats, one of the global biodiversity hotspots located in India. Results:The experiments conducted using the(15)N isotope dilution technique showed higher average gross N mineralization (2.6 +/- 1.1 mg N kg(-1)d(-1)) and gross nitrification (1.7 +/- 1.1 mg N kg(-1)d(-1)) rates in the top soil layers (0-20 cm), which decreased significantly with depth (20-40 cm) indicating potential for higher microbial activity in the top soils. The overall consumption rate of mineral N exceeded its production rate with higher consumption of ammonium (NH4+) than nitrate (NO3-) suggestingNH4+as a preferred N source for microbes. The consumption ofNH4+was higher throughNH4+immobilization than nitrification indicating active N conservation mechanism and an efficient microbial adaptation. Conclusion:Despite high rates of consumption, accumulation ofNH4+andNO3-in soils of the Western Ghats suggested additional sources of mineral N other than internal recycling of N. Long residence time ofNH4+andNO3-in soils implied longer availability of unutilized mineral N leading to high soil acidity and potential for loss of N through leaching and denitrification.
Growth, carbon sequestration, and management of native tree plantations in humid regions of Costa Rica			The Costa Rican government has provided incentives for reforestation programs since 1986 and initiated a Payment for Environmental Services program in 1996. These incentives yielded native species reforestation programs throughout the country. This research aims to provide information about growth, carbon sequestration, and management of seven native tree species (Vochysia guatemalensis, Vochysia ferruginea, Hyeronima alchorneoides, Calophyllum brasiliense, Terminalia amazonia, Virola koschnyi, and Dipteryx panamensis) growing in small and medium- sized plantations in the Caribbean and Northern lowlands of Costa Rica. A total of 179 plots were evaluated in 32 farms. Overall, I found that V. guatemalensis, V. ferruginea, H. alchorneoides, and T. amazonia were the species with the fastest diameter, total height, and volume growth; and T. amazonia and D. panamensis sequestered more carbon. Moreover, I found that the plantations that had been thinned before this assessment had the best growth. The results of the present research enhance the criteria elaborated in previous research findings to improve species choices for reforestation and silvicultural management in Costa Rica and in other regions with similar ecological features. Furthermore, they support the concept that tropical plantations can serve diverse economic, social, and ecological functions that may ultimately help reduce atmospheric CO2 accumulation. The Costa Rican government has provided incentives for reforestation programs since 1986 and initiated a Payment for Environmental Services program in 1996. These incentives yielded native species reforestation programs throughout the country. This research aims to provide information about growth, carbon sequestration, and management of seven native tree species (Vochysia guatemalensis, Vochysia ferruginea, Hyeronima alchorneoides, Calophyllum brasiliense, Terminalia amazonia, Virola koschnyi, and Dipteryx panamensis) growing in small and medium-sized plantations in the Caribbean and Northern lowlands of Costa Rica. A total of 179 plots were evaluated in 32 farms. Overall, I found that V. guatemalensis, V. ferruginea, H. alchorneoides, and T. amazonia were the species with the fastest diameter, total height, and volume growth; and T. amazonia and D. panamensis sequestered more carbon. Moreover, I found that the plantations that had been thinned before this assessment had the best growth. The results of the present research enhance the criteria elaborated in previous research findings to improve species choices for reforestation and silvicultural management in Costa Rica and in other regions with similar ecological features. Furthermore, they support the concept that tropical plantations can serve diverse economic, social, and ecological functions that may ultimately help reduce atmospheric CO2 accumulation.
Growth, deforestation and the efficiency of the REDD mechanism			This paper assesses the long term impacts of an international transfer called the Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD) mechanism, which aims at preserving tropical forests of the recipient economy. This two-sector economy faces a dilemma between economic growth and deforestation. The rural sector can substitute reproducible capital for agricultural land whereas the manufacturing sector only requires capital. The model shows that the REDD mechanism has a non-monotonic effect on steady state welfares. For low transfer schemes, the agricultural output increases with the transfer even though less land is under cultivation. For high transfer schemes, the increase in the transfer may not offset the decrease in the agricultural output. The open-loop symmetric Nash equilibrium in a dynamic deforestation game predicts that redistributing the transfer among a finite number of producers is less efficient in reducing deforestation than in the social optimum. © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
Growth, productivity, aboveground biomass, and carbon sequestration of pure and mixed native tree plantations in the Caribbean lowlands of Costa Rica			In Costa Rica, reforestation programs with indigenous tree species are a recent activity. Information is still scarce on long-term species performance and silvicultural management to ensure the success of tree plantings, especially for mixed stands. This study aims to estimate growth, aboveground biomass, and carbon sequestration of nine native tree species growing in mixed and pure plantings. The study was carried out at La Selva Biological Station in the Caribbean lowlands of Costa Rica. More than a half of the tree species studied (e.g. Calophyllum brasiliense, Jacaranda copaia, Terminalia amazonia, Hyeronima alchorneoides, Vochysiaferruginea, Balizia elegans) are distributed from Mexico-Guatemala to South America and a few have more limited distribution in Central America (e.g. Vochysia guatemalensis, Virola koschnyi, Dipteryx panamensis). The nine tree species are divided into three sets. The 3 members of each set were grown separately in pure plantations, and together in I mixed plantation, giving 12 monocultures and 4 mixtures. Plantation 1 (13 years old) is composed of V guatemalensis, C. brasiliense, and J. copaia. Plantation 2 (13 years old) is comprised of D. panamensis, T amazonia and V koschnyi. Plantation 3 (12 years old) is composed of H. alchorneoides, B. elegans, and V. ferruginea. Overall, all the species had good growth and productivity either in pure or mixed stands in comparison to other native and exotic species growing in similar ecological conditions. The exception was C. brasiliense in mixed stands, where it was suppressed by the fast-growing species V guatemalensis and J. copaia. At the stand level, the mixed stands performed well for volume, basal area, aboveground biomass, and carbon sequestration, in comparison to other pure or mixed plantations of tropical timber species. Pure plantations of V guatemalensis, V ferruginea, V koschnyi, J. copaia, and T amazonia also presented good productivity. At the tree level, V guatemalensis, J. copaia, T amazonia, H. alchorneoides, and D. panamensis performed better in mixtures than in pure stands for diameter, height, aboveground biomass, and carbon sequestration estimations. Values for the former three species were significantly higher in mixed than in pure stands. C. brasiliense was the only species with significantly better growth in pure stands than in mixed stands, for the three-species combination examined. The results show that mixed plantings had similar or higher productivities for several of the variables examined, but conclusions, on relative productivities depend on the species and growth features, interactions among species, and the variables quantified. In addition, there is a need to continue monitoring over longer time-frames, and for further studies of the species interactions and site factors involved, in order to develop reforestation guidelines for a range of objectives and environmental settings. (c) 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Guidance for successful tree planting initiatives			A growing number of initiatives at global, regional and national scales propose to plant millions, billions or even trillions of trees as a simple solution to resolve complex environmental problems. However, tree planting is much more complicated than it seems. We summarize the multifaceted decision-making process needed and offer guidelines to increase the success of the proposed ambitious efforts to increase tree cover world-wide. Given the varied definitions of and motivations for tree planting, it is critical that stakeholders work together to clearly define the biophysical and socioeconomic goals of each project. Then a series of questions must be addressed about where and how (e.g. planting trees vs. allowing for natural forest regrowth) to most effectively achieve these goals and minimize unintended negative consequences, as well as how, when and by whom success of efforts will be evaluated. Key guidelines to successfully increase tree cover include: (a) first addressing the underlying drivers of deforestation; (b) integrating decision-making across scales from local to global; (c) tailoring tree planting strategies to clearly stated project goals and planning, adaptively managing and evaluating success over a sufficiently long timeframe; (d) focusing on the forest ecosystem as a whole, and not just the trees; (e) coordinating different land uses and (f) involving stakeholders at all stages of the planning process. Synthesis and applications. Tree planting, along with other strategies to increase tree cover in appropriate locations and contexts, can make a valuable contribution to ensuring the ecological and social well-being of our planet in coming decades, but only if these efforts are considered as one component of multifaceted solutions to complex environmental problems and are carefully planned, implemented and monitored over a sufficiently long time-scale with stakeholder engagement and broader consideration of socio-ecological complexities.
Harnessing carbon markets for tropical forest conservation: towards a more realistic assessment			The proposed Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) of the Kyoto Protocol paves the way for financial and technological transfers to support forestry projects that sequester carbon or protect carbon stocks. From its inception, the concept has been highly controversial. It has been enthusiastically supported by those who believe that conservation of tropical forests will be difficult unless forest owners and managers are compensated for the environmental services of their forests. Others believe that financial transfers supporting 'carbon farming' would ignore social concerns and the full range of goods and services of forests. This paper examines the implications of CDM for forest conservation and sustainable use, by drawing on recent literature and the results of a policy dialogue with CDM stakeholders. We conclude that initial estimates of the contribution tropical forestry could make to both climate change mitigation and to forest conservation need to be scaled down. CDM payments for tropical forestry are likely to be received in a far more limited area than initially expected. The cost-effectiveness of forestry projects relative to projects in the energy sector may have been overestimated. In particular few estimates have adequately accounted for the likelihood that the duration of CDM forestry projects is unlikely to be as long as the residency time of carbon in the atmosphere. Also political realities and investor priorities may not have been sufficiently understood. CDM funding for forestry may also decline in future as economically viable clean technologies are increasingly developed in the energy sector. Tropical forests are likely to be an intermediate climate change mitigation strategy for buying time, until more permanent options become available. The most important justification for including forests in CDM may lie in the contribution CDM could potentially make to forest conservation and sustainable use. An analysis of the implications of CDM for forests reveals the importance of involving forest stakeholders more closely in the CDM debate. To prevent perverse outcomes and reduce the risk of 'leakage' of emission reduction to areas outside project boundaries; CDM projects may need to be limited to niches which meet certain political and institutional preconditions and where sufficient understanding of local decision-making and the broader context is available. CDM may be more effective if used to remove non-economic impediments to forestry activities that are economically viable and meet local needs. Lessons from the forestry sector in relation to plantations, natural forest management, forest conservation and non-timber forest products are discussed to illustrate the dangers of misusing CDM and also to give examples of how CDM could be harnessed for better use of forests. CDM should be seen as one more tool for enhancing the effectiveness of more conventional ways of promoting forest conservation and sustainable use.
Harnessing home gardens for sustainable agroforestry: A promising approach to reducing greenhouse gas emission			Greenhouse gas emissions are accelerating due to rapid land use changes. Carbon sequestration involves the process of transferring and securely storing atmospheric CO2 in other long-lived carbon pools, such as vegetation and soil. Agroforestry has excellent potential to enhance people's livelihoods by integrating food production and environmental protection. Due to the forest-like structure, composition, and multispecies plant association, agroforestry systems are speculated to have high carbon sequestration potential. Therefore, the potential for above- and belowground carbon sequestration is greater in agroforestry than in monoculture agricultural systems. Among various agroforestry systems, home gardens are the best-developed systems in tropical regions and play an essential role in C sequestration. The current chapter provides an overview of agroforestry, with a particular focus on home gardens and their role in controlling greenhouse gas emissions, by considering the traditional Kandyan home garden in Sri Lanka as a case study. The study depicted that soil C sequestration is positively affected by increasing species richness and tree density with minimum disturbances, which will be useful in developing model home garden systems to optimize the C sequestration capacity. © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Herbivory makes major contributions to ecosystem carbon and nutrient cycling in tropical forests			The functional role of herbivores in tropical rainforests remains poorly understood. We quantified the magnitude of, and underlying controls on, carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus cycled by invertebrate herbivory along a 2800m elevational gradient in the tropical Andes spanning 12 degrees C mean annual temperature. We find, firstly, that leaf area loss is greater at warmer sites with lower foliar phosphorus, and secondly, that the estimated herbivore-mediated flux of foliar nitrogen and phosphorus from plants to soil via leaf area loss is similar to, or greater than, other major sources of these nutrients in tropical forests. Finally, we estimate that herbivores consume a significant portion of plant carbon, potentially causing major shifts in the pattern of plant and soil carbon cycling. We conclude that future shifts in herbivore abundance and activity as a result of environmental change could have major impacts on soil fertility and ecosystem carbon sequestration in tropical forests.
Heterogeneity of experts' opinion regarding opportunities and challenges of tackling deforestation in the tropics: A Q methodology application			Making the concept of Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+) ready to be a mechanism to combat tropical deforestation and associated greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by compensating developing countries for income foregone in reducing their rates of deforestation, requires solutions for outstanding controversies. Existing opinions on REDD+ vary greatly. By using the Q-method as part of an action research approach, this paper investigates experts' attitudes towards REDD+. Based on their responses to 41 statements, four attitudinal groups were identified, characterized as pragmatists, sceptics, conventionalists and optimists. Opinions between groups differed as to the level of application, credibility, eligibility, economic effectiveness, and public acceptability of REDD+ policy instruments. Three of the four groups were supportive of international REDD+ type policy interventions, but there was disagreement on the more concrete design issues of REDD+ projects, such as the allocation of responsibilities, the distribution of burdens and benefits, and whether or not co-benefits could be expected, or should be required. As the potential of REDD+ is shaped not only by international climate policy but also by national and regional policies and stakeholder perceptions, this paper suggests that participatory forms of decision-making may help to develop tailor-made solutions that are supported by the many different actors that are necessarily involved in REDD+ projects. © 2013 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht.
Hidden Costs of Passive Restoration			The first few years of tropical forest restoration can be expensive, especially when applied to expansive areas. In light of this, passive restoration has been recommended as a considerably cheaper or even free alternative. There are, however, both direct and indirect costs associated with passive restoration. First, the longer recovery time that is typically required in passive restoration can be perceived as project failure, especially when compared with nearby active restoration efforts. In the worst-case scenario, this can lead to the premature termination of a project by a landowner who would like to see more rapid or visible results. Second, passive restoration may be viewed as land abandonment, and in developing nations where land tenure is not always strictly enforced this may invite unanticipated uses, such as ranchers who may unintentionally or intentionally allow livestock to take advantage of the unused forage grass, thus setting back recovery efforts. Lastly, passive restoration does have direct financial costs, including material costs for establishing fences and repairing them, and labor costs for site vigilance. These upfront investments may need to be made repeatedly in passive restoration efforts, and for a longer time period than for an active restoration project. Both the direct and indirect costs should be considered prior to choosing passive restoration as a strategy in a particular restoration project.
High aboveground carbon stock of African tropical montane forests			Tropical forests store 40-50 per cent of terrestrial vegetation carbon(1). However, spatial variations in aboveground live tree biomass carbon (AGC) stocks remain poorly understood, in particular in tropical montane forests(2). Owing to climatic and soil changes with increasing elevation(3), AGC stocks are lower in tropical montane forests compared with lowland forests(2). Here we assemble and analyse a dataset of structurally intact old-growth forests (AfriMont) spanning 44 montane sites in 12 African countries. We find that montane sites in the AfriMont plot network have a mean AGC stock of 149.4 megagrams of carbon per hectare (95% confidence interval 137.1-164.2), which is comparable to lowland forests in the African Tropical Rainforest Observation Network(4) and about 70 per cent and 32 per cent higher than averages from plot networks in montane(2,5,6) and lowland(7) forests in the Neotropics, respectively. Notably, our results are two-thirds higher than the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change default values for these forests in Africa(8). We find that the low stem density and high abundance of large trees of African lowland forests(4) is mirrored in the montane forests sampled. This carbon store is endangered: we estimate that 0.8 million hectares of old-growth African montane forest have been lost since 2000. We provide country-specific montane forest AGC stock estimates modelled from our plot network to help to guide forest conservation and reforestation interventions. Our findings highlight the need for conserving these biodiverse(9,10) and carbon-rich ecosystems.The aboveground carbon stock of a montane African forest network is comparable to that of a lowland African forest network and two-thirds higher than default values for these montane forests.
High altitude tropical secondary forests: a competitive carbon sink?			High altitude tropical regions have been heavily deforested and offer large areas for carbon offsets by secondary forest regeneration. However, a general assumption exists that productivity, and thus, carbon sequestration of high altitude forests is low, but the scarcity of data from high altitude tropical forests does not allow for a sound confirmation of this assumption. To determine the carbon sequestration potential of natural forest regeneration and reforestation efforts at high altitudes, aboveground biomass was quantified of several successional stages of two monospecific secondary forests in the high Ecuadorian Andes. The studied forests were, at 3200 m, an Alnus acuminata forest with 8-, 20, 30- and 45-year-old stands and, at 3600 m, a Polylepis incana forest with 6, 15- and 30-year-old stands and old growth forest without known age. Both trees are pioneer species. Additionally, a soil survey was conducted and leaf N/P ratios and N and P retranslocation rates were determined. Total aboveground biomass (TAGB) estimates of the oldest stages of the two forests were 241 Mg. ha(-1) for the Alnus and 366 Mg ha(-1) for the Polylepis forest. Productivity, expressed as annual aboveground biomass accumulation (ABA) was in both forests highest in the establishment phase (14.2 and 15.0 Mg ha(-1) per year at 8 and 6 years, respectively) due to high sapling numbers, and then slowed down significantly (5.9 and 6.9 Mg ha(-1) per year, respectively at age 30). TAGB and ABA figures of the investigated forests are comparable to those of lowland tropical forests and do not indicate a significant decrease of these parameters at higher altitudes in the tropics. Analysis of site conditions, ecological requirements and ecophysiological properties of the tree species indicated that in both cases an optimal combination of these factors strongly favoured forest growth. It is not possible to verify whether our forests are representative for other high altitude tropical forests or if they should be treated as exceptional cases. The results do show, however, that high carbon offsets at high altitudes are possible. (C) 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
High tree diversity enhances light interception in tropical forests			Understanding the processes that underlie the effects of tree diversity on primary production is of foremost importance to enhance climate change mitigation by tropical forests. Here, we investigated the effects of tree diversity on light interception over space and time in two tropical tree experiments, located in Panama-Sardinilla site (monocultures to 18-species mixtures), and in Brazil-Anhembi site (20- to 114-species mixtures).We assessed intercepted photosynthetically active radiation (iPAR) over horizontal grids and vertical transects (up to 5 m high in Sardinilla and up to 4 m high in Anhembi), in plots containing different richness levels and combinations of species.Light interception increased from monocultures to 5-species mixtures in Sardinilla and from 20- to 114-species mixtures in Anhembi (during the dry season). At the Sardinilla site, five-species mixtures showed iPAR comparable to the best performing monocultures, despite substantial differences observed among monocultures. Diversity-iPAR relationships changed seasonally and were more pronounced during the dry season. Tree richness promoted a less variable temporal and spatial (i.e. both horizontal and vertical) distribution of light interception.Synthesis. High tree diversity (i.e. over a hundred species in mixture) maximizes the amount of light intercepted by the canopy in restored tropical forests through more even capture in space and time. Diversity-light interception relationships should be critically considered for designing cost-efficient large-scale tropical forest restoration programs.
Historical patterns of natural forest management in Costa Rica: The good, the bad and the Ugly			We present an in-depth analysis of natural forest management practices in Costa Rica based on a new historical forestry GIS database encompassing five conservation regions in the country where selective logging has been prevalent for the last 18 years. Natural forest management refers to the selective logging practices for the production of timber in natural forest ecosystems. The study considers natural forest management plans developed following a standardized format, based on Forestry Law 7575, established in 1996. Our results show a positive aspect of forest management where a large percentage of the managed forest is still standing, contrary to other tropical countries where selective logging promotes land use change. The negative finding is that managed forest areas occur in the last remaining forest fragments outside of protected areas, which challenges the continuity of selective logging in the near and mid future due to the potential impoverishment of the isolated forest stands. The most negative aspect is the recent establishment, by law, of a very short return logging cycle (10-15 years-minimum cutting cycle) as it contradicts ecological studies showing that tropical forests require over 60 years for the forest structure and composition to return to a state similar to pre-logging states. Our results should inform decision makers and managers in conservation areas to review current policies and establish new benchmarks for sustainable forest management in the country. © 2014 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Holocene stand-scale forest dynamics of the british isles			0
HOT SPOTS OCCURRENCE IN THE DYNAMICS OF DEFORESTATION IN THE AMAZON RAINFOREST			In mitigating climate change and ecosystems preservation that are unique and indispensable to the life of the planet, efforts are being made to reduce current levels of deforestation and degradation of tropical forests. In the arch of deforestation of the Amazon forest, studies on the occurrence of fires and the dynamics of deforestation are frequent in the literature on several aspects such as soil management, climate and vegetation change and forest resilience.This work presents an analysis of the relationship between deforested areas and the occurrence of fire outbreaks observed from January 2007 to November 2018, in a study area of approximately 36,000 km(2), corresponding to the area covered by a Landsat-8 scene. Further, it was performed a correlation of fire outbreaks occurred in and near the forest area from the boundaries of the deforested areas from 2015 to 2018. Annual fire outbreaks data were obtained through the Queimadas Program of the National Institute for Space Research (INPE) from 2007 to 2018, the deforestation polygons from the Project for Deforestation Monitoring in the Amazon Forest by Satellite (PRODES) and the INPE's Real-Time Detection System (DETER-B) from 2007 to 2018. The temporal analysis revealed an increasing of the incidence of fires with the increasing of deforestation in that period, evidencing the systematic use of fire as a means of suppressing biomass. In the last 4 years, the high occurrence of forest fires between 500 to 1000 m from the edge boundaries of the deforested areas, showed a considerable degradation of the forest and a probable decrease of forest resilience.
How accurately may we project tropical forest-cover change? A validation of a forward-looking baseline for REDD			The Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation (REDD+) mechanism of a future post-2012 global climate-change treaty would aim to give incentive to tropical countries to reduce deforestation and thus forest-carbon emissions. It would do so by crediting tropical countries for reducing deforestation relative to a baseline scenario describing carbon emissions and removals from forest-cover change expected in the absence of REDD+. Defining a credible and accurate baseline is both critical and challenging. One approach considered promising is spatial modelling to project forest-cover change on the basis of historical trends; yet few such projections have been validated at a national scale. We develop and validate a novel GEOMOD projection of forest-cover change in Panama over 2000-2008, based on trends over 1990-2000 and 25 drivers of forest-cover change. Compared with the actual landscape of 2008, our projection is 85.2% accurate at a 100-m pixel resolution. More error is attributable to the location of projected forest (8.6%) than to its area (6.2%). Accuracy was least where forest regeneration predominated (80%), and greatest where deforestation predominated (90%). Despite the sophistication of our projection, it is slightly less accurate than if we had assumed no forest-cover change over 2000-2008. We identify factors limiting projection accuracy, including the complexity of forest-cover change, the spatial variability of forest-carbon density, and the relatively small area of change at the national scale. We conclude that, with the exception of contexts where forest-cover change is significant and straightforward and where forest-carbon density relatively uniform (e.g., agricultural frontiers), spatially projected baselines are of limited value for REDD+ - their accuracy is too limited given their relative lack of transparency. Simpler, relatively coarse scale, retrospective baselines are recommended instead. © 2012 Elsevier Ltd.
How agroforestry systems influence soil fauna and their functions-a review			Background Agroforestry systems have enhanced diversity of cultivated plants compared to monocultures, and are expected to affect associated biodiversity. Despite a growing body of literature on the importance of soil fauna, the known effects of different agroforestry types on soil fauna communities and functions have not yet been synthesized. Scope We scanned publications on soil fauna in agroforestry systems. Our aim was to give an overview of strengths and weaknesses of the existing data, in terms of spatial coverage and representation of diverse agroforestry types and soil fauna groups and functions. Conclusions Our database includes sixty-seven articles, mostly focusing on tropical regions and perennial crop agroforestry systems. Soil macrofauna are the most studied fauna group. The most common question addressed is the comparison of the effect of land use types on communities. Effects on fauna abundance and diversity are mainly positive when agroforestry is compared to cropland, and neutral or negative when compared to forests. Few publications actually measure soil fauna functions, or characterize their interactions and evolution in time and space depending on system design and management. Further work on soil fauna in agroforestry should harness ecological theory and address questions of spatial structure and scale, temporal dynamics and ecological interaction networks and how they determine ecosystem functioning.
How ants, birds and bats affect crop yield along shade gradients in tropical cacao agroforestry			Tropical agroforests are diverse systems where several predator groups shape animal communities and plant–arthropod interactions. Ants, birds and bats in particular can reduce herbivore numbers and thereby increase crop yield. However, the relative importance of these groups, whether they interact, and how this interaction is affected by management and landscape context, is poorly understood. We jointly manipulated access of ants, birds and bats in Indonesian smallholder cacao agroforestry across gradients of shade and distance to natural forest. We quantified arthropod abundance, pest damage and yield. In control treatments, yield was highest under 30–40% canopy cover. Ant exclusion strongly reduced yield (from 600 to 300 kg ha−1 year−1) at 15% canopy cover. Bird exclusion impaired yield (from 400 to 250 kg ha−1 year−1) at 60% and enhanced yield (from 600 to 900 kg ha−1 year−1) at 15% canopy cover, while bats had no effect. Yield increased with forest proximity, a pattern not related to predator access. No interactive effects among predator exclusions on yield, pest damage and arthropod communities were found. Ant exclusion increased numbers of herbivores below 30% canopy cover, without reducing spider abundances. Bird exclusion reduced herbivore and increased spider abundances. Synthesis and applications. Using exclusion studies, we estimated that ants and birds cause cacao yield to vary between 100 and 800 kg ha−1 year−1, depending on shade-tree management. In all but the most shaded agroforests, ants were pivotal in supporting yields. Yields under low-canopy cover were strongly dependent on access by predator groups, with birds reducing rather than increasing yield. Hence, cacao farmers should refrain from disturbing ant communities and maintain 30–40% shade-tree canopy cover not only for ecophysiological reasons but also to buffer variability in predator communities. © 2016 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology © 2016 British Ecological Society
How are biodiversity and carbon stock recovered during tropical forest restoration? Supporting the ecological paradigms and political context involved			To meet agendas for biodiversity conservation and mitigation of climate change, large-scale restoration initiatives propose ecological restoration as an alternative that can reconcile these two objectives. In ongoing ecosystem restoration, increased diversity is always associated with increased productivity (and consequent carbon stock), which is among the most important ecosystem functions. The ecological paradigm of this association is that ecosystem biodiversity (B) is positively related to both ecosystem functions and services (EF and ES). However, BEF and BES relationships vary spatially and temporally, which makes understanding these relationships relevant and important for practical restoration actions. In this study, we asked how biodiversity and carbon stock recovery occurs during tropical forest restoration. We reviewed literature of the relationships between BEF and BES in the context of ecological restoration and asked whether ecological restoration can recover both. In addition, we conducted a metadata analysis of studies on the recovery of biodiversity and biomass in regenerating tropical forests (n = 83) to find the best model that describes this relationship. In general, studies showed that ecosystem biodiversity and productivity are positively related, and that restoration can recover both. We found an asymptotic and positive correlation between biodiversity and biomass in tropical forests, suggesting limitation of the mutual gains of these two ecosystem properties during restoration. We discuss these results in the context of ecological theory and the practice of ecological restoration.
How biochar works, and when it doesn't: A review of mechanisms controlling soil and plant responses to biochar			We synthesized 20 years of research to explain the interrelated processes that determine soil and plant responses to biochar. The properties of biochar and its effects within agricultural ecosystems largely depend on feedstock and pyrolysis conditions. We describe three stages of reactions of biochar in soil: dissolution (1–3 weeks); reactive surface development (1–6 months); and aging (beyond 6 months). As biochar ages, it is incorporated into soil aggregates, protecting the biochar carbon and promoting the stabilization of rhizodeposits and microbial products. Biochar carbon persists in soil for hundreds to thousands of years. By increasing pH, porosity, and water availability, biochars can create favorable conditions for root development and microbial functions. Biochars can catalyze biotic and abiotic reactions, particularly in the rhizosphere, that increase nutrient supply and uptake by plants, reduce phytotoxins, stimulate plant development, and increase resilience to disease and environmental stressors. Meta-analyses found that, on average, biochars increase P availability by a factor of 4.6; decrease plant tissue concentration of heavy metals by 17%–39%; build soil organic carbon through negative priming by 3.8% (range −21% to +20%); and reduce non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions from soil by 12%–50%. Meta-analyses show average crop yield increases of 10%–42% with biochar addition, with greatest increases in low-nutrient P-sorbing acidic soils (common in the tropics), and in sandy soils in drylands due to increase in nutrient retention and water holding capacity. Studies report a wide range of plant responses to biochars due to the diversity of biochars and contexts in which biochars have been applied. Crop yields increase strongly if site-specific soil constraints and nutrient and water limitations are mitigated by appropriate biochar formulations. Biochars can be tailored to address site constraints through feedstock selection, by modifying pyrolysis conditions, through pre- or post-production treatments, or co-application with organic or mineral fertilizers. We demonstrate how, when used wisely, biochar mitigates climate change and supports food security and the circular economy. © 2021 The Authors. GCB Bioenergy published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
How Can Remote Sensing Help Monitor Tropical Moist Forest Degradation?-A Systematic Review			In the context of the climate and biodiversity crisis facing our planet, tropical forests playing a key role in global carbon flux and containing over half of Earth's species are important to preserve. They are today threatened by deforestation but also by forest degradation, which is more difficult to study. Here, we performed a systematic review of studies on moist tropical forest degradation using remote sensing and fitting indicators of forest resilience to perturbations. Geographical repartition, spatial extent and temporal evolution were analyzed. Indicators of compositional, structural and regeneration criteria were noted as well as remote sensing indices and metrics used. Tropical moist forest degradation is not extensively studied especially in the Congo basin and in southeast Asia. Forest structure (i.e., canopy gaps, fragmentation and biomass) is the most widely and easily measured criteria with remote sensing, while composition and regeneration are more difficult to characterize. Mixing LiDAR/Radar and optical data shows good potential as well as very high-resolution satellite data. The awaited GEDI and BIOMASS satellites data will fill the actual gap to a large extent and provide accurate structural information. LiDAR and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) form a good bridge between field and satellite data. While the performance of the LiDAR is no longer to be demonstrated, particular attention should be brought to the UAV that shows great potential and could be more easily used by local communities and stakeholders.
How Can We Incentivize Tropical Forest Restoration?			International policy incentives to promote tropical forest restoration, community forestry, and payments for environmental services have not been widely adopted at scale. It is possible that reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and related activities (REDD+) could be a policy tool for encouraging larger scale restoration efforts in the tropics. Although there are political challenges to ensuring the inclusion of restoration activities in REDD+, its use might facilitate the forest transition in tropical countries, reduce carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere, and garner political support for these policies and approaches. © 2013 Copyright Taylor and Francis Group, LLC.
How Changes in Legally Demanded Forest Restoration Impact Ecosystem Services: A Case Study in the Atlantic Forest, Brazil			The recent change in Brazilian laws reduced the amount of area that is set aside for native vegetation restoration in rural private properties. However, we lack estimates of its impacts on the provisioning of key ecosystem services at local scales. Therefore, in a microwatershed in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest hot spot, we quantified the impact of the change from the Forest Code (1965) to the Native Vegetation Protection Law in Brazil (2012) on future native forest cover, biomass carbon stocks, and soil loss and sedimentation. We analyzed three scenarios: (a) the land use and cover as of 2016, (b) the Forest Code, 1965, and (c) the Native Vegetation Protection Law, 2012. In each scenario, we modeled soil loss and sedimentation (InVEST, Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation) and calculated the carbon stocks. The 2012 law implementation would increase forest cover (15.6%), decrease soil sedimentation (1.12%) and loss (1.13%), and increase carbon stock (5.4%). However, compared to the Forest Code, it would reduce the area for restoration and the potential for native forest cover growth, increase soil loss and sedimentation potential, and limit increases in carbon stocks at the landscape level. In both restoration scenarios, the potential percent increase in forest cover in the microwatershed owing to the laws is higher than the percent decrease in soil loss and sedimentation. These findings have the potential to elucidate the effect of laws on ecosystem services and be useful to those planning the creation, modification, and implementation of laws for forest restoration in private properties.
How climate, topography, soils, herbivores, and fire control forest-grassland coexistence in the Eurasian forest-steppe			Recent advances in ecology and biogeography demonstrate the importance of fire and large herbivores - and challenge the primacy of climate - to our understanding of the distribution, stability, and antiquity of forests and grasslands. Among grassland ecologists, particularly those working in savannas of the seasonally dry tropics, an emerging fire-herbivore paradigm is generally accepted to explain grass dominance in climates and on soils that would otherwise permit development of closed-canopy forests. By contrast, adherents of the climate-soil paradigm, particularly foresters working in the humid tropics or temperate latitudes, tend to view fire and herbivores as disturbances, often human-caused, which damage forests and reset succession. Towards integration of these two paradigms, we developed a series of conceptual models to explain the existence of an extensive temperate forest-grassland mosaic that occurs within a 4.7 million km(2) belt spanning from central Europe through eastern Asia. The Eurasian forest-steppe is reminiscent of many regions globally where forests and grasslands occur side-by-side with stark boundaries. Our conceptual models illustrate that if mean climate was the only factor, forests should dominate in humid continental regions and grasslands should prevail in semi-arid regions, but that extensive mosaics would not occur. By contrast, conceptual models that also integrate climate variability, soils, topography, herbivores, and fire depict how these factors collectively expand suitable conditions for forests and grasslands, such that grasslands may occur in more humid regions and forests in more arid regions than predicted by mean climate alone. Furthermore, boundaries between forests and grasslands are reinforced by vegetation-fire, vegetation-herbivore, and vegetation-microclimate feedbacks, which limit tree establishment in grasslands and promote tree survival in forests. Such feedbacks suggest that forests and grasslands of the Eurasian forest-steppe are governed by ecological dynamics that are similar to those hypothesised to maintain boundaries between tropical forests and savannas. Unfortunately, the grasslands of the Eurasian forest-steppe are sometimes misinterpreted as deforested or otherwise degraded vegetation. In fact, the grasslands of this region provide valuable ecosystem services, support a high diversity of plants and animals, and offer critical habitat for endangered large herbivores. We suggest that a better understanding of the fundamental ecological controls that permit forest-grassland coexistence could help us prioritise conservation and restoration of the Eurasian forest-steppe for biodiversity, climate adaptation, and pastoral livelihoods. Currently, these goals are being undermined by tree-planting campaigns that view the open grasslands as opportunities for afforestation. Improved understanding of the interactive roles of climate variability, soils, topography, fire, and herbivores will help scientists and policymakers recognise the antiquity of the grasslands of the Eurasian forest-steppe.
How do earthworms influence organic matter quantity and quality in tropical soils?			Earthworms are important regulators of soil structure and soil organic matter (SUM) dynamics; however, quantifying their influence on SUM cycling in tropical ecosystems remains little studied. Simulated rainfall was used to disrupt casts produced by Amynthas khami and their surrounding soil (control) into a range of small sized aggregates (50-250, 250-500, 500-2000 and 2000-5000 mu m). To gain insight into how earthworms influence SUM biogeochemical composition in the aggregates, we carried out elemental and stable isotope analysis, and analytical pyrolysis (Py GC/MS). We also characterized their lignin component after oxidation with cupric oxide (CuO).The C content of smaller size fractions (<500 mu m) in the control soil was higher than in the larger fractions. Our study therefore suggests that the aggregate hierarchy concept, which is used to understand soil aggregates and SUM dynamics in temperate soils, may not be applicable to the tropical Acrisol studied here. Earthworms modified SUM organization in soil aggregates. Although the isotope analyses were useful for highlighting SUM enrichment in the earthworm casts, aggregate fractions could not be classified according to particle size. Molecular analyses were necessary to indicate that SUM in all size fractions of casts consisted of relatively undecomposed material. Protection of the most labile SUM structures occurred in the smallest aggregate size fraction (50-250 mu m). Py GC/MS showed that earthworm casts and control aggregates <2000 mu m could be clearly distinguished according to the molecular properties of their SOM. Aggregates larger than 2000 mu m, however, were most probably composed of all fractions and were not different. As a consequence, our results indicate that studies to determine the impact of earthworms on SUM turnover in soil are spatially dependant on the scale of observation. (C) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
How do leaf functional traits influence above-ground tree carbon in tropical hill forests of Bangladesh?			Plant leaf functional traits significantly influence carbon cycling in tropical forests, though the relationships between these traits and carbon stocks are complex. The present study investigates the role of leaf functional traits, i.e., specific leaf area (SLA), leaf dry matter content (LDMC), leaf width, and leaf thickness—on above-ground tree carbon (AGTC) stocks in two forest protected areas (PA) in northeast Bangladesh: Khadimnagar National Park (KNP) and Rema Kalenga Wildlife Sanctuary (RKWS). Data were collected from 110 plots, comprising 60 in RKWS and 50 in KNP. We observed that the community-weighted mean (CWM) leaf trait values were predominantly higher in the southwestern regions of KNP, while in RKWS, they were primarily distributed in the northern or southern regions. The results revealed that, at the landscape level, CWM-leaf width (R2 = 0.10, P < 0.01) had a significant effect on AGTC. In site-specific analyses, CWM-leaf thickness (R2 = 0.25), CWM-leaf width (R2 = 0.10), and CWM-SLA (R2 = 0.17) had significant (p < 0.05) negative effects on AGTC in KNP. However, in RKWS, only CWM-leaf width (R2 = 0.015, P < 0.01) significantly affected AGTC, while other CWM-leaf traits showed no significant impact. Additionally, the effects of two common environmental variables—solar radiation and mean annual temperature (MAT)—were significant (p < 0.05) predictors of AGTC at the landscape level but not at the site level. The total carbon stock in RKWS was 1.98 % higher than in KNP per hectare, with species-specific carbon content varying across the landscape. Notably, Chukrasia tabularis showed the highest carbon content (31.57 t ha−1). These findings highlight significant spatial variability in leaf functional traits and AGTC distribution across the two forests. This study enhances our understanding of how leaf functional traits influence AGTC stocks, underscoring the importance of localized investigations for global climate change mitigation efforts and supporting sustainable forest management in Bangladesh. © 2025 The Author(s)
How does forest restoration affect the recovery of soil quality? A global meta-analysis for tropical and temperate regions			Restoring forest ecosystems to reverse soil degradation is critical to maintain environmental quality, forest and agricultural productivity, biodiversity conservation, and to provide valuable ecosystem services. Yet the impacts of forest restoration on soil quality remain under-investigated. Here we aim to address a key knowledge gap: how does forest ecosystem restoration affect the recovery of soil quality in tropical and temperate regions? We conducted a global meta-analysis to compare soil physical, chemical, and biological properties between restoring forests and reference old-growth/less-disturbed forests. We revealed for the first time that differences between restoring and reference forests are lower for physical (12-25%; based on median values of effect size) and chemical (10-74%) properties than for biological (32-90%) properties. More specifically, bulk density (12% of difference), pH (10%), and enzyme activity (32%) had mean values in restoring forests closer to those observed in reference forests. Overall, our results suggest that the restoration of soil properties was greater in tropical regions, after longer periods (>30 years), through passive restoration, and over pasturelands. Our global meta-analysis helps to fill the soil information gap in forest restoration and increase our understanding of how to improve soil quality through forest restoration and soil monitoring processes in tropical and temperate regions.
How effective are disturbance - tolerant, agroecosystem - nesting ant species in improving soil fertility and crop yield?			Study of the abundance, diversity and nest densities of agroecosystem-inhabiting ant species, in fallow, freshly tilled and cultivated farmers' fields revealed that Pheidole latinoda had highest abundance, nest density and disturbance-tolerance ability. Thirty-one arthropod morphospecies belonging to 12 orders were recorded in the nest entrance rim debris piles of this ant species. Hence, P. latinoda was selected to study the impact of nest rim debris soil on soil fertility and yield of two common crops, rice and tomato, widely cultivated in the Indo-Gangetic plains of India. Experimental field studies revealed that ant-related enrichment results in significant increase of the C, N and P contents of the bulk soil and a doubling of the soil microbial biomass. The soil enrichment significantly enhanced the yield of both the crop plants in a dose-dependent manner. A significant positive correlation was found between the ecophysiological traits including the specific leaf area, plant height and total plant weight of both rice and tomato plants, and the soil chemical constituents i.e. total C, N, P, NH4-N, NO3-N, microbial biomass C, N and P. The ecosystem engineering activities of P. latinoda ant colonies apparently. enriched the soil via the nutrient cycling activities of the debris arthropods, on the externally discarded organic refuse. Since P. latinoda increases productivity via increase in soil fertility and also has the potential to suppress insect pests of crops, conservation of such ant species could enhance agricultural sustainability, through multiple pathways. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
How effective are perches in promoting bird-mediated seed dispersal for natural forest regeneration? A systematic review protocol			BackgroundForest landscape restoration (FLR), often through tree planting, is one of the priorities in many global and national initiatives for carbon offsetting as part of climate change mitigation and biodiversity conservation. However, active efforts to meet FLR objectives entail substantial costs for the procurement of planting stocks and require an experienced workforce for planting and nurturing tree seedlings. Alternatively, restoration projects can be more cost-effective and potentially may have greater biodiversity gain through assisting and accelerating natural forest regeneration. The use of perches is one of the strategies under Assisted Natural Regeneration (ANR) and is used to attract avian seed dispersers to degraded habitats for increased tree seed supply and seedling establishment. This systematic review and potential meta-analysis aim to determine the effectiveness of artificial and natural perches in promoting natural forest regeneration. Specifically, we will evaluate their effectiveness in driving seed richness, seed density, seedling richness, and seedling density. The results will synthesize available evidence on the topic, identify knowledge gaps we need filling to upscale the strategy, and inform their use in concert with other ANR strategies.MethodsThe search strategy was informed through a literature scan and discussions with stakeholders and experts. A total of eight databases, which include an organizational library and a web-based search engine, will be searched using the refined search string in English. The search string was formed using keywords corresponding to the PICO structure of the research question, and its comprehensiveness was evaluated using 10 benchmark articles. The search results will be screened by the review team (composed of a primary and at least two secondary reviewers) using the set eligibility criteria at the title and abstract level, followed by the full-text screening. The screened studies will then undergo critical appraisal using the assessment criteria based on risk of bias and methods. Data from the accepted studies will be extracted to the standard data sheet for meta-analysis. Effect size (Hedges' g) will be computed to determine whether perches are effective in increasing seed dispersal and seedling establishment in degraded sites. The effect of potential modifiers relating to the landscape will be explored via mixed models.
How good are tropical forest patches for ecosystem services provisioning?			Native forests play an important role regarding ecosystem services related to biodiversity, water, and nutrient cycling, and the intensity of those services should be related to the amount, configuration and quality of the forest. However, in highly dynamic landscapes, such as some tropical regions, ecosystem services are potentially affected not only by the present landscape structure, but also by the historical land use. Here we propose a simple methodological framework to evaluate the contribution of past landscape dynamics and present landscape structure in the provision of ecosystem services. We applied this framework to a traditional agricultural landscape from the Brazilian Atlantic Forest hotspot, where natural forests cover has increased from 8 to 16 % in the last 60 years (1962-2008), and where old forests are being reduced while young forests are being regenerated. Forests of different ages, in association with current landscape structure, reveal a mosaic of forest patches under different conditions, implying different abilities to deliver ecosystem services. With the replacement of old-growth forests by young-regenerating forests and a high level of forest fragmentation, less than 1/4 of the current forest cover is able to fully satisfy the ecosystem service demands. To avoid such tendency, government policies should not only focus on increasing forest cover, but also in conserving old-growth forest fragments or increasing forest quality. The proposed methodology allows integrating historical land use and current landscape structure to evaluate ecosystem services provision and can be useful to establish programs of payment for ecosystem services.
How have RPAS helped monitor forests and what can we apply in forest restoration monitoring?			We are currently experiencing an unprecedented moment in forest restoration, where monitoring activities in recovery areas play a vital role in problem identification and method adaptation. However, it is crucial to shift away from expensive traditional methodologies and develop technologies that enable large-scale monitoring using more accessible and cost-effective tools. In an effort to provide an evidence-based perspective, we conducted a systematic review of how remotely piloted aircraft systems equipped with various sensors have been employed for forest monitoring. We consulted three databases and included 53 articles in our review. The results revealed a trend toward research in tropical ecosystems, with forest structure being the most frequently assessed attribute, and canopy height being the most widely measured structural indicator. Red-green-blue sensors were commonly used, both individually and in combination with others, and there was a noticeable shift toward the use of light detection and ranging. Data validation primarily relied on forest inventory methods, often involving comparisons of outputs from different sensors and the use of artificial intelligence algorithms. Despite the wide range of studies utilizing sensor-equipped drones to analyze forest attributes, there is a notable scarcity of research specifically addressing the application of these technologies in forest restoration monitoring. Filling this research gap is essential, as employing techniques that enable large-scale monitoring, such as aerial photogrammetry and remote sensing, aligns with current trends and contributes to global commitments to environmental restoration and conservation.
How hydrology determines seasonal and interannual variations in water table depth, surface energy exchange, and water stress in a tropical peatland: Modeling versus measurements			Soil carbon stocks in tropical peatlands have declined recently from water table depth (WTD) drawdown caused by increased frequency and intensity of climate extremes like El Niño and by artificial drainage. Restoration of these carbon stocks under these climatic and anthropogenic disturbances requires improved predictive capacity for hydrological feedbacks to ecological processes. Process-based modeling of tropical peatland ecohydrology could provide us with such capacity, but such modeling has thus far been limited. We aimed at using basic processes for water and O2 transport and their effects on ecosystem water, carbon, and nitrogen cycling to model seasonal and interannual variations of WTD and surface energy exchange. We tested these processes in a process-based model ecosys in a drained tropical Indonesian peatland from an El Niño year 2002 to a wetter year 2005. WTD was modeled from hydraulically driven water transfers controlled vertically by precipitation versus evapotranspiration (ET) and laterally by discharge versus recharge to or from an external reference WTD. These transfers caused WTD drawdown and soil drying to be modeled during dry seasons, which reduced ET and increased Bowen ratio by lowering stomatal conductance. More pronounced dry seasons in drier years 2002-2004 versus wetter year 2005 caused deeper WTD, more intense peat drying, and greater plant water stress. These modeled trends were well corroborated by site measurements as apparent in regression statistics of modeled versus observed WTD (R2 > 0.8), latent heat (R2 > 0.8), and sensible heat (R2 > 0.7) fluxes. Insights gained from this modeling would aid in predicting the fate of tropical peatlands under future drier climates. Key Points Ecosys modeled tropical peatland WTD by a vertical-lateral hydraulic scheme Deeper WTD caused peat drying and reduced stomatal conductance in dry seasons Stomatal limitation to transpiration was stronger in drier dry seasons ©2015. American Geophysical Union. All Rights Reserved.
HOW LONG DO RESTORED ECOSYSTEMS PERSIST?			Why do some restored ecosystems persist for centuries while others are quickly converted to alternative land rises or land covers? We propose that restored ecosystems have a temporal dimension that is variable, often finite, and likely predictable to some extent based on attributes of stakeholders, environment, and governance. The longevity of a restored ecosystem carries strong implications for its capacity to support biodiversity and provide ecosystem services, so an emerging challenge for restoration ecology is to predict the circumstances under which restored ecosystems persist for longer or shorter periods of time. We use a case study in tropical forest restoration to demonstrate one way that restored ecosystem longevity can be approached quantitatively, and we highlight opportunities for future research rising restoration case study repositories, practitioner surveys. and historical aerial imagery. Much remains to be learned, but it is likely that decision-makers and practitioners have considerable leverage to increase the probability that restored ecosystems persist into the future, extending the benefits of contemporary restoration initiatives.
How Much Agroforestry Is Needed to Achieve Multifunctional Landscapes at the Forest Frontier?-Coupling Expert Opinion with Robust Goal Programming			Agroforestry has been promoted as a key forest landscape restoration (FLR) option to restore ecosystem services in degraded tropical landscapes. We investigated the share and type of agroforestry selected in an optimized landscape, accounting for a mosaic of alternative forest landscape restoration options (reforestation and natural succession) and forest and common agricultural land-uses. We extend previous studies on multi-objective robust optimization and the analytic hierarchy process by a systematic sensitivity analysis to assess the influence of incorporating agroforestry into a landscape. This approach accounts for multiple objectives concurrently, yet data and computational requirements are relatively low. Our results show that experts from different backgrounds perceive agroforestry (i.e., alley cropping and silvopasture) very positively. Inclusion of large shares of agroforestry (41% share of landscape) in the FLR mix enhanced simulated ecosystem service provision. Our results demonstrate that landscapes with high shares of agroforestry may also comprise of high shares of natural forest. However, landscapes dominated by single agroforestry systems showed lower landscape multifunctionality than heterogeneous landscapes. In the ongoing effort to create sustainable landscapes, our approach contributes to an understanding of interrelations between land-covers and uncertain provisions of ecosystem services in circumstances with scarce data.
How much carbon is sequestered during the restoration of tropical forests? Estimates from tree species in the Brazilian Atlantic forest			The estimation of carbon accumulation in restoration areas over time is an important step for the evaluation of the success of restoration programs and to indicate the best practices for forest management and conservation. In the present study, we evaluated the aboveground biomass (AGB) of 10 tree species (fast-growing and slow-growing tree species) that are representative of the Brazilian Atlantic forest to test if biomass accumulation varies with tree age and ecological group (fast- and slow-growing). We also used regression models to simulate how much carbon is sequestered over time in restoration areas of tropical wet forests. The results exhibited differences between the two groups in terms of biomass accumulation; the slow-growing species accumulated an almost two-fold higher amount of total biomass (379.4 kg) than the fast-growing species (208.56 kg). The estimated age of the individuals explained the biomass accumulation: the long-lived and slow-growing species accumulate less biomass over a longer time, and the short-lived fast-growing species accumulate more biomass over a shorter period. These differences suggest that the fast-growing tree species contribute more to the carbon stock during the early years (approximately 37 years) of the restoration and that the slow-growing species contribute more significantly during the later stages of succession. We estimated that second-growth forests (4160 years old) accumulate more than two-fold carbon than immature forest (21-40 years old) and much more than ten-fold carbon than young forests (7-20 years old). These differences in carbon sequestration magnitudes suggest that services provided by restoration areas, can increase exponentially in the first 60 years, and this is particularly important for future conservation and management of areas undergoing restoration. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
How payments for ecosystem services can undermine Indigenous institutions: The case of Peru?s Ampiyacu-Apayacu watershed			Payments for ecosystem services have come to dominate international policies for addressing tropical deforestation. Political ecologists, degrowth scholars, and Indigenous activists have critiqued these approaches on the grounds that by centering economic growth, they can disrupt local conservation systems and compromise forestdwelling communities' ability to protect forests and live well. Meanwhile, Indigenous groups have developed positive alternatives to 'green growth' strategies, including buen vivir (good living) in Latin America. In Peru, the National Forest Conservation Program (NFCP) serves as the state's flagship initiative to address tropical deforestation in Indigenous communities by paying communities for demonstrated reductions in deforestation, so long as they invest those funds according to an agreed up on management plan. We analyzed how the NFCP has interacted with quality-of-life plans, Indigenous planning tools rooted in buen vivir. Our findings suggest that the NFCP has eroded local systems for conservation, including the minga, an Amazonian tradition of mutual aid and shared labor for subsistence livelihoods, pushing communities to replace these systems with commodity production and employer-employee relationships. We argue that instead of imposing onerous conditions and steering communities towards evermore commodity production, conservation initiatives should support the implementation of quality-of-life plans. We suggest that climate justice organizers, political ecologists, and degrowth scholars explore and advocate for such initiatives.
How REDD+ and FLEGT-VPA Processes are Contributing Towards SFM in Indonesia-The Specialists' Viewpoint			In an effort to reverse the trend of deforestation and forest degradation, several international initiatives have been attempted. Though promoted in different political arenas, Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade (FLEGT)-Voluntary Partnership Agreement (VPA), and Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation in developing countries (REDD+) share overlapping objectives of conservation of tropical forests. We explore specialists' viewpoint on FLEGT-VPA and REDD+ processes in Indonesia with reference to their contribution towards Sustainable Forest Management (SFM). The study shows that FLEGT-VPA and REDD+ regimes contribute towards SFM. While FLEGT-VPA improves enabling condition for SFM through governance reform, improved harvesting practices, and timber legality assurance system, REDD+ supports SFM through institutional strengthening, reforming policies and frameworks, mobilizing new and additional financial resources and increasing social and ecological resilience. We identified opportunities to achieve synergies between REDD+ and FLEGT-VPA by harmonizing their processes, tools, methodologies, technical assistance, capacity-building and funding mechanisms. © 2019 Commonwealth Forestry Association. All rights reserved.
How resilient are African woodlands to disturbance from shifting cultivation?			Large parts of sub-Saharan Africa are experiencing rapid changes in land use and land cover, driven largely by the expansion of small-scale shifting cultivation. This practice creates complex mosaic landscapes with active agricultural fields and patches of mature woodland, interspersed with remnant patches in various stages of regrowth. Our objective here was to examine the rate and extent to which carbon stocks in trees and soils recover after cultivation, and detail how this disturbance and regrowth affect patterns in tree species composition and diversity over 40 years of succession in a miombo woodland landscape in southeast Tanzania. We sampled 67 areas, including plots previously cleared for cultivation, active fields, and mature woodlands for reference purposes. Sites were further stratified by soil texture to test for associated effects. Tree carbon stocks accumulated at an average rate of 0.83 +/- 0.10 Mg C.ha(-1).yr(-1), with soil texture having no clear impact on accumulation rates. Bulk soil carbon stocks on both soil types appeared unaffected by both the initial land clearance and the subsequent regrowth, which resulted in no significant changes over time. Tree species diversity in regrowing plots developed rapidly and within similar to 10 years was equivalent to that of mature woodland. Many of the species found in mature woodlands reappeared relatively quickly after abandonment, although species composition is expected to take considerably longer to recover, with at least 60-80 years required for the compositional similarity between regrowing and mature woodlands to reach levels similar to that among nearby mature woodlands. Through impacts on beta-diversity, disturbance was also found to increase the total number of tree species present in the landscape, with many of the recorded species only found in regrowing woodlands. Our results are of relevance to carbon sequestration projects by helping to inform the potential future carbon and biodiversity benefits of restoring disturbed habitats (REDD+). At a time where the use of shifting cultivation is threatened by shifts to larger-scale, commercial agriculture, we show that secondary woodland habitats can retain considerable biodiversity value, and act as carbon sinks.
How to enhance Atlantic Forest protection? Dealing with the shortcomings of successional stages classification			The Atlantic Forest is a global biodiversity hotspot and a significant provider of ecosystem services to 65% of the Brazilian population. Due to being highly threatened, it is protected by federal law 11,428/2006, which establishes forest use restrictions based on native vegetation successional stages in the Atlantic Forest, with more advanced stages receiving more protection. The classification parameters are established at the state level. However, the parameters employed to classify forest fragments in different successional stages are subjective and imprecise, negatively impacting environmental permitting and related offset policies. Here, we critically assessed the major limitations in applying the 11,428/2006 law and presented alternatives for establishing a more transparent, applicable, legally safe, and effective protocol for identifying the conservation value of forest fragments. We also highlight problems related to sampling, indicators, and methodologies and present guidelines for revising the parameters for applying the Atlantic Forest law and associated state -level resolutions. We suggest an inclusive two-step analysis based on vegetation structure, forest cover history, biodiversity, ecosystem services (social), and landscape indicators. By employing a more technological approach and transferring part of the assessment responsibility to the state -level environmental agencies instead of allowing self -declared reports by landowners, our proposal focuses on the potential for evaluating ecological integrity among different successional classes by forest types. As nearly 90% of the remaining Brazilian Atlantic Forest is located within private lands, improving this legal instrument is essential for protecting the vulnerable biodiversity of this unique and threatened biome. (c) 2024 Associa & ccedil;& atilde;o Brasileira de Ci & ecirc;ncia Ecol & oacute;gica e Conserva & ccedil;& atilde;o. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY -NC -ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
How to Organize a Large-Scale Ecological Restoration Program? The Framework Developed by the Atlantic Forest Restoration Pact in Brazil			Large-scale ecological restoration programs across the world have begun to extensively transform degraded lands into young native ecosystems. However, more projects like these will be necessary in the coming years to fulfill the goal of restoring 150 million ha established by United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity. Here, we present and discuss the steps required for and the lessons learned from the organization of a large-scale ecological restoration program in Brazil, the Atlantic Forest Restoration Pact. These lessons are organized around 9 steps: (a) the presentation of the motivations driving the promotion of large-scale restoration, (b) the organization of the main stakeholders, (c) the definition of goals, (d) the organization of a database, (e) the indication of both available and priority areas for restoration, (f) the proposal of science-based and field-validated methods, (g) the establishment of a monitoring protocol, (h) the proposal of a communication program to unite members and interact with society, and (i) the strategies for promoting the establishment of public policies conducive to restoration. This framework may provide a template to help other initiatives to mainstream isolated restoration projects into a large and well-organized movement, which may increase the chances of successful restoration in the future. © 2013 Taylor and Francis Group, LLC.
Hunting pressure modulates the composition and size structure of terrestrial and arboreal vertebrates in Amazonian forests			Overhunting is a leading contemporary driver of tropical forest wildlife loss. The absence or extremely low densities of large-bodied vertebrates disrupts plant-animal mutualisms and consequently degrades key ecosystem services. Understanding patterns of defaunation is therefore crucial given that most tropical forests worldwide are now "half-empty". Here we investigate changes in vertebrate community composition and size structure along a gradient of marked anthropogenic hunting pressure in the Medio Jurua region of western Brazilian Amazonia. Using a novel camera trapping grid design deployed both in the understorey and the forest canopy, we estimated the aggregate biomass of several functional groups of terrestrial and arboreal species at 28 sites along the hunting gradient. Generalized linear models (GLMs) identified hunting pressure as the most important driver of aggregate biomass for game, terrestrial, and arboreal species, as well as nocturnal rodents, frugivores, and granivores. Local hunting pressure affected vertebrate community structure as shown by both GLM and ordination analyses. The size structure of vertebrate fauna changed in heavily hunted areas due to population declines in large-bodied species and apparent compensatory increases in nocturnal rodents. Our study shows markedly altered vertebrate community structure even in remote but heavily settled areas of continuous primary forest. Depletion of frugivore and granivore populations, and concomitant density-compensation by seed predators, likely affect forest regeneration in persistently overhunted tropical forests. These findings contribute to a better understanding of how cascading effects induced by historical defaunation operate, informing wildlife management policy in tropical peri-urban, rural and wilderness areas.
Identification and quantification of drivers of forest degradation in tropical dry forests: A case study in Western Mexico			The intensity of forest degradation is linked to landowners' decisions on management of their shifting cultivation systems. Understanding the processes involved in this land use type is therefore essential for the design of sustainable forest management practices. However, knowledge of the processes and patterns of forest transition that result from this practice is extremely limited. In this study, we used spatially-explicit binary logistic regression to study the proximate factors that relate to forest degradation by combining biophysical and socio-economic variables. Our study region is within the Ayuquila Basin, in Western Mexico, a typical fragmented tropical dry forest landscape dominated by shifting cultivation. Through a survey and semi-structured interviews with community leaders, we obtained data on the forest resources and on the uses that people make of them. Detailed forest cover maps for 2004 and 2010 were produced from high-resolution SPOT 5 data, and ancillary geographical data were used to extract spatial variables. The degree of social marginalization of each community and the ratio of forest area to population size were the main factors positively correlated with the probability of the occurrence of forest degradation. Livestock management and use of fence posts by the communities were also positively associated with forest degradation. Among biophysical factors, forest degradation is more likely to occur in flatter areas. We conclude that local drivers of forest degradation include both socioeconomic and physical variables and that both of these factors need to be addressed at the landscape level while developing measures for activities related to REDD+. © 2015 Elsevier Ltd.
Identifying and Comparing Easily Accessible Frameworks for Assessing Soil Organic Matter Functioning			Soil organic matter (SOM) stocks are crucial for soil fertility and food provision and also contribute to climate change adaptation and mitigation. However, assessing SOM changes in cropping systems is difficult due to the varying quantity and quality of input data. SOM processes have been described by several models, but these are complex and require high amounts of input data. In this work, we identified and selected frameworks that simulate SOM pools and stocks as well as the effects of different management practices. We also required that the frameworks be easily accessible for farm-related end users and require limited and accessible amounts of input data. In all, six frameworks met our inclusion criteria: SOCRATES (Soil Organic Carbon Reserves and Transformations in EcoSystems), CCB (CANDY and-Carbon Balance), AMG, CENTURY, CQESTR, and RothC (Rothamsted Carbon Model). We collected information on these frameworks and compared them in terms of their accessibility, the model time steps used, the nutrient cycles included in the simulation, the number of SOM pools, and the agricultural management options included. Our results showed that CCB was the most robust of the frameworks considered, while AMG, CQESTR, and RothC performed the least well. However, all frameworks have strengths which may match the specific requirements and abilities of individual users.
Identifying ecological security patterns to prioritize conservation and restoration:A case study in Xishuangbanna tropical region, China			Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity adopted the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework (Kunming-Montreal GBF), which puts forward higher ecological conservation requirements for countries to carry out sound spatial planning to realize the ultimate vision of harmonious coexistence between humanity and nature. It is urgent to adopt a comprehensive and refined spatial planning method to provide spatial guidance for efficient actions. Ecological security patterns (ESP) are an integrated approach that effectively reduces the impact of production and daily life on nature, promoting regional ecological sustainability, which can provide efficient spatial planning support for Kunming-Montreal GBF implementation. Taking the Xishuangbanna tropical region as a research case, a biodiversity hotspot in China and the world, this study attempts to improve and optimize the ecological network construction process of the ESP research paradigm "ecological sources identificationecological resistance surfaces construction-ecological corridors extraction" around higher ecological objectives, and further identifies the priority areas for ecological conservation and restoration. Overall, it has been determined the ecological network spaces of five species groups in the Xishuangbanna tropical region. Key biodiversity areas of 2768.19 km2 play an important maintenance role in the overall biodiversity and ecosystem services of the region, and 213 high importance and connectivity corridors that have significant contributions to the migration of species are determined. The priority areas for ecological conservation (2467.71 km2) and ecological restoration (514.67 km2) are further determined. This study provides a demonstration case for constructing an integrated ESP to maintain regional species and ecosystem stability, enhance integrity and connectivity, and further identify priority areas. For the Xishuangbanna tropical region and other global biodiversity hotspots, a systematic, comprehensive, and sustainable ecological management model should be established, where limited funding and resources for ecological actions should be directed to priority areas of the most valuable outcomes.
Identifying optimal areas for REDD intervention: East Kalimantan, Indonesia as a case study			International discussions on reducing emissions from deforestation and degradation (REDD) as a greenhouse gas (GHG) abatement strategy are ongoing under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). In the light of these discussions, it behooves countries to be able to determine the relative likelihood of deforestation over a landscape and perform a first order estimation of the potential reduction in GHGs associated with various protection scenarios. This would allow countries to plan their interventions accordingly to maximize carbon benefits, alongside other environmental and socioeconomic benefits, because forest protection programs might be chosen in places where the perceived threat of deforestation is high whereas in reality the threat is low. In this case study, we illustrate a method for creating deforestation threat maps and estimating potential reductions in GHGs from eighteen protected areas in East Kalimantan, Indonesia, that would occur if protection of these areas was well enforced. Results from our analysis indicate that a further 230 720 ha of East Kalimantan's forest area would be lost and approximately 305 million t CO2 would be emitted from existing protected areas between 2003 and 2013 if the historical rate of deforestation continued unabated. In other words, the emission of 305 million t CO2 into the atmosphere would be avoided during this period if protection of the existing areas was well enforced. At a price of $4 per ton of CO2 (approximate price on the Chicago Climate Exchange in August 2008), this represents an estimated gross income stream of about $120 million per year. We also identified additional areas with high carbon stocks under high deforestation threat that would be important to protect if the carbon benefits of avoided deforestation activities are to be maximized in this region. © 2008 IOP Publishing Ltd.
Identifying terrestrial carbon sinks: Classification of successional stages in regenerating tropical forest from Landsat TM data			Remote sensing has generally been usual to study the role of tropical forests as a source of atmospheric carbon, primarily through land-use change, such as deforestation, and biomass burning. Regeneration of forest on previously cleared areas, however is a significant carbon sink. The strength of this carbon sink is dependent on the age and composition of the regenerating forest. The ability to identify regenerating forest classes that may differ in terms of carbon sink strength was investigated with Landsat TBI data of a test site near Manaus, Brazil. A number of forest age classes were defined from a time series of Landsat sensor data, and their separability in Landsat TM data was assessed by maximum likelihood classifications. A high level of class separability was observed with a weighted kappa coefficient of 0.8569 obtained for a classification of six forest regeneration classes. Of the classification errors observed most were found to be associated with the youngest forest age class. At the test site, however, two main successional pathways were followed and the differences between areas of forest of the same age but on different pathways was most apparent with the youngest forests. Splitting the regenerating forests by the successional pathway was found to increase classifications accuracy, with a weighted kappa coefficient of 0.9315 observed for an 11 class classification. A range of tropical forest classes that vary in strength as a carbon sink could therefore be identified accurately from Landsat TM data. Although the broader generality of the results requires further investigation this indicates the potential to use image classifications to scale-up point measurements of the carbon flux between regenerating forest classes and the atmosphere over large areas.
Image3_Carbon storage and sequestration in Southeast Asian urban clusters under future land cover change scenarios (2015-2050).TIFF			Land-use land-cover (LULC) changes are occurring rapidly in Southeast Asia (SEA), generally associated with population growth, economic development and competing demands for land. Land cover change is one of the vital factors affecting carbon dynamics and emissions. SEA is an important region to study urban-caused LULC emissions and the potential for nature-based solutions (NBS) and nature climate solutions (NCS), as it is home to nearly 15% of the worlds tropical forests and has some of the worlds fastest rates of urban growth. We present a fine-scale urban cluster level assessment for SEA of current (2015) and future (2050) scenarios for carbon sequestration service and climate mitigation potential. We identified 956 urban clusters distributed across 11 countries of SEA. Considering the urban expansion projected and decline in forests, this region could see a carbon loss of up to 0.11 Gigatonnes (Scenario SSP4 RCP 3.4). Comparing carbon change values to urban emissions, we found that the average offset value ranging from 2% (Scenario SSP1 RCP 2.6) to 21%. We also found that a few medium and large urban clusters could add to more than double the existing carbon emissions in 2050 in the SSP3 and SSP4 RCP 3.4 scenarios, while a minority of clusters could offset their emissions under SSP1. Our study confirms that NCS, and particularly reforestation, are in many cases able to offset the direct emissions from land cover conversion from SEA urban clusters. Hence, documenting the plausible LULC transitions and the associated impacts gains significance in the SEA region as the results can be useful for informing policy and sustainable land management. Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Impact of Agroforestry Practices on Fauna in Malaysia: From Arthropod to Large Mammal			Land expansion for agricultural activities has long been recognized as the major factor contributing to the decline of global tropical forests, which eventually led to the loss of biodiversity. What might be assumed as just a small-scale deforestation has brought upon negative cascading effects on all levels of fauna species from invertebrates to large mammals. In Malaysia, some species of large mammals, such as Malayan tiger, Asian elephant, and Malayan tapir, have experienced a steep decline as a result of various factors, which mainly due to habitat loss. As the second and the fifth largest producers of oil palm and rubber in the world, respectively, these agricultural tree crops are taking up so much land, which threaten the remaining natural rainforest in Malaysia. With the aim to lessen the impact of agricultural expansion on biodiversity loss, agroforestry system has started to be implemented by integrating trees in agricultural lands on the same plot. Numerous benefits of agroforestry on the ecosystem have been reported worldwide including an increase in carbon sequestration, improving water and air quality, and enhancing the quality of wildlife habitat. This chapter aims to discuss the current status of agroforestry practices in Malaysia. In addition, the impact of this system on the fauna diversity from arthropods to large mammals will also be deliberated. While agroforestry is mainly practiced by rural communities without realizing it themselves, more effort should be taken to increase the level of awareness and knowledge among these local communities. This will contribute toward maximizing the benefits of agroforestry not only for conservation purposes but also for improvement of the quality of life, which is in line with the global agenda of Sustainable Development Goals. © 2024 Scrivener Publishing LLC.
Impact of changes in land use, species and elevation on soil organic carbon and total nitrogen in Ethiopian Central Highlands			African tropical forests are thought to play an important role in global carbon sequestration. However, the increasing rate of deforestation and the impact of changes in land use require a critical and updated look at what is happening. This work emphasizes the role of bulk density as a main driver in carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) stock in four land-use categories: natural forest, tree plantations, crop land and degraded soil. The study was conducted in the Central Highlands of Ethiopia, where deforestation and human pressure on native forests are exacerbated and erosion has caused extensive soil loss. The methodological approach consisted of evaluating the confounding effect of bulk density and then estimating C and N stocks based on a fixed-mass method rather than the usual fixed-depth method, in order to compare differences across land use categories. We hypothesized that elevation gradient would play a determining role in C and N concentrations and stocks in native forest, whereas tree species would be the main factor in plantations. C and N concentrations and bulk densities in mineral soil were analyzed as repeated measures in an irregular vertical space ranging from 0-10. cm, 10-30. cm, 30-50. cm and 50-100. cm, using a linear mixed model approach. Single observations from the forest floor were analyzed by a general linear model. Results indicated that soil depth is a more important factor than elevation gradient in native forests, though C and N concentrations and stocks diminished near human settlements. Native forest stored on average 84.4%, 26.4% and 33.7% more carbon and 82.4%, 51.8% and 27.1% more nitrogen than bare soil, crop land and plantations, respectively. Conversion of crop and degraded land to plantations ameliorated soil degradation conditions, but species selection did not affect carbon and nitrogen stocks. © 2015 Elsevier B.V.
Impact of Changing Environment on Carbon Dynamics in Tropics with Special Focus on Tropical Dry Forest Ecosystems: A Synthesis			Tropical forests are estimated to have the highest carbon density and occupy more geographical areas than any other type of forest. Importantly, they act as a natural sink for atmospheric CO2 and play a pivotal role to offset climate change and related environmental perturbations. Unfortunately, due to the mounting pressure of the increasing human population to sustain a livelihood for food, timber, medicine, tropical forests are subjected to land-use change, deforestation, and degradation by industrial activities, especially mining. In addition to this, global climate change (increasing CO2 concentration, temperature, drought, and fires might have a disproportional effect on carbon (C) flux in the tropical forests. The changes above should be considered in tropical dry forests (TDFs) research because these forests often neglected over rain forests despite having a sizeable geographical extent and significant pool of C in vegetation and soil. In the wake of the elevated concentration of atmospheric CO2, the net gain in net primary productivity (NPP) and forest growth rate is getting consideration for tropical forests today, meanwhile other factors like temperature, drought, and fire likely to negate the positive effect of increased CO2 concentration in the atmosphere. Recent studies designate tropical forests overall as C neutral since the loss of carbon due to deforestation and degradation is compensated by regrowth and recovery of past disturbances. So, there is an immense potential in the tropical forests to curb elevated CO2 if policies and afforestation provisions and initiatives such as REDD+ if implemented effectively at the global level. In this chapter, we address the current state of knowledge on C stock and flux, and the magnitude of various disturbances (land-use change, deforestation), climatic perturbations (elevated CO2, increased temperature, drought, and fires) on carbon balance in the tropical forests. Furthermore, we also discuss various research gaps for sustaining its structure, function, and ecosystem services; and recent methodological advancements for the estimation of C stock in the tropical forests. © 2021 Nova Science Publishers, Inc.
Impact of land use and land cover changes on ecosystem services in Menglun, Xishuangbanna, Southwest China			Changing the landscape has serious environmental impacts affecting the ecosystem services, particularly in the tropics. In this paper, we report changes in ecosystem services in relation to land use and land cover over an 18-year period (1988-2006) in the Menglun Township, Xishuangbanna, Southwest China. We used Landsat TM/ETM and Quickbird data sets to estimate changes in ten land use and land cover categories, and generalized value coefficients to estimate changes in the ecosystem services provided by each land category. The results showed that over the 18-year period, the land use and land cover in the study area experienced significant changes. Rubber plantations increased from 12.10% of total land cover to 45.63%, while forested area and swidden field decreased from 48.73 and 13.14 to 27.57 and 0.46%, respectively. During this period, the estimated value of ecosystem services dropped by US $11.427 million (similar to 27.73%). Further analysis showed that there were significant changes in ecological functions such as nutrient cycling, erosion control, climate regulation and water treatment as well as recreation; the obvious increase in the ecological function is provision of raw material (natural rubber). Our findings conclude that an abrupt shift in land use from ecologically important tropical forests and traditionally managed swidden fields to large-scale rubber plantations result in a great loss of ecosystem services in this area. Further, the study suggests that provision of alternative economic opportunities would help in maintaining ecosystem services and for an appropriate compensation mechanisms need to be established based on rigorous valuation.
Impact of land use change on soil aggregate dynamics in the dry tropics			A 2-year study was conducted to elucidate land use change (LUC) impact on the distribution of aggregate size fractions and associated carbon (C) concentration involving natural forest (NF), degraded forest (DF), cropland (CL), and biofuel plantation (JP, Jatropha plantation) in the dry tropical region of India across the soil profile (0-10, 10-20, and 20-30 cm). Across the seasons and the land uses, the proportion of macro- and microaggregates was maximum at upper and minimum at lower layer whereas mesoaggregates increase with depth. The trend of macro- and microaggregate fractions through the soil profile was NF > JP > DF > CL whereas that of mesoaggregates was CL > DF < JP > NF. Dry mean weight diameter was highest at upper layer and decreased down the depth in all the land uses and followed the trend NF > JP > DF > CL. Aggregate associated organic carbon (OC) concentration in all the fractions decreased from NF to DF, CL, or JP indicates that macroaggregate associated OC concentration was more susceptible to loss than that of meso- and microaggregate associated OC concentration. LUC induced decline in macroaggregate associated OC stock and increase in meso- and microaggregate associated OC stock; indicated redistribution of OC stock among aggregate fractions. It may be concluded that JP in dry tropics can be an efficient strategy for rehabilitation of degraded land as it improves aggregate structure and stability in the whole profile and aggregate associated OC stock in upper layer of soil.
Impact of Land Use Change on Tree Diversity and Aboveground Carbon Storage in the Mayombe Tropical Forest of the Democratic Republic of Congo			The Mayombe tropical forest has experienced dramatic changes over several decades due to human activities. However, the impact of these changes on tree biodiversity and ecosystem services has not been studied yet. Such a study could advance the current knowledge on tree biodiversity and carbon storage within the Mayombe forest, which is presently under high anthropogenic pressures. This information could benefit decision-makers to design and implement strategies for biodiversity conservation and sustainable natural resource utilization. As such, biodiversity surveys were conducted within the forest under different land utilization regimes. To evaluate the effect of human utilization on tree biodiversity and ecosystem services (carbon storage), land was classified into three categories based on the intensity of human utilization: low utilization, moderate utilization, and high utilization. Additionally, the study evaluated the recovery potential of the disturbed forest under both moderate and high utilization, after abandonment for 10 and 20 years. Tree diameter and height were measured for all trees whose diameter at breast height was greater than or equal to 10 cm. Our findings revealed that forest land with both high and moderate utilization regimes, and having no regulation, resulted in the decline of tree species richness, tree species diversity, and carbon storage. The magnitude of decrease was greater in high utilization compared to moderate utilization regimes. On the other hand, high values of biodiversity indices and carbon storage were observed in the low utilization regime. This study also demonstrated that fallow land that had been left undisturbed for more than 10 years, but had experienced both high and moderate utilization regimes, could reasonably recover carbon storage, and an acceptable level of tree species biodiversity can be achieved. However, there remains a significant difference when compared with the original level in the low utilization regime, suggesting that the Mayombe forest takes longer to recover. Based on the findings on tree biodiversity and carbon storage over the recovery trajectory, this study improves the understanding of the degraded forest restoration process within the Mayombe forest. It is therefore necessary to formulate new strategies to regulate forest land utilization within the Mayombe forest. This will ensure sustainability and availability of all ecosystem services this forest provides to a human population that strongly depends on it for their survival.
Impact of land use intensification on key drivers of soil organic carbon pools in Brazil's Central-West			There are studies showing the potential of integrated production systems, such as Crop-Livestock-Forestry (CLF), for soil carbon sequestration, enhancing nutrient cycling, and reducing farmers' dependence on mineral fertilizers. However, more focused research is needed to identify the main biophysical and chemical processes governing SOC accumulation. This study investigated the main drivers of soil organic carbon sequestration and soil quality in a very clayey Rhodic Ferralsol under an 11-year-old CLF system in the Central West region of Brazil. CLF was implemented in 2009 in a conventional Pasture area and soils samples were collected in 2012 and 2020 under two land uses, CLF and conventional Pasture as time-zero reference. The soil in CLF was evaluated within the tree lines (CLF-WL) and in the alley pasture between the tree lines (CLF-BL) having palisade grass. Our results showed that SOC stocks was higher (both in 2012 and 2020) for the CLF-WL (86.70 and 83.74 Mg ha(-1)) than in pasture reference (71.81 and 74.96 Mg ha(-1)) within the 0.3-1.0 m soil layer. Most of the soil's carbon content was in the mineral associated fraction (96-97 %) for all sites. Soil available water for plants (at -8 and -6 kPa) within 0.0-0.1 m soil depth increased in CLF system. Soil nutrient availability increased from 2012 to 2020 in CLF system. While in the Pasture the main drivers of SOC pools were the soil physical properties, in the CLF these were chemical soil properties. These key parameters underscore the role of CLF systems in promoting carbon storage and supporting low-carbon agriculture, particularly in the Brazilian Savanna and similar tropical regions. This knowledge allows farmers to optimize CLF management, balancing soil health with productivity.
Impact of long-term no-tillage and cropping system management on soil organic carbon in an Oxisol: A model for sustainability			Soil organic carbon (SOC) was assessed in a long-term (19 yr) experiment comparing conventional tillage (CT) and no-tillage (NT) management systems and various winter cover crop treatments in a Rhodic Hapludox in southern Brazil. After 19 yr, NT resulted in 6.84 Mg C ha(-1), in the upper soil layer (0-10 cm), which represented 64.6% more than CT. In the 0 to 20 cm soil layer, the NT system sequestered 1.24 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1), while CT sequestered 0.96 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1). Independent of soil management, the fallow treatment resulted in the lowest SOC stocks to the 40-cm soil depth compared to all other winter treatments. We compared SOC levels of the experimental site with a nearby-forested area, which has never been cleared. No-till management combined with winter cover crops resulted in soil properties that most closely resembled the undisturbed forest. Maize grain yields and soybean seed yields were 6 and 5% higher, respectively, under NT than CT. Our results point to NT management combined with winter cover crops as the management system of choice to achieve sustainable crop production on Oxisols in the subtropical and tropical regions of the world.
Impact of Organic Vegetable System on Soil Organic Matter Pools and CO2 Emission in the Tropical Region			It is widely recognized that the input of organic matter in tropical agriculture is essential to maintain productivity and soil quality. This study aimed to investigate the dynamics of organic C pools and CO2 emission influenced by organic compost fertilization and leucaena biomass in an area of 6 years under organic farming. The system consisted of 5 treatments based on 5 levels of fertilization with organic compost (0, 10, 20, 30, and 40 t ha(-1)). Each block was surrounded by leucaena and their pruning's were distributed in equal proportions for all treatments. Two rotating crops were performed per year, cabbage/corn. Soil samples were collected in the 0-10 and 10-20 cm layers in 2-year seasons. TOC and N stocks were between 23.1 and 51.6 t ha(-1), and 2.1 and 5.4 t ha(-1), respectively. The highest compost doses increased the microbial biomass C and N. The increase in microbial biomass was followed by higher emissions of C-CO2. Increased microbial quotient values indicated C accumulation in the system by a higher amount of active metabolic C. The microbial biomass was less efficient in the use of the high organic compost doses. The dose of compost should be reduced and applied constantly by the farmers to attend the plant demand by nutrients and increase the efficiency of C sequestration in the soil. This C sequestration will also improve biological activity and soil quality in tropical regions, increasing food production.
Impact of rainforest conversion into monoculture plantation systems on pseudoscorpion density, diversity and trophic niches			Indonesia's biodiversity is at risk due to large forest areas being transformed into rubber and oil palm monoculture plantations. The effects of this land-use change on local fauna have been studied in a variety of organisms, including invertebrates from leaf litter and soil habitats. Litter and soil organisms arc important drivers of essential ecosystem functions, such as nutrient cycling and carbon sequestration, which are impacted heavily by monoculture plantations. Pseudoscorpions (Arachnida: Pseudoscorpiones) are predatory arthropods in such litter and soil habitats and are an ubiquitous, although typically not very abundant, component of the soil animal food web. Since virtually nothing is known on their functional role diversity in tropical soil food webs, this study aims at contributing filling this gap of knowledge. We studied the impact of the conversion of rainforest into rubber and oil palm plantations on the density and diversity of pseudoscorpions in two landscapes of Jambi province, Sumatra, Indonesia, and applied stable isotope analysis to investigate changes in their trophic niches. Among 266 sorted individuals, only one described species was recorded, while the others were sorted to a total of nine moiphospecies. Pseudoscorpions in the study region predominantly colonized mineral soil rather than the litter layer. As expected, the density declined from rainforest to rubber (-83%) and oil palm (-87%), and the number of species declined from rainforest to rubber (-37%) but in particular to oil palm (-47%). The density in riparian areas was five times lower than in non-riparian sites, however, species richness was almost the same. Further, the community composition of pseudoscorpions differed between land-use systems and landscap, no species was present across all land-use systems, and the majority of species was only present in one land-use system indicating high habitat dependence. Stable isotope analysis suggested that the pseudoscorpion community shifted from species associated with the detritus-based energy channel in rainforest to species associated with the plant-based energy channel in monoculture plantations, indicating shifts in the use of basal resources by the soil community cascading up into predators. Overall, the results indicate that tropical pseudoscorpion communities comprise high-level predators that prefere to inhabit soil rather than litter and respond sensitively to land-use change. Due to this sensitivity, pseudoscorpion abundance may serve as bioindicator for ecosystem changes in the tropics. To mitigate negative effects of changes in land use in tropical ecosystems on cryptic and unexplored soil biodiversity, reduced herbicide use resulting in increased understory vegetation and mulching practices might be adopted.
Impact of rice-husk ash on the soil biophysical and agronomic parameters of wheat crop under a dry tropical ecosystem			Several alternative amendments like organic manure and biochar have been proposed for revitalizing the degrading soil viability and fertility for sustainable agriculture, globally. However, detailed field-scale studies focussing on the soil and agronomic parameters of crops under these amendments are limited in dry tropical ecosystems. Therefore, we studied the impact of various soil amendments viz., rice-husk ash (RHA) and farmyard manure (FYM) along with mineral fertilizer on soil biophysical and agronomic parameters of wheat crop. We specifically explored the impact of the amendments on soil CO2 efflux (SCE, under different growth stages) and the harvest index of wheat crop, which are considered as the key indicators of soil viability and agronomic efficiency, respectively. SCE, soil moisture, soil temperature, soil N, microbial biomass and soil pH were found significantly varying under different treatments (P < 0.05). SCE was found maximum under sole FYM applied and minimum under mineral fertilizer applied treatments, whereas RHA application lowered the SCE as compared to sole FYM application. Moreover, SCE showed variation with plant growth stages, and found maximum during stem elongation followed by heading stage whereas minimum during ripening stage. Soil moisture was found to have considerable regulation for the overall variation in SCE (r(2) = 0.17; P = 0.04). In contrast to the soil properties, agronomic parameters (except harvest index) were found higher under mineral fertilizer applied treatments followed by sole FYM and combined FYM + RHA treatments, whereas sole RHA applied treatment showed minimum values. However, significant variations were observed only for harvest index, aboveground dry matter, grain and straw yields (P < 0.05). Further, harvest index was found highest under sole and combined FYM and RHA applied treatments whereas lowest in mineral fertilizer applied treatments. Soil C/N ratio (r(2) = 0.16; P = 0.04) and panicle length (r(2) = 0.18; P = 0.03), respectively as soil and agronomic parameters, have been found to have considerable control over harvest index. The findings revealed that soil viability is higher under sole FYM and combined FYM + RHA treatments whereas mineral fertilization enhances agronomic performance. Based on the studied two indicators, we conclude that both soil and agronomic sustainability can be maintained by using a combination of organic (FYM and RHA) fertilization with reduced inputs from mineral fertilizers. However, it further needs exploration for various soil and plant eco-physiological parameters of different crops at field level for wider adaptation in the dry tropical region.
Impact of the Urbanisation Process in the Availability of Ecosystem Services in a Tropical Ecotone Area			Urbanisation has been a main cause of land use land cover (LULC) change worldwide, often with irreparable consequences to the provision of ecosystem services. Despite an increase in quantitative assessments of ecosystem service values (ESV) related to LULC changes, data are scarce for ecotones, such as the agreste in northeast Brazil (a transitional area between the Atlantic Forest and the Caatinga biomes). The benefit transfer method was used to quantify changes in ESV between 1989, 2007 and 2014 due to urbanisation in the microwatershed Riacho das Piabas (3660 ha) in the agreste of Paraíba. Remote sensing techniques and a geographic information system were used to quantify LULC changes. Loss of arboreal vegetation (covering 46% of the study area in 1989 and 5% in 2014) was the key factor driving the 73.2% decline in the total ESV (from US$ 13.7 million to US$ 3.7 million in 2017 values). LULC changes resulted in losses of 89% in the estimated value of eight ecosystem services, including climate regulation, water flow regulation, moderation of disturbance, nutrient cycling and biological control, which are critical locally when considering the regional trend towards aridification and the existing pressures on water resources. Ecosystem functions loss and climate change impacts may lead to a shift in ecotone boundaries favouring the semiarid Caatinga vegetation. These results urge the implementation of ecosystem-based spatial planning, focusing on urban green infrastructure and restoration of natural habitats and their connectivity, to prevent further ecosystem service losses. Local estimates of ESV required to inform the suggested policy actions are identified. © 2018, The Author(s).
Impact of tree plantations on the dynamics of soil aggregates in urban degraded lands in the dry tropics			The impact of land-use change in an urban ecosystem on soil aggregate dynamics and soil carbon storage was studied through two annual cycles under five land uses. All the land uses namely: (1) natural mixed vegetation (NV) growing in a protected area; (2) grass fallow (GF); and tree plantations of (3) Cassia siamea (CP); (4) Jatropha curcas (JP); and (5) Tectona grandis (TP) were grown on urban degraded waste lands in a dry tropical region of India. Proportions of soil aggregate fractions, their stability, and soil carbon storage were analyzed at upper (00–15 cm), and lower (15–30 cm) soil depths during the rainy, winter, and summer seasons. Across all the land uses and at both the soil depths, the proportion of macroaggregate was highest during summer and lowest during the rainy season, whereas the reverse trend was observed for mesoaggregate. The annual mean proportion of macroaggregate decreased while meso- and microaggregates increased, with increasing soil depth across all the land uses. At the upper layer, the trends of macroaggregate, aggregate stability, and soil C storage were NV > CP > JP > TP > GF whereas at lower depth, the trend was NV > TP > CP > JP > GF. Across all the land uses in both the depths, soil C storage was strongly and positively correlated with annual mean fraction of soil macroaggregate. All tree plantations improved soil properties considerably as compared to GF at upper soil layer, yet TP reached near NV in these soil properties at lower depth. Soil aggregate fractions may be used as an index of carbon storage capacity in the urban ecosystems. © 2021 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Impacts of a large-scale reforestation program on carbon storage dynamics in Guangdong, China			In the early 1980s, the province of Guangdong, China implemented a 10-year, large-scale reforestation program to counter environment degradation as a result of rapid economic development. Quantification of the contribution of this forest restoration program to carbon storage will provide critical information and guidance for designing future forest restoration and management strategies at the provincial level. The Guangdong Provincial Forest Inventory Database, together with our field sampling data was used to estimate carbon storage dynamics over the 10-year period of 1994-2003 for key restoration forest types as well as OBPA (open forest, bamboo forest, production forest and ambient trees). Various layers of forests were considered in calculating carbon storage: tree layers, understory vegetation and litterfall layers for the key forest types and bamboo forests; tree layers and litterfall layers for production forests; and only tree layers for open forest and ambient trees. Our results show that over the 10-year period, the reforestation program has increased total carbon storage by 41.67 Tg and forest carbon density by 1.58 Mg C ha(-1). Carbon storage in tree layers was the greatest among all layers studied. Carbon storage in litterfall and understory layers amounted to approximately 38%-44% of the total carbon storage, demonstrating that litter-fall and understory layers can not be neglected in estimating regional forest vegetation carbon storage in the sub-tropical forests. It was determined that coniferous forests provided the greatest contribution to total carbon, followed by broadleaved forests, OBPA, and mixed coniferous and broadleaved forests in decreasing order of magnitude. Among all key forest types, stands of P. massoniana had the greatest amount of carbon storage (from 59.65 to 65.87Tg) while Albizia falcataria (Linn.) Fosberg forest stands had the lowest (from 0.05 to 0.37 Tg). Over the 10-year period, carbon storage pools in maturescent forests, mature forests and post-mature forests were on the increasing trend, while those in young forests and middle-aged forests were declining and relatively stable, respectively. Our analysis also shows that the carbon accumulation rate in broadleaved forests (0.19-1.36 Mg ha(-1) year(-1)) was the highest among the key forest types in Guangdong, which has important implications for selection of future forest restoration species. (C) 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Impacts of carbon-based policy instruments and taxes on tropical deforestation			The impacts of carbon payments and income taxes on curbing tropical forest loss are analyzed under a market equilibrium framework. The supply of cleared forest land was derived by using a two-period utility maximization model when the carbon sequestration of a private forestholder is credited. The land demand was derived from the profit maximization problem of a cash-crop farmer. The model was applied to data from the humid Chaco eco-region of Paraguay. The results indicate that taxes on cash-crop and forestry incomes may in fact be ineffective in curbing forest loss. Carbon payments, however, would effectively reduce forest clearing. In the context studied, a carbon payment of (sic)30 per ton of carbon would limit deforestation to 10% of existing forest cover. A reversible carbon crediting system, in which a forestholder can redeem a credited forest, seems to substantially increase, at least in the short run, the effectiveness of carbon payments. Carbon payments could also complement the tax on cash-crop income in curbing tropical forest loss. An effective policy to combat tropical deforestation should, therefore, jointly consider forestry and cash-crop sectors. (C) 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Impacts of climate variability on tree demography in second growth tropical forests: the importance of regional context for predicting successional trajectories			Naturally regenerating and restored second growth forests account for over 70% of tropical forest cover and provide key ecosystem services. Understanding climate change impacts on successional trajectories of these ecosystems is critical for developing effective large-scale forest landscape restoration (FLR) programs. Differences in environmental conditions, species composition, dynamics, and landscape context from old growth forests may exacerbate climate impacts on second growth stands. We compile data from 112 studies on the effects of natural climate variability, including warming, droughts, fires, and cyclonic storms, on demography and dynamics of second growth forest trees and identify variation in forest responses across biomes, regions, and landscapes. Across studies, drought decreases tree growth, survival, and recruitment, particularly during early succession, but the effects of temperature remain unexplored. Shifts in the frequency and severity of disturbance alter successional trajectories and increase the extent of second growth forests. Vulnerability to climate extremes is generally inversely related to long-term exposure, which varies with historical climate and biogeography. The majority of studies, however, have been conducted in the Neotropics hindering generalization. Effects of fire and cyclonic storms often lead to positive feedbacks, increasing vulnerability to climate extremes and subsequent disturbance. Fragmentation increases forests' vulnerability to fires, wind, and drought, while land use and other human activities influence the frequency and intensity of fire, potentially retarding succession. Comparative studies of climate effects on tropical forest succession across biogeographic regions are required to forecast the response of tropical forest landscapes to future climates and to implement effective FLR policies and programs in these landscapes.
Impacts of forest conservation on local agricultural labor supply: Evidence from the Indonesian forest moratorium			Tropical forest conservation is critical for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and maintaining global ecosystems. Understanding the channels through which conservation affects agricultural activities and livelihoods in these regions is key to designing effective policies and promoting sustainable development. To this end, we use labor supply data from Indonesia in 2007 and 2015 combined with a matching strategy to estimate the impacts of a national forest conservation policy, the forest moratorium, on local agricultural labor. Consistent with the predictions of our theoretical model, we find robust empirical evidence that the moratorium increased local agricultural employment and slowed structural transformation away from the agricultural sector. We provide corresponding evidence of decreased household expenditure due to the moratorium. Despite the moratorium, we find significant deforestation and forest degradation within the boundaries of the moratorium-targeted areas, suggesting that increases in local agricultural employment may partly dampen the conservation policy's effectiveness. Our work offers new insights into evaluating existing conservation policies and designing future policies for Indonesia and other resource-dependent economies that face similar challenges in balancing economic growth with conservation.
Impacts of forest management on tree species richness and composition: Assessment of forest management regimes in Tarai landscape Nepal			The role of natural (non-plantation) production forests is increasingly recognized in conservation of forest biodiversity globally. Government and other forest stakeholders in Nepal are, however, still reluctant to promote active management of production forests for fear of negative impacts on forest biodiversity. Moreover, Nepal's government is converting production forests into protected areas thus restricting the area available for multiple uses. To assess the implications of forest management practices on forest biodiversity at landscape level, we compared the richness and composition of tree species among regularly harvested community forests, irregularly harvested community forests, protected area and national forests in sub-tropical forested landscape of Nepal using tree species inventory and assessment of key environmental variables. Results showed that regularly harvested community forests could be effective in supporting tree species richness and composition compared to other management regimes. Results supported the hypothesis that high forest disturbance and no disturbance do not support tree species diversity and composition. In addition, this study found that regularly managed community forests also protect ecologically important and vulnerable tree species. Some possible explanations for the better performance of these community forests could be tenure security, frequency and regularity of silvicultural operations and sensitivity of forest users to the ecological aspects of forest management. Our study reaffirmed the need for active forest management at the local level to contribute to global conservation initiatives such as sustainable forest management, reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries (REDD+) and biodiversity conservation. Better compliance with forest management plans and capacity development of local forestry stakeholders in forest management operations are suggested for managing forests outside protected areas that is, in national and community forests. © 2019 Elsevier Ltd
Impacts of Future Crop Tree Release Treatments on Forest Carbon as REDD+ Mitigation Benefits			Sustainable forest management activities, such as future crop tree (FCT) release treatments, became part of the REDD+ strategy to avoid carbon emissions from forests. FCT release treatments are intended to achieve increased growth of FCTs by removing competitor trees. This initially leads to a reduction of the forest carbon pool and represents a carbon debt. We estimated that the time it takes for FCTs to offset the carbon debt through increased growth on experimental sites of 10 km(2) in Belize, Guyana, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago. We further investigated whether the costs of treatment can be compensated by the generated financial carbon benefits. An average of 2.3 FCT per hectare were released through the removal of an average of 3.3 competitors per hectare. This corresponds to an average above ground biomass (AGB) deficit of 2.3 Mg FCT-1. Assuming a 30% increase in growth, the FCT would need on average 130 years to offset the carbon loss. For carbon prices from US$ 5 to 100 Mg CO(2)e(-1) an additional increment between 0.6 and 22.7 Mg tree(-1) would be required to cover the treatment costs of US$ 4.2 to 8.4 FCT-1. Assuming a carbon price of US$ 10 Mg CO(2)e(-1), the additional increment required would be between 5.8 and 11.4 Mg tree(-1), thus exceeding the biological growth potential of most individual trees. The release of FCTs does not ensure an increase in forest carbon stocks, and refinancing of treatment costs is problematic.
Impacts of individual tree species on carbon dynamics in a moist tropical forest environment			In the moist tropical forest biome, which cycles carbon (C) rapidly and stores huge amounts of C, the impacts of individual species on C balances are not well known. In one of the earliest replicated experimental sites for investigating growth of native tropical trees, we examined traits of tree species in relation to their effects on forest C balances, mechanisms of influence, and consequences for C sequestration. The monodominant stands, established in abandoned pasture in 1988 at La Selva Biological Station, Costa Rica, contained five species in a complete randomized block design. Native species were: Hieronyma alchorneoides, Pentaclethra macroloba, Virola koschnyi, and Vochysia guatemalensis. The exotic species was Pinus patula. By 16 years, the lack of differences among species in some attributes suggested strong abiotic control in this environment, where conditions are very favorable for growth. These attributes included aboveground net primary productivity (ANPP), averaging 11.7 Mg C.ha(-1).yr(-1) across species, and soil organic C (0-100 cm, 167 Mg C/ha). Other traits differed significantly, however, indicating some degree of biological control. In Vochysia plots, both aboveground biomass of 99 Mg C/ha, and belowground biomass of 20 Mg C/ha were 1.8 times that of Virola (P = 0.02 and 0.03, respectively). Differences among species in overstory biomass were not compensated by understory vegetation. Belowground NPP of 4.6 Mg C.ha(-1).yr(-1) in Hieronyma was 2.4 times that of Pinus (P < 0.01). Partitioning of NPP to belowground components in Hieronyma was more than double that of Pinus (P = 0.03). The canopy turnover rate in Hieronyma was 42% faster than that of Virola (P < 0.01). Carbon sequestration, highest in Vochysia (7.4 Mg C.ha(-1).yr(-1), P = 0.02), averaged 5.2 Mg C.ha(-1).yr(-1), close to the annual per capita fossil fuel use in the United States of 5.3 Mg C. Our results indicated that differences in species effects on forest C balances were related primarily to differences in growth rates, partitioning of C among biomass components, tissue turnover rates, and tissue chemistry. Inclusion of those biological attributes may be critical for robust modeling of C cycling across the moist tropical forest biome.
Impacts of logging and rehabilitation on invertebrate communities in tropical rainforests of northern Borneo			The inclusion of carbon stock enhancements under the REDD+ framework is likely to drive a rapid increase in biosequestration projects that seek to remove carbon from the atmosphere through rehabilitation of degraded rainforests. Concern has recently been expressed, however, that management interventions to increase carbon stocks may conflict with biodiversity conservation. Focusing on a large-scale rainforest rehabilitation project in northern Borneo, we examine the broad impacts of selective logging and subsequent carbon enhancement across a wide range of invertebrate fauna by comparing the abundance of 28 higher-level taxa within two separate rainforest strata (leaf-litter and understorey) across unlogged, naturally-regenerating and rehabilitated forest. We additionally assess changes in functional composition by examining responses of different feeding guilds. Responses of individual taxa to forest management were idiosyncratic but logging resulted in more than a 20% increase in total invertebrate abundance, with fewer than 20% of taxa in either stratum having significantly lower abundance in logged forest. Rehabilitation resulted in a marked reduction in abundance, particularly among leaf-litter detritivores, but overall, there were much smaller differences between unlogged and rehabilitated forest than between unlogged and naturally regenerating forest in both total invertebrate abundance and the abundances of different feeding guilds. This applied to both strata with the exception of understorey herbivores, which were more abundant in rehabilitated forest than elsewhere. These results support previous data for birds suggesting that carbon stock enhancement in these forests has only limited adverse effects on biodiversity, but with some impacts on abundance within particular guilds. © 2011 Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
Impacts of Nitrogen Deposition on Forest Ecosystems in China			Anthropogenic nitrogen (N) deposition, mainly driven by reactive N emissions from agricultural and industrial activities, has been enhanced dramatically in China. The enhancement of N deposition has aroused increasing concerns about its effects on ecosystem health and function. Forest covers more than one fifth of the national land area in China and provides fundamental ecosystem services. There have been emerging experimental, observational and modelling efforts to assess the impacts of N deposition on forest ecosystems since the 2000s. Here we summarized these research progresses with a focus on the effects of N deposition on soil chemistry and N transformation, soil microorganisms and enzymes, plant physiology, biodiversity and ecosystem carbon (C) balance. Experimental results and modelling estimates generally indicate a fertilization effect of N deposition on forest growth and consequent C sequestration. However, high-level N deposition has been increasingly evidenced to cause N leaching, soil acidification, nutrient imbalance, increased N2O emissions and decreased soil CH4 uptake, which likely offset the positive effect on ecosystem C storage over time. Meanwhile, N deposition has changed both species composition and richness of plant and soil microbial communities, consequently altering C and nutrient cycling. Moreover, the effects of N deposition are likely non-linear with N doses, and thus the assessment on the threshold values for N deposition would have important implications for N emission regulation and forest management options. We conclude that elevated N deposition is altering ecosystem structure and function of China's forests, especially in the eastern and southern regions. In addition, we highlight research efforts to jointly consider multiple abiotic factors (e.g. climate warming, CO2 enrichment, drought and increase in surface ozone) and biotic factors (e.g. insect outbreaks and invasive species), when evaluating ecological impacts of N deposition in the future.
Impacts of shaded agroforestry management on carbon sequestration, biodiversity and farmers income in cocoa production landscapes			PurposeConversion of shaded agroforests to unshaded monocultures endangers the resilience of tropical landscapes. Landscape-scale impacts of alternative shade managements have rarely been assessed. This study explored plantation- and landscape-level impacts of different shade management strategies on aboveground biomass, functional group diversity, and economic potential of cocoa production in northern Ecuador.MethodsWe simulated several cocoa shade management scenarios, using the dynamic forest model LANDIS-II: (i) baseline' projections representing the current mosaic of traditional agroforests, planted agroforests, and unshaded monoculture plantations; (ii) traditional' agroforestry shaded by native fruit and timber trees; (iii) planted' agroforests shaded by planted fruit trees; and (iv) monoculture' unshaded plantations. The impacts of setting aside 20, 30, and 40% of cocoa plantations for natural regeneration was tested for the monoculture scenario.ResultsTraditional agroforests shaded by native trees stored up to 7% more aboveground biomass and had higher abundances of rare functional groups compared to monocultures after 50years of simulation. Smaller effects were found for planted agroforests. Shaded plantations and land set aside for natural regeneration reduced forest fragmentation at the landscape level. The estimated yield gap for monoculture and shaded plantations could not be compensated by additional revenues for carbon storage at current carbon market price.ConclusionsImproving payment-for-ecosystem services and certification schemes are needed to incentivize smallholders to maintain substantial non-cocoa tree cover that may provide an environmental-friendly way to improve economic potential and food security for smallholders, while supporting biomass and functional group diversity at the landscape level.
Impacts of tropical forest cover on water quality in agricultural watersheds in southeastern Brazil			Tropical forests are under continued threat due to deforestation and fragmentation, mainly because of clear cutting for agriculture and cattle ranching, and it can lead to water quality degradation. However, there is a need for understanding the role of forest areas as an indicator of water quality in the current diverse landscape in tropical watersheds. Thus, this study aims at evaluating forest cover as an indicator of stream health in tropical agricultural watersheds. We selected six watersheds of low-order streams in Southeastern Brazil with different percentages of forest cover, where water samples were collected to obtain the following water quality parameters: dissolved oxygen (DO), turbidity (NTU), total suspended solids (TSS), inorganic suspended solids (ISS), organic suspended solids (OSS), total nitrogen (TN), total phosphorus (TP), total coliforms (TC), and fecal coliforms (FC). A land use/land cover (LULC) map was used to extract the LULC pattern of each watershed, and a distance metric was applied to explore the differences between them. The water quality parameters were analyzed by the yearly mean, data variation and the correlation between them. We compared forested (55% of forest cover or more) and degraded (35% or less) watersheds using MANOVA and PCA. Degraded watersheds showed high values of solids, turbidity, nutrients, and coliforms. The most forested watershed showed the best water quality, whereas the watershed mainly covered by agriculture presented the poorest water quality and the greatest temporal variation. The forested watersheds showed significant difference with degraded watersheds, which presented higher value of all the parameters, excepted of DO. NTU, solids, and TP were correlated, showing that turbidity and solids represent the particles in the water, and they carry adsorbed phosphorus. Those parameters also responded to the streamflow variation. The results indicated that the pollution came from the agricultural and residential areas, whereas the tropical forest was important to keep water clean. Thus, tropical forest cover is a good indicator of water quality, and plays an important role in minimizing the impacts of human activities on ecosystem services in agricultural watersheds. Nevertheless, better soil management practices and basic sanitation implementation are still needed to improve water quality.
Impacts of Tropical Forest Modification on Soil Microbial Community Attributes and Function in Southeast Asia			0
Implementation and opportunity costs of reducing deforestation and forest degradation in Tanzania			The Cancun Agreements provide strong backing for a REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation) mechanism whereby developed countries pay developing ones for forest conservation(1). REDD+ has potential to simultaneously deliver cost-effective climate change mitigation and human development(2-5). However, most REDD+ analysis has used coarse-scale data, overlooked important opportunity costs to tropical forest users(4,5) and failed to consider how to best invest funds to limit leakage, that is, merely displacing deforestation(6). Here we examine these issues for Tanzania, a REDD+ country, by comparing district-scale carbon losses from deforestation with the opportunity costs of carbon conservation. Opportunity costs are estimated as rents from both agriculture and charcoal production (the most important proximate causes of regional forest conversion(7-9).). As an alternative we also calculate the implementation costs of alleviating the demand for forest conservation thereby addressing the problem of leakage by raising agricultural yields on existing cropland and increasing charcoal fuel-use efficiency. The implementation costs exceed the opportunity costs of carbon conservation (medians of US$6.50 versus US$3.90 per Mg CO2), so effective REDD+ policies may cost more than simpler estimates suggest. However, even if agricultural yields are doubled, implementation is possible at the competitive price of similar to US$12 per Mg CO2.
Implementation of forest cover and carbon mapping in the Greater Mekong subregion and Malaysia project - A case study of Thailand			The Great Mekong Subregion (GMS) contains one of the world's largest tropical forests and plays a vital role in sustainable development and provides a range of economic, social and environmental benefits, including essential ecosystem services such as climate change mitigation and adaptation. However, the forest in this Subregion is experiencing deforestation rates at high level due to human activities. The reduction of the forest area has negative influence to the environmental and natural resources issues, particularly, more severe disasters have occurred due to global warming and the release of the greenhouse gases. Therefore, in order to conduct forest management in the Subregion efficiently, the Forest Cover and Carbon Mapping in Greater Mekong Subregion and Malaysia project was initialized by the Asia-Pacific Network for Sustainable Forest Management and Rehabilitation (APFNet) with the collaboration of various research institutions including Institute of Forest Resource Information Technique (IFRIT), Chinese Academy of Forestry (CAF) and the countries in Sub region and Malaysia comprises of Cambodia, the People's Republic of China (Yunnan province and Guangxi province), Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, Thailand, and Viet Nam. The main target of the project is to apply the intensive use of recent satellite remote sensing technology, establishing regional forest cover maps, documenting forest change processes and estimating carbon storage in the GMS and Malaysia. In this paper, the authors present the implementation of the project in Thailand and demonstrate the result of forest cover mapping in the whole country in 2005 and 2010. The result of the project will contribute towards developing efficient tools to support decision makers to clearly understand the dynamic change of the forest cover which could benefit sustainable forest resource management in Thailand and the whole Subregion.
Implementing REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation): Evidence on governance, evaluation and impacts from the REDD-ALERT project			The REDD-ALERT (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation from Alternative Land Uses in the Rainforests of the Tropics) project started in 2009 and finished in 2012, and had the aim of evaluating mechanisms that translate international-level agreements into instruments that would help change the behaviour of land users while minimising adverse repercussions on their livelihoods. Findings showed that some developing tropical countries have recently been through a forest transition, thus shifting from declining to expanding forests at a national scale. However, in most of these (e.g. Vietnam), a significant part of the recent increase in national forest cover is associated with an increase in importation of food and timber products from abroad, representing leakage of carbon stocks across international borders. Avoiding deforestation and restoring forests will require a mixture of regulatory approaches, emerging market-based instruments, suasive options, and hybrid management measures. Policy analysis and modelling work showed the high degree of complexity at local levels and highlighted the need to take this heterogeneity into account-it is unlikely that there will be a one size fits all approach to make Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+) work. Significant progress was made in the quantification of carbon and greenhouse gas (GHG) fluxes following land-use change in the tropics, contributing to narrower confidence intervals on peat-based emissions and their reporting standards. There are indications that there is only a short and relatively small window of opportunity of making REDD+ work-these included the fact that forest-related emissions as a fraction of total global GHG emissions have been decreasing over time due to the increase in fossil fuel emissions, and that the cost efficiency of REDD+ may be much less than originally thought due to the need to factor in safeguard costs, transaction costs and monitoring costs. Nevertheless, REDD+ has raised global awareness of the world's forests and the factors affecting them, and future developments should contribute to the emergence of new landscape-based approaches to protecting a wider range of ecosystem services. © 2014 The Author(s).
Implications of land management on soil microbial communities and nutrient cycle dynamics in the lowland tropical forest of northern Costa Rica			The long-term effects of reforestation versus maintained grassland on microbial community structure and nutrient cycling provide a valuable perspective on ecosystem health and carbon sequestration potential of tropical soils in the heavily deforested Northern Zone of Costa Rica. The soil from the secondary forests in this area had greater levels of phosphate, inorganic nitrogen, organic carbon, respiratory activity, abundance and diversity of Basidomycete rDNA, abundance of fungal rDNA, and lower abundance but greater diversity of Rhizobium rDNA, and less abundance of nifH gene DNA than soils from adjacent grasslands of the same age. Critical correlations were observed between the abundance of Basidiomycete rDNA and laccase gene with the levels of phosphate, microbial biomass, organic carbon use efficiency, and percent water saturation. These data suggest a, trend towards the secondary forest soils becoming more fungal-dominant, with greater microbial activity, greater nitrogen mineralization activity and more efficient use of carbon. This project provides some of the first evidence that the management strategy of regeneration of secondary forests results in more complex soil ecosystems, with greater potential for carbon sequestration than the maintained grasslands.
Importance of bistatic SAR features from TanDEM-X for forest mapping and monitoring			Deforestation and forest degradation are one of the important sources for human induced carbon dioxide emissions and their rates are highest in tropical forests. For man-kind, it is of great importance to track land-use conversions like deforestation, e.g. for sustainable forest management and land use planning, for carbon balancing and to support the implementation of international initiatives like REDD. + (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation). SAR (synthetic aperture radar) sensors are suitable to reliably and frequently monitor tropical forests due to their weather independence. The TanDEM-X mission (which is mainly aimed to create a unique global high resolution digital elevation model) currently operates two X-band SAR satellites, acquiring interferometric SAR data for the Earth's entire land surface multiple times. The operational mission provides interferometric data as well as mono- and bistatic scattering coefficients. These datasets are homogenous, globally consistent and are acquired in high spatial resolution. Hence, they may offer a unique basic dataset which could be useful in land cover monitoring.Based on first datasets available from the TanDEM-X mission, the main goal of this research is to investigate the information content of TanDEM-X data for mapping forests and other land cover classes in a tropical peatland area. More specifically, the study explores the utility of bistatic features for distinguishing between open and closed forest canopies, which is of relevance in the context of deforestation and forest degradation monitoring. To assess the predominant information content of TanDEM-X data, the importance of information derived from the bistatic system is compared against the monostatic case, usually available from SAR systems. The usefulness of the TanDEM-X mission data, i.e. scattering coefficients, derived textural information and interferometric coherence is investigated via a feature selection process. The resulting optimal feature sets representing a monostatic and a bistatic SAR dataset were used in a subsequent classification to assess the added value of the bistatic TanDEM-X features in the separability of land cover classes. The results obtained indicated that especially the interferometric coherence significantly improved the separability of thematic classes compared to a dataset of monostatic acquisition. The bistatic coherence was mainly governed by volume decorrelation of forest canopy constituents and carries information about the canopy structure which is related to canopy cover. In contrast, the bistatic scattering coefficient had no significant contribution to class separability. The classification with coherence and textural information outperformed the classification with the monostatic scattering coefficient and texture by more than 10% and achieved an overall accuracy of 85%. These results indicate that TanDEM-X can serve as a valuable and consistent source for mapping and monitoring tropical forests. © 2013 Elsevier Inc.
Importance of Dalbergia sissoo for restoration of degraded land: A case study of Indian dry tropical vindhyan regions			To achieve the UN Sustainable Development Goals and preserve biodiversity and ecosystem services, degraded land must be restored. The focus of the current study was to evaluate the impact of Dalbergia sissoo Roxb (D. sissoo), a multipurpose native Indian tree in restoring degraded land. The significance of this species in restoring the fertility of agricultural soil in the dry tropical region of India was also examined in this study. This study showed an improvement in the soil quality (physical, chemical, biological, and enzymatic properties) of rhizosphere zone of D. sissoo (DL) throughout three seasons (rainy, winter and summer) in comparison to D. sissoo based agricultural soil (AL) and degraded (barren) land soil (BL). Soil moisture and water holding capacity (WHC) was significantly higher in DL in all three seasons compared to AL and BL, whereas, lower soil tem-perature and bulk density were noted in the rhizospheric soil of DL. The amount of soil organic carbon (SOC) was 75-94% higher in DL rhizospheric soil and 12-20% in the AL compared to BL soil in all three seasons. Total nitrogen (TN) and total phosphorus (TP) in the rhizospheric soil of DL were significantly higher (TN, 0.15-0.17% and TP, 16.1-21%) than those in AL (TN, 0.05-0.06%; TP, 11.4-14.2%) and BL ((TN, 0.03-0.04%; TP, 11.6-10.5%) soils, while C: N ratio was higher in BL (13.2-14.8) than AL (10.8-12.1) and lower in DL (6.5-8.2) soil in all three seasons. The rhizosphere soil of DL had considerably greater levels of microbial biomass carbon (MBC), microbial biomass nitrogen (MBN), and soil dehydrogenase activity (SDA) than the AL and BL. Pearson's correlation showed a significant strong positive correlation of SOC with WHC, TN, TP, MBC, MBN and soil dehydrogenase activity (SDA) (p < 0.01). Additionally, the principal component analysis (PCA) showed large and positive loading of PC1 for TN, WHC, MBN, MBC, SOC and SDA, suggesting that the restoration efforts should focus on increasing the TN, MBC, MBN, SOC and SDA. Increased SOC, TN, TP, microbial biomass and SDA in the rhizosphere soil of D. sissoo indicate healthy soil conditions in the Vindhyan dry tropical region of India. Therefore, this study advises to use D. sissoo tree extensively in land restoration initiatives for the benefit of both nat ure and people and also to achieve the goal of the United Nations Decade on Ecosystem Restoration (2021-2030).
Importance of Ethiopian shade coffee farms for forest bird conservation			Coffee is the most important tropical commodity and is grown in high-priority areas for biological conservation. There is abundant literature on the conservation value of coffee farms internationally, but there has been little research on this topic in Africa. Ethiopia is a diverse and little-studied country with high levels of avian endemism, pressing conservation challenges, and where Coffea arabica originated. We sampled bird communities in shade coffee farms and moist evergreen Afromontane forest in Ethiopia utilizing standard mist netting procedures at seven sites over three years to evaluate bird species richness, diversity and community structure. Although species diversity did not differ between shade coffee and forest, shade coffee farms had over double the species richness of forest sites and all but one of the nine Palearctic migratory species were captured only in shade coffee. There was a greater relative abundance of forest specialists and understory insectivores in forest, demonstrating that little-disturbed forest is critical for sustaining these at-risk groups of birds. Nonetheless, all species recorded in primary forest control sites were also recorded in shade coffee, indicating that Ethiopian shade coffee is perhaps the most "bird-friendly" coffee in the world. This is an important finding for efforts to conserve forest birds in Africa, and for shade coffee farmers that may benefit from avian pest regulation and biodiversity-friendly coffee certifications. © 2015 Elsevier Ltd.
Important constraints on soil organic carbon formation efficiency in subtropical and tropical grasslands			More than 10% of Australia's 49 M ha of grassland is considered degraded, prompting widespread interest in the management of these ecosystems to increase soil carbon (C) sequestration—with an emphasis on long-lived C storage. We know that management practices that increase plant biomass also increase C inputs to the soil, but we lack a quantitative understanding of the fate of soil C inputs into different soil organic carbon (SOC) fractions that have fundamentally different formation pathways and persistence in the soil. Our understanding of the factors that constrain SOC formation in these fractions is also limited, particularly within tropical climates. We used isotopically labelled residue (13C) to determine the fate of residue C inputs into short-lived particulate organic matter (POM) and more persistent mineral-associated organic matter (MAOM) across a broad climatic gradient (ΔMAT 10°C) with varying soil properties. Climate was the primary driver of aboveground residue mass loss which corresponded to higher residue-derived POM formation. In contrast, MAOM formation efficiency was constrained by soil properties. The differential controls on POM and MAOM formation highlight that a targeted approach to grassland restoration is required; we must identify priority regions for improved grazing management in soils that have a relatively high silt+clay content and cation exchange capacity, with a low C saturation in the silt+clay fraction to deliver long-term SOC sequestration. © 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Important role of Pinus massoniana mixed forests in enhancing soil carbon stocks in degraded forests in southern China			Forest degradation, including low-function forest (LFF), native forest destruction or transformation (NFDT), and subsequent soil erosion (SE), has occurred. Historically, single-species plantations rather than mixed forests have been used to offset forest losses. However, the important role of Pinus massoniana mixed forests (PMFs) at degraded sites in enhancing soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks in southern China remains untested. Our meta- analysis included 1840 paired observations from 136 studies. The results demonstrated that converting P. massoniana pure forests (PPFs) to PMFs at degraded sites increased SOC stocks (0-100 cm) by 46.55%, which was 7.03 times greater than that at nondegraded sites. The PMFs at the SE sites sequestered significantly higher SOC stocks (2.40 and 4.35 times) than did those at the LFF and NFDT sites. At the LFF and SE sites, SOC stock increases were attributed to significant increases in litter biomass, root biomass, tree biomass, and tree OC stock. At the SE sites, converting bare lands to PMFs increased SOC stocks (0-100 cm) by 274.30%. At the NFDT sites, converting natural evergreen broadleaved forests (NEBFs) to PPFs significantly decreased the SOC stocks. However, SOC stocks remained unchanged after the conversion of NEBFs to PMFs. At the NFDT sites, the conversion of PPFs to PMFs increased SOC stocks by significantly increasing the contribution of soil microbial residue accumulation and microbial residue-carbon to SOC. The transformation of NEBFs into PMFs and PPFs significantly reduced soil microbial residue retention and microbial residue-carbon. Nevertheless, only PPFs significantly decreased the proportion of microbial residues in SOC to reduce SOC stocks. Together, transforming PPFs to PMFs in degraded areas significantly enhances SOC stocks but needs plant species richness not exceeding 20. Thus, PMF cannot replace NEBF, and NEBF requires adequate protection.
Improved models for estimating temporal changes in carbon sequestration in above-ground biomass of mixed-species environmental plantings			Plantings of mixed native species (termed 'environmental plantings') are increasingly being established for carbon sequestration whilst providing additional environmental benefits such as biodiversity and water quality. In Australia, they are currently one of the most common forms of reforestation. Investment in establishing and maintaining such plantings relies on having a cost-effective modelling approach to providing unbiased estimates of biomass production and carbon sequestration rates. In Australia, the Full Carbon Accounting Model (FulICAM) is used for both national greenhouse gas accounting and project-scale sequestration activities. Prior to undertaking the work presented here, the FulICAM tree growth curve was not calibrated specifically for environmental plantings and generally under-estimated their biomass. Here we collected and analysed above-ground biomass data from 605 mixed-species environmental plantings, and tested the effects of several planting characteristics on growth rates. Plantings were then categorised based on significant differences in growth rates. Growth of plantings differed between temperate and tropical regions. Tropical plantings were relatively uniform in terms of planting methods and their growth was largely related to stand age, consistent with the un-calibrated growth curve. However, in temperate regions where plantings were more variable, key factors influencing growth were planting width, stand density and species-mix (proportion of individuals that were trees). These categories provided the basis for FulICAM calibration. Although the overall model efficiency was only 39-46%, there was nonetheless no significant bias when the model was applied to the various planting categories. Thus, modelled estimates of biomass accumulation will be reliable on average, but estimates at any particular location will be uncertain, with either under- or over-prediction possible. When compared with the un-calibrated yield curves, predictions using the new calibrations show that early growth is likely to be more rapid and total above-ground biomass may be higher for many plantings at maturity. This study has considerably improved understanding of the patterns of growth in different types of environmental plantings, and in modelling biomass accumulation in young (<25 years old) plantings. However, significant challenges remain to understand longer-term stand dynamics, particularly with temporal changes in stand density and species composition. Crown Copyright (C) 2014 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Improved multi-sensor satellite-based above ground biomass estimation by selecting temporally stable forest inventory plots using NDVI time series			Accurate estimates of aboveground biomass (AGB) are crucial to assess terrestrial C-stocks and C-emissions as well as to develop sustainable forest management strategies. In this study we used Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) data acquired at L-band and the Landsat tree cover product together with Moderate Resolution Image Spectroradiometer (MODIS) normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) time series data to improve AGB estimations over two study areas in southern Mexico. We used Mexican National Forest Inventory (INFyS) data collected between 2005 and 2011 to calibrate AGB models as well as to validate the derived AGB products. We applied MODIS NDVI time series data analysis to exclude field plots in which abrupt changes were detected. For this, we used Breaks For Additive Seasonal and Trend analysis (BFAST). We modelled AGB using an original field dataset and BFAST-filtered data. The results show higher accuracies of AGB estimations using BFAST-filtered data than using original field data in terms of R2 and root mean square error (RMSE) for both dry and humid tropical forests of southern Mexico. The best results were found in areas with high deforestation rates where the AGB models based on the BFAST-filtered data substantially outperformed those based on original field data (R2 BFAST = 0.62 vs. R2 orig = 0.45; RMSEBFAST = 28.4 t/ha vs. RMSEorig = 33.8 t/ha). We conclude that the presented method shows great potential to improve AGB estimations and can be easily and automatically implemented over large areas. © 2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Improving estimates of tropical peatland area, carbon storage, and greenhouse gas fluxes			Our limited knowledge of the size of the carbon pool and exchange fluxes in forested lowland tropical peatlands represents a major gap in our understanding of the global carbon cycle. Peat deposits in several regions (e.g. the Congo Basin, much of Amazonia) are only just beginning to be mapped and characterised. Here we consider the extent to which methodological improvements and improved coordination between researchers could help to fill this gap. We review the literature on measurement of the key parameters required to calculate carbon pools and fluxes, including peatland area, peat bulk density, carbon concentration, above-ground carbon stocks, litter inputs to the peat, gaseous carbon exchange, and waterborne carbon fluxes. We identify areas where further research and better coordination are particularly needed in order to reduce the uncertainties in estimates of tropical peatland carbon pools and fluxes, thereby facilitating better-informed management of these exceptionally carbon-rich ecosystems. © 2014, Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht.
Improving rural health care reduces illegal logging and conserves carbon in a tropical forest			Tropical forest loss currently exceeds forest gain, leading to a net greenhouse gas emission that exacerbates global climate change. This has sparked scientific debate on how to achieve natural climate solutions. Central to this debate is whether sustainably managing forests and protected areas will deliver global climate mitigation benefits, while ensuring local peoples’ health and well-being. Here, we evaluate the 10-y impact of a human-centered solution to achieve natural climate mitigation through reductions in illegal logging in rural Borneo: an intervention aimed at expanding health care access and use for communities living near a national park, with clinic discounts offsetting costs historically met through illegal logging. Conservation, education, and alternative livelihood programs were also offered. We hypothesized that this would lead to improved health and well-being, while also alleviating illegal logging activity within the protected forest. We estimated that 27.4 km2 of deforestation was averted in the national park over a decade (∼70% reduction in deforestation compared to a synthetic control, permuted P = 0.038). Concurrently, the intervention provided health care access to more than 28,400 unique patients, with clinic usage and patient visitation frequency highest in communities participating in the intervention. Finally, we observed a dose–response in forest change rate to intervention engagement (person-contacts with intervention activities) across communities bordering the park: The greatest logging reductions were adjacent to the most highly engaged villages. Results suggest that this community-derived solution simultaneously improved health care access for local and indigenous communities and sustainably conserved carbon stocks in a protected tropical forest. © 2020 National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Improving sustainable tropical forest management with voluntary carbon markets			Purpose Due to a rapidly changing climate, voluntary carbon markets are gaining momentum and should be leveraged to improve and expand tropical sustainable forest management plans, limiting carbon emissions and enhancing critical carbon sinks. By sequestering more carbon than any other terrestrial ecosystem - - similar to 1 Pg C yr(-1) - tropical forests provide crucial natural climate solutions and opportunities in the evolving voluntary carbon market.Methods Here, we argue that some issues with the current sustainable management of tropical forests can be addressed using carbon-focused sustainable forest management (SFM + C) to leverage financial resources for tropical forest carbon storage and sequestration. We suggest an extended harvest cycle in SFM + C and calculate an associated potential increase in aboveground carbon stocks of commercial timber of 1.26 Mg C ha(-1) after each cycle in the Brazilian Amazon.Results The additional carbon storage due to a longer harvest cycle can generate carbon credits worth 152.6 (SD 9.2) US dollars per hectare in 40 years. Considering an average cost of 180 BRL per m(3) of commercial timber delivered to the sawmill, an SFM + C plan with a 40-year cycle could generate 28.7% (SD 2.5) more profit than 35-year cycles by combining timber and carbon revenues.Conclusion A robust carbon price could incentivize the further extension of harvest cycles, providing a monetary return that offsets the opportunity cost intrinsic to harvesting under longer cycles. Finally, we highlight research needs to support tropical SFM + C, which can be part of a global collective effort to limit global warming to below 2 degrees C above pre-industrial levels.
Incomplete recovery of tree community composition and rare species after 120 years of tropical forest succession in Panama			Determining how fully tropical forests regenerating on abandoned land recover characteristics of old-growth forests is increasingly important for understanding their role in conserving rare species and maintaining ecosystem services. Despite this, our understanding of forest structure and community composition recovery throughout succession is incomplete, as many tropical chronosequences do not extend beyond the first 50 years of succession. Here, we examined trajectories of forest recovery across eight 1-hectare plots in middle and later stages of forest succession (40-120 years) and five 1-hectare old-growth plots, in the Barro Colorado Nature Monument (BCNM), Panama. We first verified that forest age had a greater effect than edaphic or topographic variation on forest structure, diversity and composition and then corroborated results from smaller plots censused 20 years previously. Tree species diversity (but not species richness) and forest structure had fully recovered to old-growth levels by 40 and 90 years, respectively. However, rare species were missing, and old-growth specialists were in low abundance, in the mid- and late secondary forest plots, leading to incomplete recovery of species composition even by 120 years into succession. We also found evidence that dominance early in succession by a long-lived pioneer led to altered forest structure and delayed recovery of species diversity and composition well past a century after land abandonment. Our results illustrate the critical importance of old-growth and old secondary forests for biodiversity conservation, given that recovery of community composition may take several centuries, particularly when a long-lived pioneer dominates in early succession.Abstract in Spanish is available with online material.
Incorporating natural regeneration in forest landscape restoration in tropical regions: synthesis and key research gaps			Extensive tropical forest loss and degradation have stimulated increasing awareness at the international policy level of the need to undertake large-scale forest landscape restoration (FLR). Natural regeneration offers a cost-effective way to achieve large-scale FLR, but is often overlooked in favor of tree plantations. The studies presented in this special issue show how natural regeneration can become an important part of FLR and highlight the ecological, environmental, and social factors that must be considered to effectively do so. They also identify major knowledge gaps and outline a research agenda to support the use of natural regeneration in FLR. Six central questions emerge from these studies: (1) What are the ecological, economic, and livelihood outcomes of active and passive restoration interventions?; (2) What are the tradeoffs and synergies among ecological, economic, and livelihood outcomes of natural regeneration, restoration and productive land uses, and how do they evolve in the face of market and climate shocks?; (3) What diagnostic tools are needed to identify and map target areas for natural regeneration?; (4) How should spatial prioritization frameworks incorporate natural regeneration into FLR?; (5) What legal frameworks and governance structures are best suited to encourage natural regeneration and how do they change across regions and landscapes?; (6) What financial mechanisms can foster low-cost natural regeneration? Natural regeneration is not a panacea to solve tensions and conflicts over land use, but it can be advantageous under some circumstances. Identifying under what conditions this is the case is an important avenue for future research.Abstract in Portuguese and Spanish are available with online material.
Increased aridity and chronic anthropogenic disturbance reduce litter productivity in a Caatinga dry forest			Tropical dry forest productivity is thought to be driven by a combination of natural factors, particularly total water availability and seasonality. However, most of the world's dry forests have been converted into forest successional mosaics by a combination of slash-and-burn agriculture and exploitation of forest products, which has potential impacts for forest productivity. Here, we examined litter production, nutrient concentrations and fluxes across regenerating and old-growth stands of a Caatinga dry forest during a 48-mo period, assessing the impact of annual rainfall, forest aboveground biomass, soil fertility, forest successional status, stand age and chronic anthropogenic disturbance. We found our sites to have low litter productivity, producing 0.193 +/- 0.016 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1) (mean +/- SE) of litter. Moreover, litter production was highly seasonal (> 90% during the dry season), and varied substantially across forest stands (from 0.0035 to 0.564 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1)), but with no differences relative to forest successional status; i.e. similar litter production in regenerating and old-growth stands. Litter production was affected by precipitation, soil fertility and chronic anthropogenic disturbance. Litter nutrient concentration was highly variable across forest stands, but concentration responded very little to our focal drivers. Litter N-concentration was relatively high, while P was very low resulting in a small flux to the soil via litter decomposition. In contrast to litter nutrient concentrations, nutrient fluxes were more predictable, particularly considering forest successional status. Our results suggest that Caatinga dry forest on sandy soils is a low-productivity ecosystem, probably due to a combination of natural and anthropogenic drivers.
Increased soil organic carbon stocks under agroforestry: A survey of six different sites in France			Agroforestry systems are land use management systems in which trees are grown in combination with crops or pasture in the same field. In silvoarable systems, trees are intercropped with arable crops, and in silvopastoral systems trees are combined with pasture for livestock. These systems may produce forage and timber as well as providing ecosystem services such as climate change mitigation. Carbon (C) is stored in the aboveground and belowground biomass of the trees, and the transfer of organic matter from the trees to the soil can increase soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks. Few studies have assessed the impact of agroforestry systems on carbon storage in soils in temperate climates, as most have been undertaken in tropical regions. This study assessed five silvoarable systems and one silvopastoral system in France. All sites had an agroforestry system with an adjacent, purely agricultural control plot. The land use management in the inter-rows in the agroforestry systems and in the control plots were identical. The age of the study sites ranged from 6 to 41 years after tree planting. Depending on the type of soil, the sampling depth ranged from 20 to 100 cm and SOC stocks were assessed using equivalent soil masses. The aboveground biomass of the trees was also measured at all sites. In the silvoarable systems, the mean organic carbon stock accumulation rate in the soil was 0.24 (0.09-0.46) Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1) at a depth of 30 cm and 0.65 (0.004-1.85) Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1) in the tree biomass. Increased SOC stocks were also found in deeper soil layers at two silvoarable sites. Young plantations stored additional SOC but mainly in the soil under the rows of trees, possibly as a result of the herbaceous vegetation growing in the rows. At the silvopastoral site, the SOC stock was significantly greater at a depth of 30-50 cm than in the control. Overall, this study showed the potential of agroforestry systems to store C in both soil and biomass in temperate regions. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Increasing liana abundance and biomass in tropical forests: Emerging patterns and putative mechanisms			Tropical forests are experiencing large-scale structural changes, the most apparent of which may be the increase in liana (woody vine) abundance and biomass. Lianas permeate most lowland tropical forests, where they can have a huge effect on tree diversity, recruitment, growth and survival, which, in turn, can alter tree community composition, carbon storage and carbon, nutrient and water fluxes. Consequently, increasing liana abundance and biomass have potentially profound ramifications for tropical forest composition and functioning. Currently, eight studies support the pattern of increasing liana abundance and biomass in American tropical and subtropical forests, whereas two studies, both from Africa, do not. The putative mechanisms to explain increasing lianas include increasing evapotranspirative demand, increasing forest disturbance and turnover, changes in land use and fragmentation and elevated atmospheric CO2. Each of these mechanisms probably contributes to the observed patterns of increasing liana abundance and biomass, and the mechanisms are likely to be interrelated and synergistic. To determine whether liana increases are occurring throughout the tropics and to determine the mechanisms responsible for the observed patterns, a widespread network of large-scale, long-term monitoring plots combined with observational and manipulative studies that more directly investigate the putative mechanisms are essential. © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/CNRS.
Increasing plant species diversity benefits soil protein accumulation in a subtropical forest			Protein, derived from plant and microbial residues, constitutes a significant portion of soil nitrogen or organic carbon pool and plays a crucial role in determining soil nitrogen and carbon sequestration. Though diversifying plant species has been regarded as a promising strategy for promoting soil nitrogen or organic carbon accumulation during vegetation restoration or afforestation, how increasing plant species diversity (PSD) would influence soil protein pool remains unknown. We selected 45 plots covering a natural gradient of PSD, which was reflected by the Shannon index and varied from 0.15 to 3.57, in a subtropical karst forest. The major objective was to investigate the impact of increasing PSD on soil protein abundance, with soil protein depolymerization rate and multiple biotic and abiotic variables being measured to explore the underlying mechanism. The relative abundance of soil protein, that is proportion in soil organic matter varied between 24.1 and 34.0% with an average of 29.2 ± 2.3% across the 45 plots. Soil protein abundance increased on average by 1.56% with each unit of PSD increase. Nevertheless, soil protease activity, protein depolymerization rate and microbial amino acid uptake rate all significantly (p < 0.05) decreased as PSD increased. The mechanism underlying the increase of soil protein abundance in response to higher PSD included three aspects, that is stimulating microbial biomass and subsequent microbial residue input to the soil, promoting mineral protection of soil protein via elevating levels of soil exchangeable calcium and magnesium, and decreasing soil protease activity and protein depolymerization due to aggravated soil microbial phosphorus limitation. Synthesis and application: Our study suggests that increasing PSD is an efficient way to promote soil protein accumulation. Given that protein is a major component of soil nitrogen or organic carbon pool, diversifying plant species during vegetation restoration or afforestation would hence benefit soil nitrogen and organic carbon sequestration. © 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Applied Ecology © 2024 British Ecological Society.
Increasing tree cover while losing diverse natural forests in tropical Hainan, China			To protect biodiversity and improve environmental conditions, China has invested billions of dollars in reforestation and payments for ecosystem service programs. Here, we examine the Sloping Land Conversion Program, the largest such program in the world and found that after 13 years of implementation at our study site, it has had negative impacts on natural tropical forests. GIS and remote sensing techniques revealed that both natural forests and natural shrub and grasslands were replaced by non-native monocultural plantations on Hainan Island, China, a key tropical biodiversity hotspot. Under current Chinese policy, these plantations are classified simply as "forests", with the assumption that they are equivalent to natural forests. This lack of a distinction in forest quality has led to substantial deforestation and plantation expansion, including encroachment into protected areas on Hainan. Additional social and economic drivers of these changes were identified by examining the participants in this program and their actions. Without a new ecologically based definition of forests and new goals for reforestation, such programs designed to improve ecosystem services, and forest quality may actually threaten remaining natural forests and other vegetation types in Hainan and in other areas of mainland China.
Incremental costs of carbon storage in forestry, bioenergy and land-use			This paper presents a comprehensive and consistent methodology to account for the incremental costs and net changes in carbon stocks for different categories of forestry and biomass energy projects. The methodology allows consistent comparisons of the costs and quantities of carbon stored in different types of projects and/or national programs, facilitating the inclusion of forestry and biomass energy projects in a possible CO2 emission reduction regime. The framework presented includes guidelines for defining a reference case against which carbon-storage projects are compared, a carbon-storage accounting method based on simple analytic techniques for one-time terrestrial sinks, an endowment approach to incremental costing, and a discussion of local benefits and risk factors.
Indian Ocean coastal thicket is of high conservation value for preserving taxonomic and functional diversity of forest-dependent bird communities in a landscape of restricted forest availability			The Indian Ocean Coastal Belt Forest is extremely biodiverse but is threatened by anthropogenic land-use change. In South Africa, remnant forest patches are divided into highly restricted but protected indigenous forest (IF) and abundant but unprotected coastal thicket/dense bush (DB), which likely represents secondary/regenerating IF. We tested the hypothesis that DB had value for conserving forest dependent avian taxonomic and functional diversity, as (a) DB is situated with in the forestanthropogenic land-use mosaic and (b) birds maintain diverse ecosystem functions and are sensitive to environmental change given their varied biological traits. We conducted 149 and 112 fixed-radius point-count surveys of avian communities in 99, and 24, patches of DB and IF, respectively, at each location recording microhabitat vegetation structure. We compared vegetation characteristics and taxonomic species richness between vegetation classes, and tested the breadth of functional trait-space and for significant associations with vegetation structures at each survey location, using RLQ analysis. Vegetation classes differed significantly, but floral species overlap and vegetation structures in DB closely resembled regenerating IF habitat. Specialist ground-nesting and insect-gleaning species corresponded to taller, more diverse IF structures. Other biological traits and total species richness overlapped broadly across both classes, but IF had significantly higher mean species richness. Given the relatively high taxonomic and functional diversity of the avian community in the abundant DB, the scarcity of IF, and the proximity of DB to the anthropogenic land-use mosaic, we recommend allocating suitable DB patches to the Protected Area Network, which may simultaneously help preserve avian taxonomic and functional diversity, facilitate colonisation throughout the fragmented landscape and provide ecosystem services to anthropogenic land uses. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Indigenous lands and conservation units slow down non-GHG climate change in the Cerrado-Amazon ecotone			Preserving tropical forests by avoiding deforestation and forest degradation is essential for maintaining ecosystem services. Brazilian Conservation Units (CUs) and Indigenous Lands (ILs) have effectively prevented deforestation and supported climate regulation. However, these protected areas face increasing threats from forest fires and droughts across the Amazon and Cerrado biomes. This study assesses how disturbances affect climate regulating factors (surface temperature (LST), evapotranspiration (ET), and albedo) in Mato Grosso state, among different land uses (CUs, ILs, and multiple -use areas - MUs). To do so, we analyzed satellite data collected between 2001 and 2020. Results showed that MUs (outside protected areas) had lower ET (-10%), higher daytime LST (-1.5 degrees C), and higher albedo (-10%) than CUs and ILs in both biomes in 2001. Over the study period, MUs experienced a greater increase in LST (Amazon: -1.4 degrees C; Cerrado: -1.1 degrees C) and albedo (Amazon: -6%; Cerrado: -3%) compared to protected areas, regardless of the biome. In contrast, ILs and CUs showed smaller mean changes in LST (-0.2 degrees C), ET (-1.3%), and albedo (-1.3%). These changes were associated with native vegetation loss, forest fires, and water stress. Our results highlight the important role of protected areas in maintaining climate stability, with higher ET, lower LST, and lower albedo than other land uses. However, the long-term preservation of these services within protected areas depends on interventions in surrounding regions, particularly in the Amazon. Protecting and restoring these natural ecosystems is key for safeguarding ecosystem services and climate regulation in tropical regions.
Indigenous livelihoods, slash-and-burn agriculture, and carbon stocks in Eastern Panama			Improved crop-fallow systems in the humid tropics can simultaneously sequester atmospheric carbon emissions and contribute to sustainable livelihoods of rural populations. A study with an indigenous community in eastern Panama revealed a considerable biophysical potential for carbon offsets in small-scale slash-and-burn agriculture through longer fallow periods, improved fallow management, secondary forest development, and agricultural intensification. Based on soil and biomass carbon measurements, estimated annual sequestration rates amount to 0.3-3.7 t C ha(-1) yr(-1). Despite such potential, the economic benefits of initiatives aimed at sequestration of carbon in the community are likely to be rather unequally distributed within the community. Heterogeneity in livelihood strategies and uneven asset endowments among households factors often overlooked in the ongoing carbon and sustainable development debate - are expected to strongly affect household participation. Indeed, only the better-endowed households that have also managed to diversify into more lucrative farm and non-farm activities are likely to be able to participate in and thus benefit from improved crop-fallow systems that capture carbon. Economic, ethical, institutional, and technical concerns need to be taken into account when designing community carbon management and investment plans. (c) 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Indigenous Sacred Forests as a Tool for Climate Change Mitigation: Lessons from Gedeo Community, Southern Ethiopia			Sacred forests are patches of remnant natural forests, protected through social laws by the local communities near their villages and are always dedicated to cultural purposes. They are playing a significant role in combating climate change and informal enhancing biodiversity conservation. The aim of this study was to estimate carbon stocks of sacred forests by quantifying the aboveground biomass (AGB), and belowground (BGB) carbon of trees. The estimation of carbon stocks was conducted across the three sacred forests of Bolocho sacred forest (BSF), Ejjerissa sacred forest (ESF), and Amba sacred forest (ASF). A total of 30 plots: 10 BSF, 10 ESF, and 10 ASF were sampled and trees with DBH >= 5 cm and a height of >= 3 m was considered for biomass-carbon determination. We compared tree biomass, carbon stocks, stem densities, basal area, and importance value index of trees. Nondestructive methods of woody species biomass measurement was used by using allometric equations developed for application in tropical forests and/ or agroforestry system. A total of 4216 individuals representing 87 different species and 44 families were recorded. Statistical the highest stem density was recorded. Total biomass considered as AGB+BGB, which is highest for ASF followed by ESF and BSF (one way ANOVA, F = 98.66, df, 2, p < .001). The estimated amount of AGB across the three sacred forests were (505 Mg ha(-1)), (267 Mg ha(-1)) and (202 Mg ha(-1)) in ASF, ESF, and BSF, respectively. Total biomass stored, both aboveground and belowground (AGB+BGB) significantly higher for ASF (637 Mg ha(-1)) followed by ESF (338 Mg ha(-1)) and BSF (255 Mg ha(-1)). Total biomass carbon (C) was 318.5 Mg C ha(-1) for ASF, 169 Mg C ha(-1) for ESF, and 127.5 Mg C ha(-1) for BSF. From the present study, it can be concluded that, sacred forests and indigenous way of forest protection has playing an enormous roles in carbon sequestration. Perhaps it could be accepted as best practices in climate change (CC) mitigation and reducing deforestation. Hence, it needs urge calls for an immediate attention for conservation, protections and documentation of indigenous knowledge.
Indonesia's Contested Domains. Deforestation, Rehabilitation and Conservation-with-Development in Central Kalimantan's Tropical Peatlands			Tropical peat swamp forests (TPSF) in Indonesia have long faced competition between industrial demand for timber, the subsistence requirements of local communities and, more recently, global concern about the need to conserve tropical peat carbon stores, ecosystem services and biodiversity. This paper uses concepts of ecological distribution and environmental justice to investigate how tensions between conservation and livelihood goals have played out on the ground and examine who has gained and lost out from recent TPSF exploitation, conservation and rehabilitation initiatives. A central focus is how peat-based communities in Central Kalimantan have adapted their livelihoods to changing peatland conditions and management policies with particular emphasis on the livelihood impacts of conservation-with-development initiatives in the area. It is argued that despite recent emphasis on 'win-win' initiatives, the costs of environmental conservation are rarely distributed in proportion to their benefit.
Indonesia's REDD+ pact: Saving imperilled forests or business as usual?			Indonesia and Norway have entered into a landmark deal that will pay Indonesia up to US$1 billion for forest-conservation activities aimed at slowing rampant deforestation and resulting greenhouse gas emissions. A recent Presidential Instruction in Indonesia outlines a key deliverable of this " Partnership" -a two-year suspension on new concessions for clearing or logging of peat and old-growth forest. Here, we discuss the implications of this instruction for carbon and biodiversity protection. The protection of highly threatened deep peatlands represents a clear victory. However, by focusing solely on old-growth forests, the instruction excludes over 46. million ha of selectively logged rainforests, which often have high carbon storage and biodiversity. This leaves the logged forests, most of which are in accessible lowland areas, highly vulnerable to re-logging and conversion for oil palm and pulpwood plantations. The instruction also could allow large areas of peatlands and old-growth forest to be converted to sugarcane-one of the world's most rapidly expanding biofuel crops. While the Partnership could potentially help reform land-use planning and reduce illegal deforestation in Indonesia, we argue that Indonesia must also strive to protect vulnerable logged forests, which comprise a large part of the country's high-carbon, high-biodiversity lands. © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
Influence of Acacia mangium on Soil Fertility and Bacterial Community in Eucalyptus Plantations in the Congolese Coastal Plains			Productivity and sustainability of tropical forest plantations greatly rely on regulation of ecosystem functioning and nutrient cycling, i.e., the link between plant growth, nutrient availability, and the microbial community structure. So far, these interactions have never been evaluated in the Acacia and Eucalyptus forest planted on infertile soils in the Congolese coastal plains. In the present work, the soil bacterial community has been investigated by metabarcoding of the 16S rRNA bacterial gene in different stands of monoculture and mixed-species plantation to evaluate the potential of nitrogen-fixing trees on nutrient and bacterial structure. At the phylum level, the soil bacterial community was dominated by Actinobacteria, followed by Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Acidobacteria. A principal coordinate analysis revealed that bacterial communities from pure Eucalyptus, compared to those from plantations containing Acacia in pure and mixed-species stands, showed different community composition (beta-diversity). Regardless of the large variability of the studied soils, the prevalence of Firmicutes phylum, and lower bacterial richness and phylogenic diversity were reported in stands containing Acacia relative to the pure Eucalyptus. Distance-based redundancy analysis revealed a positive correlation of available phosphorus (P) and carbon/nitrogen (C/N) ratio with bacterial community structure. However, the Spearman correlation test revealed a broad correlation between the relative abundance of bacterial taxa and soil attributes, in particular with sulfur (S) and carbon (C), suggesting the important role of soil bacterial community in nutrient cycling in this type of forest management. Concerning mixed plantations, a shift in bacterial community structure was observed, probably linked to other changes, i.e., improvement in soil fertility (enhanced P and C dynamics in forest floor and soil, and increase in soil N status), and C sequestration in both soil and stand wood biomass with the great potential impact to mitigate climate change. Overall, our findings highlight the role of soil attributes, especially C, S, available P, and C/N ratio at a lesser extent, in driving the soil bacterial community in mixed-species plantations and its potential to improve soil fertility and to sustain Eucalyptus plantations established on the infertile and sandy soils of the Congolese coastal plains.
Influence of afforestation, reforestation, forest logging, climate change, CO2 concentration rise, fire, and insects on the carbon sequestration capacity of the forest ecosystem			Controlling the rising levels of atmospheric greenhouse gas (GHG, especially CO2) concentration to mitigate global climate change is arguably the most challenging environmental issue encountered by China and many other countries. Forest ecosystem, which is an integral part of terrestrial ecosystems, can play a significant role in absorbing CO2 from the atmosphere and aiding global climate change mitigation, subsequently contributing to meet the national commitment and demand of carbon emission reduction and carbon sink enhancement. Afforestation and reforestation, as recognized in the Kyoto Protocol, provide relatively low-cost and effective solutions to enhance forest ecosystem carbon sink. Meanwhile, the carbon sequestration capacity of a forest ecosystem is enormously affected by various natural and anthropogenic factors, which may convert the forest ecosystem from a carbon sink to a source. Therefore, the understanding of the influence of afforestation, reforestation, and those factors on the carbon sequestration capacity of the forest ecosystem is important for the accurate estimation of global and regional forest ecosystem carbon budget. In this study, the recent research progresses on the effect of afforestation and reforestation on carbon sequestration capacity of global and regional forest has been reviewed, along with the influence of several natural and anthropogenic disturbances (i.e., forest logging, climate change, CO2 concentration enhancement, fire, and insect). It was indicated that the carbon sequestration capacity of global afforestation and reforestation was in the range of 148 to 2400 TgC/a, varying regionally as follows: tropical forest (1700 TgC/a) > boreal forest (700 TgC/a) > temperate forest (27-500 TgC/a). Furthermore, besides climate change and CO2 concentration rise, other factors that caused carbon emissions in the forest have been summed up and listed below. Forest logging caused the highest carbon emissions (900 TgC/a), followed by forest fire (300 TgC/a), and insects caused the lowest carbon emissions (2-107 TgC/a). Henceforth, more attention should be paid on the influence of carbon sequestration measures and integrated effects of multiple forms of disturbance on the carbon sequestration capacity of forest ecosystems, especially carbon sequestration capacity of forest soil. Furthermore, controlling forest logging and fire, along with reducing or avoiding additional carbon leakage due to afforestation and reforestation would also greatly contribute to forest carbon sequestration. © 2016, Ecological Society of China. All rights reserved.
Influence of Intraspecific Competition Stress on Soil Fungal Diversity and Composition in Relation to Tree Growth and Soil Fertility in Sub-Tropical Soils under Chinese Fir Monoculture			Soil microorganisms provide valuable ecosystem services, such as nutrient cycling, soil remediation, and biotic and abiotic stress resistance. There is increasing interest in exploring total belowground biodiversity across ecological scales to understand better how different ecological aspects, such as stand density, soil properties, soil depth, and plant growth parameters, influence belowground communities. In various environments, microbial components of belowground communities, such as soil fungi, respond differently to soil features; however, little is known about their response to standing density and vertical soil profiles in a Chinese fir monoculture plantation. This research examined the assemblage of soil fungal communities in different density stands (high, intermediate, and low) and soil depth profiles (0-20 cm and 20-40 cm). This research also looked into the relationship between soil fungi and tree canopy characteristics (mean tilt angle of the leaf (MTA), leaf area index (LAI), and canopy openness index (DIFN)), and general growth parameters, such as diameter, height, and biomass. The results showed that low-density stand soil had higher fungal alpha diversity than intermediate- and high-density stand soils. Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, Mucromycota, and Mortierellomycota were the most common phyla of the soil fungal communities, in that order. Saitozyma, Penicillium, Umbelopsis, and Talaromyces were the most abundant fungal genera. Stand density composition was the dominant factor in changing fungal community structure compared to soil properties and soil depth profiles. The most significant soil elements in soil fungal community alterations were macronutrients. In addition, the canopy openness index and fungal community structure have a positive association in the low-density stand. Soil biota is a nutrient cycling driver that can promote better plant growth in forest ecosystems by supporting nutrient cycling. Hence, this research will be critical in understanding soil fungal dynamics, improving stand growth and productivity, and improving soil quality in intensively managed Chinese fir plantations.
Influence of nutrient availability, stand age, and canopy structure on isoprene flux in a Eucalyptus saligna experimental forest			[1] Eucalyptus plantations occupy approximately 10 million ha of land in the tropics and, increasingly, afforestation and reforestation projects are relying on this genus to provide rapid occupation of degraded sites, large quantities of high-quality wood products, and high rates of carbon sequestration. Members of the genus Eucalyptus are also very high emitters of isoprene, the dominant volatile organic compound emitted by trees in tropical ecosystems, which significantly influences the oxidative capacity of the atmosphere. While fertilization growth response of these trees has been intensively studied, little is known about how fertilization and tree age alter isoprene production from plantations of these trees. Here we examined the effects of fertilization and tree age on leaf-level isoprene flux from 2- and 6-year-old trees in a Eucalyptus saligna experimental forest in Hawaii. Leaf-level emission at a given canopy height did not differ between fertilized and unfertilized 6-year-old trees likely because leaf nitrogen content did not vary with fertilization. Across treatments, however, the standardized emission rate of isoprene (emission at a standard light and temperature) followed patterns of leaf N content and declined with canopy depth. Although leaf nitrogen content was similar between 2- year and 6-year fertilized trees, leaf-level emission rates declined with stand age. Surprisingly, despite differences in stand leaf area and leaf area distribution, modeled canopy-level isoprene flux was similar across stands varying in fertilization and tree age. Model results suggest that leaf area index was high enough in all treatments to absorb most of the light penetrating the canopy, leading to similar canopy flux rates despite the very different sized canopies.
Influence of Plot Size on Efficiency of Biomass Estimates in Inventories of Dry Tropical Forests Assisted by Photogrammetric Data from an Unmanned Aircraft System			Applications of unmanned aircraft systems (UASs) to assist in forest inventories have provided promising results in biomass estimation for different forest types. Recent studies demonstrating use of different types of remotely sensed data to assist in biomass estimation have shown that accuracy and precision of estimates are influenced by the size of field sample plots used to obtain reference values for biomass. The objective of this case study was to assess the influence of sample plot size on efficiency of UAS-assisted biomass estimates in the dry tropical miombo woodlands of Malawi. The results of a design-based field sample inventory assisted by three-dimensional point clouds obtained from aerial imagery acquired with a UAS showed that the root mean square errors as well as the standard error estimates of mean biomass decreased as sample plot sizes increased. Furthermore, relative efficiency values over different sample plot sizes were above 1.0 in a design-based and model-assisted inferential framework, indicating that UAS-assisted inventories were more efficient than purely field-based inventories. The results on relative costs for UAS-assisted and pure field-based sample plot inventories revealed that there is a trade-off between inventory costs and required precision. For example, in our study if a standard error of less than approximately 3 Mg ha(-1) was targeted, then a UAS-assisted forest inventory should be applied to ensure more cost effective and precise estimates. Future studies should therefore focus on finding optimum plot sizes for particular applications, like for example in projects under the Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation, plus forest conservation, sustainable management of forest and enhancement of carbon stocks (REDD+) mechanism with different geographical scales.
INFLUENCE OF TREE COVER ON DIVERSITY, CARBON SEQUESTRATION AND PRODUCTIVITY OF COCOA SYSTEMS IN THE ECUADORIAN AMAZON			Cocoa production in the Ecuadorian Amazon is an important source of income for the local population. There is a wide variety of cocoa production systems, from enriched primary forests to traditional agroforestry systems and monoculture. This study assesses the relationship between tree diversity, carbon stocks, agricultural productivity and forest use potential under three land use systems in the Ecuadorian Amazon: cocoa-based agroforestry (Cocoa AFS), cocoa monoculture (Monoculture) and primary forest (PF). Understanding and quantifying the tradeoffs between different ecosystem services related to cocoa production systems can contribute to the conservation of primary forests and help to optimize income for local people. Species richness, beta-diversity, carbon stocks (above-and below-ground biomass, necromass and soil), and cocoa and timber production were determined for each system in 1,600 m(2) study plots (n=28). The results show that beta diversity, species richness and carbon stocks were significantly higher in PF and Cocoa AFS, whereas cocoa production was 1.5 times higher in the Monoculture than in Cocoa AFS. In both cocoa systems, species richness, beta diversity and total C were negatively correlated with cocoa productivity. Although our results show that cocoa monoculture was more profitable than Cocoa AFS for the farmers, a monetary payment based on carbon credits for avoided deforestation could be a viable strategy to support the implementation of Cocoa AFS, which would help conservation efforts and climate change mitigation while sustaining commercial cocoa production in the area.
Insect Diversity and Trophic Interactions in Shaded Cacao Agroforestry and Natural Forests in Indonesia			0
Insect-plant coevolution: A dynamic relationship shaping ecosystems			Insect-plant coevolution is a fundamental process that has significantly shaped the diversity and functionality of ecosystems across the globe. This review synthesizes research from 2010 to 2024, focusing on key interactions such as herbivory, pollination, and chemical ecology, which form the basis of this evolutionary arms race. The study explores how plants develop a variety of defense mechanisms, including physical barriers and chemical deterrents, and how insects, in turn, evolve adaptations to overcome these defenses. Mutualistic relationships, particularly in pollination, demonstrate the coevolution of specific traits that enhance survival and reproductive success for both plants and insects. Moreover, the review addresses the impacts of climate change on these coevolutionary dynamics, highlighting concerns over phenological mismatches and altered species distributions that could disrupt established relationships. The implications of these disruptions are profound, potentially affecting biodiversity and ecosystem services such as pollination and nutrient cycling. The review also identifies gaps in the current research, particularly the need for studies that integrate genetic, ecological, and evolutionary perspectives, as well as the importance of understanding coevolutionary processes in tropical regions. Overall, this review underscores the importance of insect-plant coevolution in maintaining ecological stability and calls for continued research to address the challenges posed by environmental changes. The findings are crucial for informing conservation strategies aimed at preserving these vital interactions and the broader ecosystems they support.
Insights of Forest Dynamics for the Regional Ecological Fragility Assessment			Forest ecosystems play a vital role in sustaining various life forms on the earth. These ecosystems support society through the provision of goods (timber, fuelwood, etc.) and an array of ecological services (carbon sequestration, nutrient cycling, etc.). However, unplanned developmental activities have been affecting the ecological integrity evident from the fragmentation of forests, barren hilltops, conversion of perennial streams to intermittent or seasonal streams, etc. During the past three decades, forests have undergone major transitions with the breaking of contiguous native forests into small parcels of land, restricting the movement of species thereby limiting the potential of species for dispersal and colonization. This paper analyzes the landscape dynamics and spatial patterns of forests fragmentation of Shimoga District, Central Western Ghats and prioritizes ecologically fragile or Ecologically Sensitive regions (ESR) at village levels based on bio-geo-climatic-social variables with the land use dynamics considering temporal remote sensing data. Results revealed that there was a net loss of 10% in forest cover from 43.83% (1973) to 34.02% (2018), primarily caused by the expansion of agriculture, horticulture, and forest plantations. Forest fragmentation has increased, evident from the decline of the interior forest to an extent of 11% from 26% (1973-2018). ESR prioritization at village level in the Shimoga district considering the ecological, geo-climatic and social variables indicate that 11% villages are ESR 1 (highest sensitivity), 30% are in ESR 2 (higher sensitivity), 36% are in ESR 3 (high sensitivity) and the remaining 23% are in ESR 4 or moderate sensitivity category. The analysis illustrates the importance of understanding spatiotemporal patterns of landscape structure for sustainable management of tropical forests.
Intact and managed peatland soils as a source and sink of GHGs from 1850 to 2100			Land-use change disturbs the function of peatland as a natural carbon sink and triggers high GHG emissions(1). Nevertheless, historical trends and future trajectories of GHG budgets from soil do not explicitly include peatlands(2,3). Here, we provide an estimate of the past and future role of global peatlands as either a source or sink of GHGs based on scenario time-lines of land conversion. Between 1850 and 2015, temperate and boreal regions lost 26.7 million ha, and tropical regions 24.7 million ha, of natural peatland. By 2100, peatland conversion in tropical regions might increase to 36.3 million ha. Cumulative emissions from drained sites reached 80 +/- 20 PgCO(2)e in 2015 and will add up to 249 +/- 38 Pg by 2100. At the same time, the number of intact sites accumulating peat will decline. In 1960 the global peatland biome turned from a net sink into a net source of soil-derived GHGs. Annual back-conversion of most of the drained area would render peatlands GHG neutral, whereas emissions from peatland may comprise 12-41% of the GHG emission budget for keeping global warming below +1.5 to +2 degrees C without rehabilitation.
Intact Forests in the United States: Proforestation Mitigates Climate Change and Serves the Greatest Good			Climate change and loss of biodiversity are widely recognized as the foremost environmental challenges of our time. Forests annually sequester large quantities of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2), and store carbon above and below ground for long periods of time. Intact forests-largely free from human intervention except primarily for trails and hazard removals-are the most carbon-dense and biodiverse terrestrial ecosystems, with additional benefits to society and the economy. Internationally, focus has been on preventing loss of tropical forests, yet U.S. temperate and boreal forests remove sufficient atmospheric CO2 to reduce national annual net emissions by 11%. U.S. forests have the potential for much more rapid atmospheric CO2 removal rates and biological carbon sequestration by intact and/or older forests. The recent 1.5 Degree Warming Report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change identifies reforestation and afforestation as important strategies to increase negative emissions, but they face significant challenges: afforestation requires an enormous amount of additional land, and neither strategy can remove sufficient carbon by growing young trees during the critical next decade(s). In contrast, growing existing forests intact to their ecological potential-termed proforestation-is a more effective, immediate, and low-cost approach that could be mobilized across suitable forests of all types. Proforestation serves the greatest public good by maximizing co-benefits such as nature-based biological carbon sequestration and unparalleled ecosystem services such as biodiversity enhancement, water and air quality, flood and erosion control, public health benefits, low impact recreation, and scenic beauty.
Integrated analysis of ecosystem interactions with land-use change: The southern Yucatán peninsular region			The southern Yucatán peninsular region is a seasonal tropical forest biome that experiences drought, hurricane, and agricultural disturbance. Substantial agricultural expansion over the past 50 years has opened and fragmented much of the forest surrounding the Calakmul Biosphere Reserve, posing a series of threats to the coupled human-environment systems. These threats are traced in a conceptual model borrowed from vulnerability studies and detailed in regard to ecosystem responses, including forest structure and composition, above-ground biomass, soil nutrients, balance in species and biotic diversity, and invasive species. The land-use and land-cover changes underway pose trade-offs in ecosystem services and raise several scalar issues important to deforestation studies. © 2004 by the American Geophysical Union.
Integrated land-use systems: Assessment of promising agroforest and alternative land-use practices to enhance carbon conservation and sequestration			Degraded or sub-standard soils and marginal lands occupy a significant proportion of boreal, temperate and tropical biomes. Management of these lands with a wide range of existing, site-specific, integrated, agroforest systems represents a significant global opportunity to reduce the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Establishment of extensive agricultural, agroforest, and alternative land-use systems on marginal or degraded lands could sequester 0.82-2.2 Pg carbon (C) per year, globally, over a 50-year time-frame. Moreover, slowing soil degradation by alternative grassland management and by impeding desertification could conserve up to 0.5-1.5 Pg C annually. A global analysis of biologic and economic data from 94 nations representing diverse climatic and edaphic conditions reveals a range of integrated land-use systems which could be used to establish and manage vegetation on marginal or degraded lands. Promising land-use systems and practices identified to conserve and temporarily store C include agroforestry systems, fuelwood and fiber plantations, bioreserves, intercropping systems, and shelterbelts/windbreaks. For example, successful establishment of low-intensity agroforestry systems can store up to 70 Mg C/ha in boreal, temperate and tropical ecoregions. The mean initial cost of soil rehabilitation and revegetation ranges from $500-3,000/ha for the 94 nations surveyed. Natural regeneration of woody vegetation or agro-afforestation establishment costs were less than $1000/ha in temperate and tropical regions. The costs of C sequestration in soil and vegetation systems range from $1-69/Mg C, which compares favorably with other options to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to the atmosphere. Although agroforestry system projects were recently established to conserve and sequester C in Guatemala and Malaysia, constraints to wide-spread implementation include social conditions (demographic factors, land tenure issues, market conditions, lack of infrastructure), economic obstacles (difficulty of demonstrating benefits of alternative systems, capital requirements, lack of financial incentives) and, ecologic considerations (limited knowledge of impacts and sustainability of some systems). © 1994 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
Integrating Field and Remote Sensing Analyses of Aboveground Biomass Dynamics During Secondary Forest Regeneration in Costa Rica			0
Integrating Forest Ecosystem Service Assessment with Pro-Poor Governance in India			Research and policy discussions on tropical forest ecosystem services are currently happening in two disjoint spheres. Ecologists and economists are in conversation to develop data and models for quantifying and monetising ecosystem services. On the other hand, political ecologists, political economists and sociologists are studying the implications of changes in forest rights, institutions and governance mechanisms for forest conservation and the well-being of the poor. In terms of policy, the former group is recommending market-based approaches, while the latter is recommending a rights-based approach. The disconnect is from both sides and at several levels. Environmental economists tend to assume away the critical importance of institutions and power as a determinant of forest condition, market prices and benefit distribution, whilst rights- and justice-focussed researchers may neglect the full range of ecological services and their importance to non-local stakeholders. Ecologists emphasise the multiplicity of benefits from forests, while political economists point to tradeoffs between them. We contend that these two analytical and policy perspectives must be reconciled if sustainable and pro-poor governance of forest ecosystems and their services is to be achieved. We propose to address this challenge in this project. Forest-related decision-making in India reflects this lack of integration and rigour. While the Supreme Court has imposed a net present value charge on forest conversion, upstream (hilly) states are demanding payments from downstream ones for forest conservation. Both are using data and methods that are weak, to say the least. While the Ministry of Environment and Forests is eagerly looking to carbon markets to bring in new financial flows, activists and local communities, while struggling to get a landmark forest rights law implemented, are questioning the Ministry's initiatives without any consultation or reference to rights. They are also unclear about how (or under what conditions) the new rights will actually improve livelihoods and affect ecosystem services. This study will use two critical concepts-tradeoffs and institutions-as an approach to nuancing and bridging the conversations. It will develop an understanding of the biophysical flows of ecosystem services, their variation by management regime and distribution across stakeholders and within them for poorer households, the tradeoffs involved in modifying forest management regimes, and the role played by institutions in shaping who benefits and how. The project will also seek to develop rigorous assessment methods and tools for rapidly assessing different management scenarios in different political-economic contexts. The study will be implemented in India, in two regions-Western Ghats and eastern central India (Orissa state in particular)--with contrasting ecological and social characteristics and forest histories. We will use comparisons between adjacent state managed 'command and control' (for timber / biodiversity) and rights based management sites within each region. We will attempt to consider the full range of ecosystem services, including forest products, hydrological services, and carbon sequestration and biodiversity. We will seek to disaggregate the FES value chains and the distribution of benefits to different users along the value chain, and to highlight policy recommendations that increase benefits to the poor. Findings will be highly policy relevant and will feed into policy debates over forest governance and rights. Findings and the methodological innovations they are based on will also be of relevance to forest policy globally ... Stakeholder engagement is seen as essential and will be achieved through 3 cycles of workshops in which 'learning groups' comprised of multiple stakeholders will contribute into and develop a sense of understanding for the ESPA issues, our innovative project and the findings.
Integrating forest restoration into land-use planning at large spatial scales			Forest restoration is being scaled up globally, carrying major expectations of environmental and societal benefits. Current discussions on ensuring the effectiveness of forest restoration are predominantly focused on the land under restoration per se . But this focus neglects the critical issue that land use and its drivers at larger spatial scales have strong implications for forest restoration outcomes, through the influence of landscape context and, importantly, potential off-site impacts of forest restoration that must be accounted for in measuring its effectiveness. To ensure intended restoration outcomes, it is crucial to integrate forest restoration into land-use planning at spatial scales large enough to account for - and address - these largerscale influences, including the protection of existing native ecosystems. In this review, we highlight this thus-far neglected issue in conceptualizing forest restoration for the delivery of multiple desirable benefits regarding biodiversity and ecosystem services. We first make the case for the need to integrate forest restoration into large-scale land-use planning, by reviewing current evidence on the landscape-level influences and off-site impacts pertaining to forest restoration. We then discuss how science can guide the integration of forest restoration into large-scale land-use planning, by laying out key features of methodological frameworks required, reviewing the extent to which existing frameworks carry these features, and identifying methodological innovations needed to bridge the potential shortfall. Finally, we critically review the status of existing methods and data to identify future research efforts needed to advance these methodological innovations and, more broadly, the effective integration of forest restoration design into large-scale landuse planning.
Integrating national forestry initiatives in India with international climate change policy			Policy initiatives in India, such as the Social Forestry Program and later the Joint Forest Management, were introduced for their co-benefits, including forest protection, employment opportunities, and added income for communities living in and around the forests. The evolution of these forest policies is critically reviewed. It is argued that India is perfectly positioned to benefit from climate change mitigation efforts, due to a rich, albeit chequered, history in forest management. National forestry policies are examined to assess how they can complement international climate change mitigation instruments, such as the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and the more recent Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD or REDD+ with conservation, sustainable management of forests, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks) and aid national sustainable development objectives. There is a need to heed the experiences from India's evolving forest policies, particularly those concerning land tenure and resource rights, which lack specificity within international mechanisms. The active engagement of rural communities must be integral to any programmes that make any claim to development and to environmental integrity as a whole. Policy relevance India's forestry programmes are examined for their effectiveness in informing international initiatives such as the CDM and REDD+. Forestry policies in India can evolve to complement international climate mitigation tools. By examining current and historical forest legislation, and their subsequent impacts, it is shown how communities can sustain their system of forest management and retain/obtain rights to land and resources under the CDM and REDD+. Looking for such synergies within existing national policies to implement newer international initiatives can greatly facilitate and increase the momentum of global environmental change.
Integrating remotely sensed fires for predicting deforestation for REDD			Fire is an important tool in tropical forest management, as it alters forest composition, structure, and the carbon budget. The United Nations program on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) aims to sustainably manage forests, as well as to conserve and enhance their carbon stocks. Despite the crucial role of fire management, decision-making on REDD+ interventions fails to systematically include fires. Here, we address this critical knowledge gap in two ways. First, we review REDD+ projects and programs to assess the inclusion of fires in monitoring, reporting, and verification (MRV) systems. Second, we model the relationship between fire and forest for a pilot site in Colombia using near-real-time (NRT) fire monitoring data derived from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS). The literature review revealed fire remains to be incorporated as a key component of MRV systems. Spatially explicit modeling of land use change showed the probability of deforestation declined sharply with increasing distance to the nearest fire the preceding year (multi-year model area under the curve [AUC] 0.82). Deforestation predictions based on the model performed better than the official REDD earlY-warning system. The model AUC for 2013 and 2014 was 0.81, compared to 0.52 for the early-warning system in 2013 and 0.68 in 2014. This demonstrates NRT fire monitoring is a powerful tool to predict sites of forest deforestation. Applying new, publicly available, and open-access NRT fire data should be an essential element of early-warning systems to detect and prevent deforestation. Our results provide tools for improving both the current MRV systems, and the deforestation early-warning system in Colombia.
Integration of carbon conservation into sustainable forest management using high resolution satellite imagery: A case study in sabah, malaysian borneo			Conservation of tropical forests is of outstanding importance for mitigation of climate change effects and preserving biodiversity. In Borneo most of the forests are classified as permanent forest estates and are selectively logged using conventional logging techniques causing high damage to the forest ecosystems. Incorporation of sustainable forest management into climate change mitigation measures such as Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) can help to avert further forest degradation by synergizing sustainable timber production with the conservation of biodiversity. In order to evaluate the efficiency of such initiatives, monitoring methods for forest degradation and above-ground biomass in tropical forests are urgently needed. In this study we developed an index using Landsat satellite data to describe the crown cover condition of lowland mixed dipterocarp forests. We showed that this index combined with field data can be used to estimate above-ground biomass using a regression model in two permanent forest estates in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo. Tangkulap represented a conventionally logged forest estate while Deramakot has been managed in accordance with sustainable forestry principles. The results revealed that conventional logging techniques used in Tangkulap during 1991 and 2000 decreased the above-ground biomass by an annual amount of average -6.0 t C/ha (-5.2 to -7.0 t C/ha, 95% confidential interval) whereas the biomass in Deramakot increased by 6.1 t C/ha per year (5.3-7.2 t C/ha, 95% confidential interval) between 2000 and 2007 while under sustainable forest management. This indicates that sustainable forest management with reduced-impact logging helps to protect above-ground biomass. In absolute terms, a conservative amount of 10.5 t C/ha per year, as documented using the methodology developed in this study, can be attributed to the different management systems, which will be of interest when implementing REDD+ that rewards the enhancement of carbon stocks. © 2012 Elsevier B.V.
Intensification of tropical fallow-based agriculture: Trading-off ecosystem services for economic gain in shifting cultivation landscapes?			Farmers are under ever growing pressure to increase productivity to meet both food and fibre needs, as well as rising household economic demands. In many shifting cultivation systems, farmers are taking advantage of restorative forest fallow periods to plant commercially-oriented orchards to increase output. While there is an economic benefit to this intensification pathway, we ask: what are the trade-offs in ecosystem services with planting low diversity orchards? We compare the capacity of native forest fallows vs. planted umarí orchards (. Poraquieba sericea) to provide critical regulating services (soil fertility regeneration, woody biomass accumulation), provisioning services (commercial fruit production, timber, charcoal, wild fruits and handicraft materials production), and tree biodiversity in lowland forests of Peru. In addition, we estimate their potential contribution to farmer livelihoods to better understand the economic incentives behind orchard planting. Orchards were found to provide similar or higher levels of both regulating and provisioning services than forest fallows, apart from harvestable timber. Although biodiversity was lower under orchards, tree diversity and composition recovered fully in subsequent fallow rotations. Potential revenues from orchard planting were greater than from fallows, however they were small compared to median incomes suggesting that the motivation to plant orchards is income diversification. Together these results highlight that orchard fallows may be an ecologically and economically viable pathway for intensification. © 2015 Elsevier B.V.
Intensive silviculture enhances biomass accumulation and tree diversity recovery in tropical forest restoration			Maximizing initial aboveground woody biomass (AGB) accumulation in order to obtain early payments for carbon stocking is essential for the financial viability of reforestation programs fostered by climate mitigation efforts. Intensive silviculture, i.e., silviculture traditionally used in commercial forestry to maximize productivity and gains, has recently been advocated as a promising approach to enhance AGB accumulation in restoration plantations. However, this approach may hamper natural forest regeneration and ecological succession due to high competition between colonizing plants and planted trees. We investigated the impacts of different silvicultural treatments applied to restoration plantations with 20 native tree species on AGB accumulation and spontaneous regeneration of native woody species in an experiment set up in the Atlantic Forest of Brazil. Intensive silviculture demonstrated a remarkable potential to enhance AGB accumulation in restoration plantations by increasing up to three times the AGB of tree stands (from similar to 25 to 75 Mg/ha in the 12th year). Intensive fertilization/weed control enhanced AGB accumulation, while higher tree density and the proportion of pioneers did not have a significant effect on AGB over the time. In spite of higher costs (cost increase of 13-19%), the cost-effectiveness for AGB accumulation of intensive silviculture was comparable to that of traditional silviculture applied to restoration (US$50-100/Mg AGB for 3 x 2 m spacing). Contrary to our expectations, we did not find a trade-off between AGB accumulation by planted trees and the spontaneous regeneration of tree species, since intensive silviculture enhanced the regeneration of both planted (total of 12 species) and colonizing woody species (total of 30 species) in the plantation understory. Specifically, a strong association was found between AGB stocks and the abundance and richness of colonizing species, a vast majority of which (90% of species and 95% of individuals) were dispersed by animals. We report a case of positive correlation between AGB stocking and woody species regeneration in the restoration of the Atlantic Forest. Fostering the establishment and maintenance of restoration tree plantations can, in some cases, be a win-win strategy for climate mitigation and biodiversity conservation in human-modified tropical landscapes.
Intention of preserving forest remnants among landowners in the Atlantic Forest: The role of the ecological context via ecosystem services			Unravelling the psychological processes determining landowners' support towards forest conservation is crucial, particularly in rural areas of the tropics, where most forest remnants are within private lands. As human-nature connections are known to shape pro-environmental behaviours, the intention of preserving forest remnants should ultimately be determined by the ecological context people live in. Here, we investigate the pathways through which the ecological context (forest cover), via direct contact with forests and ecosystem services and disservices, influence the psychological antecedents of conservation behaviour (beliefs, attitude and intention of preserving forest remnants). We conceptualized a model based on the Reasoned Action Approach, using the ecological context and these three forest experiences as background factors, and tested the model using Piecewise Structural Equation Modelling. Data were collected through an interview-based protocol applied to 106 landowners across 13 landscapes varying in forest cover in a consolidated rural region in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. Our results indicate that: (a) ecosystem services are more important than disservices for shaping intention of preserving forests, particularly non-provisioning services; (b) contact with forest has an indirect effect on intention, by positively influencing the frequency of receiving ecosystem services; (c) people living in more forested ecological contexts have more contact with forests, receive ecosystem services more frequently and, ultimately, have stronger intention of preserving forests. Hence, our study suggests a dangerous positive feedback loop between deforestation, the extinction of forest experiences and impairment of human-nature connections. Local demands across the full range of ecosystem services, the balance between services and disservices and the ecological context people live in should be considered when developing conservation initiatives in tropical rural areas.A free Plain Language Summary can be found within the Supporting Information of this article.AbstratoDesvendar os processos psicologicos que determinam o apoio dos proprietarios de terras a conservacAo das florestas e crucial, particularmente, em areas rurais dos tropicos, onde a maioria dos remanescentes florestais se encontra em areas privadas. Como as conexoes humano-natureza sAo conhecidas por moldar comportamentos pro-ambientais, a intencAo de preservar remanescentes florestais deve ser, em ultima instancia, determinada pelo contexto ecologico no qual as pessoas vivem. Neste trabalho, investigamos os caminhos pelos quais o contexto ecologico (cobertura florestal), atraves do contato direto com a floresta e dos servicos e desservicos ecossistemicos, influencia os antecedentes psicologicos do comportamento de conservacAo (crencas, atitude e intencAo de preservar remanescentes florestais). Formulamos um modelo baseado na Abordagem da AcAo Racional, usando o contexto ecologico e estas tres experiencias com a floresta como fatores de base, e o testamos atraves da Piecewise Structural Equation Modelling. Os dados foram coletados atraves de protocolo aplicado por meio de entrevista a 106 proprietarios de terra em 13 paisagens que variam na cobertura florestal em uma regiAo rural consolidada na Mata Atlantica brasileira. Nossos resultados indicam que: (a) servicos sAo mais importantes que desservicos ecossistemicos para moldar a intencAo de preservar florestas, particularmente servicos que nAo os de provisAo; (b) o contato com a floresta tem um efeito indireto sobre a intencAo, influenciando positivamente a frequencia de recebimento de servicos ecossistemicos; (c) as pessoas que vivem em contextos ecologicos mais florestados tem mais contato com a floresta, recebem servicos ecossistemicos mais frequentemente e, assim, tem uma intencAo mais forte de preservar as florestas. Nosso estudo, portanto, sugere um perigoso ciclo de retroalimentacAo positiva entre o desmatamento, a extincAo de experiencias com a floresta e o enfraquecimento das conexoes humano-natureza. As demandas locais considerando toda a gama de servicos ecossistemicos, o balanco entre servicos e desservicos e o contexto ecologico no qual as pessoas vivem devem ser considerados ao se desenvolverem iniciativas de conservacAo em areas rurais dos tropicos.A free Plain Language Summary can be found within the Supporting Information of this article.
Interactions of Natural Enemies with Non-cultivated Plants			0
Interactive effects between vegetation structure and soil fertility on tropical ground-dwelling arthropod assemblages			The development of forests undergoing restoration determines the structure of the vegetation, influencing ground-dwelling arthropod composition. Soil fertility can interact with vegetation structure, influencing the diversity and composition of arthropod assemblages through bottom-up effects on developing forests. We evaluated if soil fertility (here defined by the attributes directly related to macronutrient availability) and the vegetation structure in three adjacent areas from different land-use/cover categories (abandoned pasture, riparian forest undergoing restoration, and remnant riparian forest) influences ground-dwelling arthropod assemblages. These areas were subject to a gradient of soil fertility due to the presence of a corral that resulted in a local increase of soil nutrients in the three areas, enabling to evaluate the interaction between soil fertility and vegetation structure. We hypothesized that ground-dwelling arthropod assemblages have lower diversity in pasture, intermediate in forest undergoing restoration and higher diversity in the remnant forest. Furthermore, we expected that increasing soil fertility would have a positive effect in these assemblages through bottom-up effects. Environmental conditions were characterized by vegetation structure and soil chemical attributes variables, whereas arthropods were sampled with pitfalls and identified to morphospecies. Diversity indicators responded differentially to the studied effects. Abundances decreased with soil fertility, and were higher in the forest undergoing restoration, followed by pasture and remnant forest. Species richness also varied among categories, following the same pattern as abundances. On the other hand, diversity indices indicated an interaction between soil fertility and land use category, with larger effects of soil fertility on diversity in the more simplified habitats (pasture and forest undergoing restoration), whereas no bottom-up effects were recorded in the remnant forest; species evenness increased with soil fertility in all studied areas. A redundancy analysis (RDA) indicated that both vegetation structure and soil attributes significantly influenced arthropod composition. Arthropod assemblages in areas undergoing restoration with higher soil fertility and low grass cover were more similar to assemblages in remnant forest when compared to areas with low soil fertility, independently of the vegetation structure, indicating an interaction between these two effects. Therefore, ground-dwelling arthropod assemblages responded both to increasing vegetation complexity resulting from the different land use/cover categories, and to increasing soil fertility, so that they are effective indicators to evaluate the recovery of ecosystems in forest restoration projects and to determine the importance of soil fertility in this process.
Interactive effects of land use history and natural disturbance on seedling dynamics in a subtropical forest			Human-impacted forests are increasing in extent due to widespread regrowth of secondary forests on abandoned lands. The degree and speed of recovery from human disturbance in these forests will determine their value in terms of biodiversity conservation and ecosystem function. In areas subject to periodic, severe natural disturbances, such as hurricanes, it has been hypothesized that human and natural disturbance may interact to either erase or preserve land use legacies. To increase understanding of how interactions between human and natural disturbance influence forest regeneration and recovery, we monitored seedlings in a human-and hurricane-impacted forest in northeastern Puerto Rico over a; 10-yr period and compared seedling composition and dynamics in areas that had experienced high-and low-intensity human disturbance during the first half of the 20th century. We found that land use history significantly affected the composition and diversity of the seedling layer and altered patterns of canopy openness and seedling dynamics following hurricane disturbance. The area that had been subject to high-intensity land use supported a higher density, but lower diversity, of species. In both land use history categories, the seedling layer was dominated by the same two species, Prestoea acuminata var. montana and Guarea guidonia. However, seedlings of secondary-successional species tended to be more abundant in the high-intensity land use area, while late-successional species were more abundant in the low-intensity area, consistent with patterns of adult tree distributions. Seedlings of secondary-forest species showed greater increases in growth and survival following hurricane disturbance compared to late-successional species, providing support for the hypothesis that hurricanes help preserve the signature of land use history. However, the increased performance of secondary-forest species occurred predominantly in the low-intensity land use area, suggesting that hurricanes act to homogenize differences in species composition between areas with differing land use histories by increasing secondary-forest species regeneration in areas that experienced little direct human disturbance. Our results suggest that, through effects on seedling dynamics, hurricanes may extend the signature of land use history beyond the average recovery time of forests not subject to intense natural disturbance events.
Intercropping with Shrub Species That Display a Steady-State Flowering Phenology as a Strategy for Biodiversity Conservation in Tropical Agroecosystems			Animal species in the Neotropics have evolved under a lower spatiotemporal patchiness of food resources compared to the other tropical regions. Although plant species with a steady-state flowering/fruiting phenology are rare, they provide predictable food resources and therefore may play a pivotal role in animal community structure and diversity. I experimentally planted a supplemental patch of a shrub species with a steady-state flowering/fruiting phenology, Hamelia patens Jacq., into coffee agroforests to evaluate the contribution of this unique phenology to the structure and diversity of the flower-visiting community. After accounting for the higher abundance of captured animals in the coffee agroforests with the supplemental floral resources, species richness was 21% higher overall in the flower-visiting community in these agroforests compared to control agroforests. Coffee agroforests with the steady-state supplemental floral patch also had 31% more butterfly species, 29% more hummingbird species, 65% more wasps and 85% more bees than control coffee agroforests. The experimental treatment, together with elevation, explained 57% of the variation in community structure of the flower-visiting community. The identification of plant species that can support a high number of animal species, including important ecosystem service providers, is becoming increasingly important for restoration and conservation applications. Throughout the Neotropics plant species with a steady-state flowering/fruiting phenology can be found in all aseasonal forests and thus could be widely tested and suitable species used throughout the tropics to manage for biodiversity and potentially ecosystem services involving beneficial arthropods.
Intergovernmental fiscal transfers, forest conservation and climate change			Intergovernmental fiscal transfers (IFTs) are an innovative way to create incentives for local public actors to support conservation. This book contributes to the debate about how to conserve tropical forests by implementing mechanisms for reducing deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+). With Indonesia as a case study, the authors adopt an interdisciplinary approach, drawing on political science, economics, and public policy. They consider the theoretical justification, as well as the wider political and administrative context for developing the design of IFTs for conservation. © Silvia Irawan and Luca Tacconi 2016. All rights reserved.
International Forest Conservation: A Survey of Key Staff in the 112th Congress			0
Intra-specific patterns of δ13C, growth and wood density variation at sites of contrasting precipitation with implications for modelling carbon sequestration of tropical tree species			Tropical agroforestry practices play a crucial role in mitigating global climate change by absorbing CO2 from the atmosphere through photosynthesis and storing carbon in their biomass. Assessing the effects of water stress on carbon sequestration as well as uncertainties in measurement, are important for implementing the Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) programs and carbon trading. This study aims to understand how precipitation influences carbon sequestration of Tectona grandis, Acacia mangium and Eucalyptus camaldulensis growing in agroforestry (woodlot) plantations in Bangladesh. Wood cores were collected at two different sites with contrasting (low vs high) annual precipitation and analysed for radial growth, carbon isotope abundance (delta C-13) of cellulose and wood density. Site- and species-specific variation in delta C-13 was observed with higher values (less negative) detected at the low precipitation site. Trees at the low precipitation site showed lower growth rate and higher wood (basic) density compared to the trees at high precipitation site. Trees at the low precipitation site also showed significantly lower carbon sequestration rate (CSR) than those of the high precipitation site. delta C-13 reflects site- and species-specific water stress conditions. This study characterises intra- and inter-specific CSR variations in contrasting sites and confirms the importance of considering site-specific radial variation of wood density to render more accurate accounting of carbon sequestration and storage in tropical forests.
Intraspecific variation in fruit production of African mahogany (Khaya anthotheca) in a semi-deciduous East African rainforest			Restoring valuable timber trees is a necessary part of regaining many ecosystem services and products provided by degraded tropical forests. However, knowledge of seed production, a regeneration prerequisite, is limited for many tropical timber tree species. We studied the fruit production of African mahogany (Khaya anthotheca) in a semi-deciduous rainforest in East Africa, to provide information for ecological restoration programs. First, we quantified population variability and synchrony in fruit production. Then, we assessed how reproductive status and output were influenced by tree size, neighbourhood crowding, exchangeable cations, liana presence, and crown exposure. We found fruit production at the population level was weakly synchronised, with high interannual variability at the population and individual levels. Tree size determined reproductive status. Individual quantity of fruit produced increased with tree size but decreased with neighbourhood crowding. Our results indicate that K. anthotheca does not meet the criteria for mast fruiting. Our findings suggest that reproductive output in mahogany is regulated by tree size and competition. In addition to active protection, thinning to reduce competition around seed trees may boost fruit production at the individual tree level to provide seed for forest enrichment.
Invasion effects of Chromolaena odorata on soil carbon and nitrogen fractions in a tropical savanna			The ecological impacts of biological invasion are generalized with difficulty since these impacts are commonly species-or ecosystem-specific. A noxious invasive plant, Chromolaena odorata, has invaded broad regions, but limited attention has been paid to clarify the ecological impacts of this invasive plant on soil carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) storage in invaded ecosystems. This study was conducted to investigate changes in the labile and total soil C and N fractions in the surface and subsurface soil layers in non-invaded plots, plots with slight (30%) or severe (100%) invasion, and a restored forest plot with native tree and shrub species within a tropical savanna. Our results showed that different severities of C. odorata invasion induced inconsistent responses of the soil C and N fractions in the investigated tropical savanna. In particular, slight invasion did not alter or decreased the total and labile soil C and N fractions, and severe invasion significantly increased most of the total and labile soil C and N fractions. The encroachment of woody species significantly increased the soil C and N contents, with significantly higher increases than in the invaded plots. Our results suggest that the impacts of invasion on soil C and N fractions could vary depending on invasion severity. Therefore, comparisons of the invaded and non-invaded plots with invasion duration or severity overlooked are likely to result in biased conclusions regarding the invasioninduced ecological consequences in terrestrial ecosystems. Moreover, C. odorata invasion can alter soil nutrient conditions according to the needs of C. odorata establishment at different stages and consequently affect the soil C and N contents in this tropical ecosystem.
Inventory of agroecosystem services and perceptions of potential implications due to climate change: A case study from Benin in West Africa			Agricultural and Agroforestry play an important role in the economy of West African countries. They contribute to nearly 40% of the GDP and provide a large variety of ecosystem services to the local populations. However, the sustainability of agricultural and agroforestry systems in these countries is gradually jeopardised by climate change since these ecosystems are still predominantly rain-fed and therefore at the mercy of climatic hazards. For a developing country like Benin, there is still a lot of data gap in other to quantify the impact of climate change on agro-ecosystems. Thus, the current study focused on providing an inventory of the evolution and the monetary value of agro-ecosystem services in Benin with an analysis of the perceptions of the impact of climate change on these services. The data analysed showed, from 1975 to 2015, a reduction in forests and savannahs in favour of an increase in cultivated land. The areas of water bodies, swamps and floodplains have increased by almost 500% in the subequatorial climate regions and have remained almost unchanged in the tropical climate regions. The main uses of agroecosystems were agriculture, fishing, energy production, timber trade, and cultural rituals. A monetary estimate reveals that the value of agroecosystems services provided in the subequatorial regions (USD 3700/ha) is 2-3 times greater than that of the value of these services in the tropical regions (USD 1600/ha). The local population didn't perceive see climate hazards as a threat to community forests and planted forests. However, they felt that the establishment of sustainable management of agroecosystems through good agricul-tural practices and sustainable management of the landscape, would allow better regulation of the climate, conservation of specific and genetic biodiversity, and solve the problems of erosion and silting up of rivers.
Investigating the Efficiency of Reforestation Approaches in Restoring Rainforest Biodiversity and Function			0
Is enrichment planting worth its costs? A financial cost-benefit analysis			A strategy for enhancing natural forests' economic value is to increase their concentration of economically important, indigenous tree species by planting seeds or seedlings for future harvest, which can be accomplished with enrichment planting (EP). EP may help make forest management financially attractive and thereby reduce forest conversion to other uses but many factors deter landholders from EP, including a lack of reliable information about its costs and benefits. A financial appraisal of an eastern Amazon EP case study is presented with 7 alternate scenarios: high and low financial costs, low timber yield, carbon sequestration payments, higher timber prices, free seedlings, and reduced discount rates. A sensitivity analysis of carbon payment amounts, timber prices, and discount rates is explored. The net present value (NPV), internal rate of return (IRR), and benefit cost ratio (BCR) are reported for each scenario. Results showed that start-up costs must be kept low, and site maintenance must not only be sustained but also kept minimal to prevent costs from exceeding financial benefits of EP. Scenarios with the best NPV and BCR were those with carbon sequestration sales, higher timber prices, and a low discount rate. Carbon sequestration and high timber sale prices resulted in the best IRRs. (C) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Is multiple-use forest management widely implementable in the tropics?			Multiple-use forest management (MFM) for timber, non-timber forest products and environmental services is envisioned by many as a preferable alternative to timber-dominant management models. It is praised as a more equitable strategy of satisfying the demands from multiple stakeholders, an ecologically more benign harvesting approach, and a way of adding more value to forests making them more robust to conversion. MFM thus represents a common and prime management objective under the sustainable forest management (SFM) paradigm. However, its implementation has been lagging behind the expectations, particularly in the tropics. In this paper, we analyze selected MFM implementation examples to try to explain why. We scrutinize the tropical forestry debate to find that the meaning of MFM has undergone significant changes along the way, and that the topic depends heavily on the scale of inspection. Also, we examine the conditions that either favor or constrain MFM adoption. At the local scale, the factors that set the scene for multiple-use approaches to be successfully adopted are favorable governance conditions relate to land-devolution policies, effective collective institutions, and multi-agent forest-management models. MFM feasibility also depends on the stage of forest transition, i.e. in society's economic development. MFM (at the stand level) dominates in poor subsistence-oriented autarchic forest settings, it typically declines when entering capitalist stages of specialized commodity production, but may then rebound (at the landscape level) in more advanced development stages. Key factors MFM generally is up against range from intricate technical trade-offs to the economies of scale in forestry production and marketing. MFM remains a valid management alternative under specifically favorable local context conditions, especially when practiced at the landscape scale, but these conditions are less frequent than commonly assumed. © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Issues in using landscape indicators to assess land changes			Landscape indicators, when combined with information about environmental conditions (such as habitat potential, biodiversity, carbon and nutrient cycling, and erosion) and socioeconomic forces, can provide insights about changing ecosystem services. They also provide information about opportunities for improving natural resources management. Landscape indicators rely on data regarding land cover, land management and land functionality. Challenges in using landscape indicators to assess change and effects include (1) measures of land management and attributes that are reliable, robust and consistent for all areas on the Earth do not exist, and thus land cover is more frequently utilized; (2) multiple types of land cover and management are often found within a single landscape and are constantly changing, which complicates measurement and interpretation; and (3) while causal analysis is essential for understanding and interpreting changes in indicator values, the interactions among multiple causes and effects over time make accurate attribution among many drivers of change particularly difficult. Because of the complexity, sheer number of variables, and limitations of empirical data on land changes, models are often used to illustrate and estimate values for landscape indicators, and those models have several problems. Recommendations to improve our ability to assess the effects of changes in land management include refinement of questions to be more consistent with available information and the development of data sets based on systematic measurement over time of spatially explicit land qualities such as carbon and nutrient stocks, water and soil quality, net primary productivity, habitat and biodiversity. Well-defined and consistent land-classification systems that are capable of tracking changes in these and other qualities that matter to society need to be developed and deployed. Because landscapes are so dynamic, it is crucial to develop ways for the scientific community to work together to collect data and develop tools that will enable better analysis of causes and effects and to develop robust management recommendations that will increases land's capacity to meet societal needs in a changing world. (C) 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
It is not just about time: Agricultural practices and surrounding forest cover affect secondary forest recovery in agricultural landscapes			Natural regeneration of forests has significantly led to increased native forest cover in some regions. Several studies have explored the spatial drivers of forest cover increase, yet little is known about their effects on forest structure and species richness and diversity. We quantified the effects of local (forest age, remnant Eucalyptus basal area, slope, soil fertility, and clay content) and landscape drivers (surrounding land use, distance from streams, and surrounding forest cover and its change over time) on the aboveground biomass, species density, and phylogenetic diversity of native trees in second-growth forests. We sampled 44 naturally regenerating forests established on former pastures and abandoned Eucalyptus plantations for 11-46 years in agricultural landscapes of the southeastern Atlantic Forest, Brazil. We used generalized linear mixed effect models to quantify the effect drivers on forest attributes. While only Eucalyptus basal area and proximity to sugarcane plantations had a consistent negative effect on forest biomass, other drivers were among the best models to explain forest attributes, but their effect was variable. Age increased tree biomass but the effect was not consistent. Similarly, species richness and phylogenetic diversity were mainly affected by landscape drivers such as surrounding forest cover. In tropical agricultural landscapes, effective forest recovery requires more than just time, as forest age can be less important in determining forest attributes than human land uses and surrounding native forest cover. Crucially, forest recovery can be improved through interventions and policies that promote less impactful human activities and enhance existing forest cover.Abstract in Portuguese is available with online material.
It is possible to reverse soil degradation caused by bauxite mining through ecological restoration?			Mining is one of the most impacting human activities to natural resources, and that can profoundly affect ecosystem resilience depending on the level of soil degradation. Thus many mined areas are not effectively recovered to the point of restoring relevant part of biodiversity and ecosystem services, restricting rehabilitation. If the physical, chemical and microbiological soil properties are not considered in forest restoration, resilience is not viable, and consequently, the ecosystem will not restore its ecological functions. In particular, the physical and chemical attributes are the first to be recovered to establish vegetation, facilitating ecological succession. The recovery of the chemical attributes denotes attention, since soils of tropical ecosystems are generally poor in nutrients. The mineralogical composition of the soil is intrinsically linked to that context by conditioning the physical and chemical soil properties, in particular its physical structure, which may different managements that compartment are needed and chemically mineralogy vary significantly among soil types, so in terms of fertility, working the soil as a reservoir or drain nutrients. The aim of this study is to determine the total and clay fraction in newly mined soils, forests and restoration of native forests and forest rehabilitation process mineralogy. The study areas are located in the city of Pocos de Caldas / MG and belong to ALCOA Aluminum. In each study area, ie each sample unit correspond to a collection point, this being composed of 15 sub-samples, the 0-5, 5-10, 10-20, 20-40, 40-60 cm. The mineralogy of the soil will be determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD). (AU)
Job share Knowledge Exchange Fellowship: Regenerative agriculture for sustainable plantation ecosystems			Plantation ecosystems underpin the production of a range of commodities including tea and coffee and supports the livelihoods of millions of smallholder farmers. However, these ecosystems face a range of challenges, including declining soil fertility and increased soil erosion, and yields that are maintained through high nitrogen fertiliser applications. Across most production areas, climate change is reducing yields and crop quality, impacting farmer livelihoods. Regenerative agriculture (RA) describes a suite of practices designed to deliver beneficial outcomes for agroecosystems, with a focus on improving soil health and soil carbon sequestration, lower agrochemical inputs, and increasing biodiversity. This results in a healthier, more climate resilient ecosystem. For plantation crops, approaches include agroforestry and intercropping, reduced soil disturbance, and the use of organic fertilisers and composts as alternatives to inorganic fertilisers. At present, adoption is low due to limited research on specific techniques for certain crops, and knowledge and financial barriers. However, many techniques have significant similarities across regions and crops, and thus evidence of the benefits and possible trade-offs have the potential to be more widely applied. Adopting such an approach will help accelerate the incorporation of RA into current management practices. In this project, we will focus on the adoption of RA in tea and coffee production in East Africa. We will primarily work in Kenya, as tea and coffee are key regional exports and underpins the livelihoods of over a million smallholder farmers, but production is vulnerable to climate change. In the longer-term, and with the help of our partners and networks, we hope to expand our scope to include further crops and regions. To achieve our aim, this fellowship will facilitate knowledge exchange between researchers, agribusinesses, NGOs and smallholder farmers in tea and coffee ecosystems, building on the relationships and networks already established by the applicants (Dr Nick Girkin and Dr Kenisha Garnett) and Cranfield University. We will adopt a transdisciplinary approach, bringing our diverse background, experience and collective expertise in tropical ecosystem processes, RA, and the social sciences. We will synthesise NERC-remit science on RA's environmental benefits for tea and coffee ecosystems, with evidence of the social and economic impacts of adoption and combine this with new knowledge generated through the sharing of ideas, experience and expertise between researchers, agribusinesses and smallholder famers. We will adopt a co-production approach to our work with smallholders, to generate insights on current sustainable practices, and identify barriers to change, and delivery models. We will use this evidence to create materials to inform discussions with policymakers (e.g. the All-Parliamentary Group on Agroecology for Sustainable Food and Farming), NGOs (e.g. Rainforest Alliance) and businesses (e.g. Ekaterra) around the benefits of RA and means of incentivising adoption. Working collaboratively with our partners and a network of smallholder farmers, we will co-develop a RA toolkit for plantation crops, which can inform practice and promote adoption. A key impact of this fellowship will be the translation of NERC-remit science to improve the sustainability of tea and coffee production, bringing environmental, social and economic benefits to smallholders in the long-term. We will achieve our aim with support from a range of partners including agribusiness (e.g. Ekaterra), NGOs (e.g. Rainforest Alliance) and regional research institutions (e.g. Kenyatta University). We anticipate the knowledge exchange and engagement of stakeholders across our networks can be sustained and that the network will be self-maintaining after the fellowship, to deliver a long-term legacy by increasing the sustainability and climate resilience of plantation ecosystems.
Keep wetlands wet: the myth of sustainable development of tropical peatlands – implications for policies and management			Pristine tropical peat swamp forests (PSFs) represent a unique wetland ecosystem of distinctive hydrology which support unique biodiversity and globally significant stores of soil carbon. Yet in Indonesia and Malaysia, home to 56% of the world's tropical peatland, they are subject to considerable developmental pressures, including widespread drainage to support agricultural needs. In this article, we review the ecology behind the functioning and ecosystem services provided by PSFs, with a particular focus on hydrological processes as well as the role of the forest itself in maintaining those services. Drawing on this, we review the suitability of current policy frameworks and consider the efficacy of their implementation. We suggest that policies in Malaysia and Indonesia are often based around the narrative of oil palm and other major monocrops as drivers of prosperity and development. However, we also argue that this narrative is also being supported by a priori claims concerning the possibility of sustainability of peat swamp exploitation via drainage-based agriculture through the adherence to best management practices. We discuss how this limits their efficacy, uptake and the political will towards enforcement. Further, we consider how both narratives (prosperity and sustainability) clearly exclude important considerations concerning the ecosystem value of tropical PSFs which are dependent on their unimpacted hydrology. Current research clearly shows that the actual debate should be focused not on how to develop drainage-based plantations sustainably, but on whether the sustainable conversion to drainage-based systems is possible at all. © 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Keeping people in the loop: Socioeconomic valuation of dry forest ecosystem services in the Colombian Caribbean region			Tropical dry forests (TDF) are one of the most endangered ecosystems in the world, especially in Colombia. One way to promote TDF conservation is by upholding the valuation of the ecosystem services they provide. Therefore, in order to deepen the understanding regarding the conservation of TDF from the perspective of local communities, we sampled two populations for our analysis: the first one consisted of people living inside a TDF protected area, while the second one was made up of urban inhabitants living near the TDF. Through a contingent valuation study, we found that 71% of urban inhabitants were willing to pay 12,119 USD/year to the protected area?s inhabitants to implement conservation strategies and also that 100% of the protected area?s dwellers were willing to participate of the strategy. Hence, we proposed a payment for ecosystem services scheme. Lastly, we observed that inhabitants? high participation rates for the proposed strategy related to the high importance given to TDF-provided ecosystem services.
Lack of evidence of edge age and additive edge effects on carbon stocks in a tropical forest			Despite the importance of tropical forest fragmentation on carbon balance, most of our knowledge comes from few sites in the Amazon and disregard long-term underlying processes related to landscape configuration. Accurate estimation of fragmentation effects should account for additive edge effects and edge age. Here we investigated those effects on C stock and forest structure (density, height, basal area) in fragments (13 to 362 ha) of forest with >= 70 years old, surrounded by pasture, in the Brazilian Atlantic forest region. We measured 5297 stems sampled in four categories replicated in eight fragments: fragment interiors (> 110 m from edges); old (> 50 years) corner edges (< 50 m); old straight edges; and new (ca. 44 years) straight edges. Aboveground biomass was estimated from tree height and diameter at breast height, and converted to carbon. Carbon stock was highly variable between categories, scoring from 10.44 Mg ha(-1) up to 107.59 Mg ha(-1) (average of 41.27 +/- 23 Mg ha(-1)). Contrary to our expectations, interior plots did not have higher carbon stock, basal area or tree stem density than edges, but only taller trees. We found no significant effects of edge age or additive edge effects on carbon stocks. These results suggest that edge effects in the Atlantic rainforest may differ from those observed in more recently fragmented tropical forests, such as the Amazonian forest. We hypothesize that in heavily human-modified landscapes, more extensive edge effects combined with other human disturbances on tree mortality and carbon stock may contribute to overall high levels of degradation, reducing differences between edge and interior habitats. Existing models based on Amazonian forest data may underestimate the true impacts of fragmentation on carbon storage in landscapes with an old history of human disturbance.
Land cover change and carbon emissions over 100 years in an African biodiversity hotspot			Agricultural expansion has resulted in both land use and land cover change (LULCC) across the tropics. However, the spatial and temporal patterns of such change and their resulting impacts are poorly understood, particularly for the presatellite era. Here, we quantify the LULCC history across the 33.9 million ha watershed of Tanzania's Eastern Arc Mountains, using geo-referenced and digitized historical land cover maps (dated 1908, 1923, 1949 and 2000). Our time series from this biodiversity hotspot shows that forest and savanna area both declined, by 74% (2.8 million ha) and 10% (2.9 million ha), respectively, between 1908 and 2000. This vegetation was replaced by a fivefold increase in cropland, from 1.2 million ha to 6.7 million ha. This LULCC implies a committed release of 0.9 Pg C (95% CI: 0.4-1.5) across the watershed for the same period, equivalent to 0.3 Mg C ha(-1)  yr(-1) . This is at least threefold higher than previous estimates from global models for the same study area. We then used the LULCC data from before and after protected area creation, as well as from areas where no protection was established, to analyse the effectiveness of legal protection on land cover change despite the underlying spatial variation in protected areas. We found that, between 1949 and 2000, forest expanded within legally protected areas, resulting in carbon uptake of 4.8 (3.8-5.7) Mg C ha(-1) , compared to a committed loss of 11.9 (7.2-16.6) Mg C ha(-1) within areas lacking such protection. Furthermore, for nine protected areas where LULCC data are available prior to and following establishment, we show that protection reduces deforestation rates by 150% relative to unprotected portions of the watershed. Our results highlight that considerable LULCC occurred prior to the satellite era, thus other data sources are required to better understand long-term land cover trends in the tropics.  © 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Land cover change in low-warming scenarios may enhance the climate role of secondary organic aerosols			Most socioeconomic pathways compatible with the aims of the Paris Agreement include large changes to land use and land cover. The associated vegetation changes can interact with the atmosphere and climate through numerous mechanisms. One of these is emissions of biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOCs), which may lead to the formation of secondary organic aerosols (SOAs) and atmospheric chemistry changes. Here, we use a modeling framework to explore potential future global and regional changes in SOA and tropospheric ozone following idealized, large-scale vegetation perturbations, and their resulting radiative forcing (RF). Guided by projections in low-warming scenarios, we modify crop and forest cover, separately, and in concurrence with changes in anthropogenic emissions and CO2 level. We estimate that increasing global forest cover by 30% gives a 37% higher global SOA burden, with a resulting forcing of -0.13 W m(-2). The effect on tropospheric ozone is relatively small. Large SOA burden changes of up to 48% are simulated for South America and Sub-Saharan Africa. Conversely, increasing crop cover at the expense of tropical forest, yields similar changes but of opposite sign. The magnitude of these changes is strongly affected by the concurrent evolution of anthropogenic emissions. Our land cover perturbations are representative of energy crop expansion and afforestation, two key mitigation measures in 1.5 degrees C compatible scenarios. Our results hence indicate that depending on the role of these two in the underlying mitigation strategies, scenarios with similar long-term global temperature levels could lead to opposite effects on SOA. Combined with the complexity of factors that control SOA, this highlights the importance of including BVOC effects in further studies and assessments of climate and air quality mitigation involving the land surface.
Land cover changes and carbon dynamics in Central India's dry tropical forests: A 25-year assessment and nature-based eco-restoration approaches			Anthropogenic land use and land cover changes are major drivers of environmental degradation and declining soil health across heterogeneous landscapes in Central India. To examines the land cover changes and spatiotemporal variations in forest carbon stock and soil organic carbon (SOC) over the past 25 years in central India. Geospatial techniques, coupled with ground measurements were employed to detect changes in land cover, carbon stocks in vegetation, and soil carbon in various vegetation types. The results indicate that forested areas have decreased, while agriculture and habitation have expanded between 1997 and 2022. Vegetation C stocks varied significantly (P < 0.05) from 39.42 to 139.95 Mg ha(-1) and the SOC varied from 7.02 to 17.98 Mg ha(-1) under different soil profiles across vegetation types, which decreased with soil depth, while the pH and bulk density increased. The maximum bulk density in the soil was found at a depth of 40-60 cm (lower profile) in Bamboo Brake, while the minimum was observed under Dense Mixed Forest at a depth of 0-20 cm (top profile). The topsoil profile contributed 33.6%-39%, the middle profile (20-40 cm) was 33.6%-34.4%, and the lower profile was 26.5%-30.8% of soil organic carbon. The study site has experienced rapid carbon losses due to changes in land cover, such as illegal expansion of agriculture, encroachments into forest fringes, and activities like selective logging and overgrazing, which have degraded dense forests. The ecological engineering of degraded ecosystems poses a great challenge and application of complex biological, mechanical and engineering measures is highly cumbersome, expensive, uneconomical and practically not feasible for upscaling. Nevertheless, proposed nature-based solutions mimic natural reparation and processes provide sustainable interventions for the reclamation of ruined landscapes besides improving ecological integrity and rendering many co-benefits to ecosystems and human societies.
Land cover changes and fragmentation in mountain neotropical ecosystems of Oaxaca, Mexico under community forest management			Changes in land cover have a direct impact on forest ecosystem goods and services. In this study, changes in land cover in Sierra de Juarez-Oaxaca ecosystems were estimated using a consistent processing of Landsat images and OBIA methodology. Additionally, landscape analyses using FRAGSTAT were conducted. In 2014, Sierra de Juarez-Oaxaca was covered by approximately 84% of forests, mainly pine-oak and cloud forests. After extensive deforestation until 2001, this trend was reversed and the forest cover surface area in 2014 was slightly higher than in 1979. The comparison of the landscape structure of the forested and agricultural lands suggests an increase in habitat heterogeneity. However, interspersion and juxtaposition indices, showing the patch shape by patch area and perimeter, were similar throughout the study period (1979-2014). Social and economic drivers can explain this situation: namely, community organization, forest enterprises, payment for ecosystem services programs, and changes of agricultural activity. Communities in the Sierra of Oaxaca have reforested degraded lands, created community forest enterprises, and preserved the forest under conservation schemes like those proposed by the Mexican payment for ecosystem services programs. However, their sustainable management faces internal challenges and has become highly dependent on political and institutional decisions beyond their control.
Land cover impacts on aboveground and soil carbon stocks in Malagasy rainforest			Deforestation and forest degradation can impact carbon dynamics and, subsequently, ecosystem functioning and climate change. In this study, we surveyed the influence of such land cover changes on four land cover/uses including closed canopy forest, tree fallow, shrub fallow, and degraded land among 120 study sites. We assessed these changes on total carbon stocks including both aboveground biomass (AGB) and soil organic carbon (SOC) including both topsoil, 0-30 cm, and deep soil, 30-100 cm. The four land cover/uses were located within four regions (Andasibe, Didy, Anjahamana, and Lakato) in the Eastern humid tropical forest of Madagascar. Our results show that total carbon stocks, AGB and soil, average 166 +/- 57 Mg C ha(-1) in which 82% is stored in 0-100 cm of soil surface horizon (55% stored in the topsoil and 27% in deep soil) suggesting the importance of soil pools in the sequestration of atmospheric carbon. The total carbon stocks were significantly higher in closed canopy compared to the other land covers. In lower altitude regions, the total carbon stock was lower ranging from 143.5 Mg C ha(-1) to 163.7 Mg C ha(-1), relative to higher altitude areas where total C stock ranged from 170.6 Mg C ha(-1) to 186.1 Mg C ha(-1). The relative importance of AGB and SOC were reversed in these study sites, with AGB/ SOC ratios of 0.37 for Anjahamana, 0.17 for Lakato, 0.21 for Didy, and 0.17 for Andasibe. Climatic factor combined with soil properties could explain the SOC variations across the study regions. High SOC was related to lower precipitation, high clay content and high root development. These results provide an accurate assessment of carbon storage distribution in a tropical region and support the importance of forest conservation and effective land cover management in maintaining carbon storage in ecosystems as tools in climate change mitigation in tropical forests. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Land related grievances shape tropical forest-cover in areas affected by armed-conflict			Armed-conflicts often occur in tropical areas considered to be of high ‘conservation-value’, termed as such for their biodiversity or carbon-storage functions. Despite this important overlap, few studies have assessed how forest-biomass is affected by armed-conflicts. Thus, in this paper we develop a multinomial logit model to examine how outcomes of the interactions between carbon-storage, armed-conflict and deforestation rates are linked to social, institutional and economic factors. We use Colombia as a case study because of its protracted armed-conflict, high forest-cover, sustained deforestation rates and on-going peace processes. Our empirical results show that the impacts of armed-conflicts on forest-cover are connected to specific socio-economical processes, such as unequal land distribution and land-grabbing, which typically occurs as part of ‘agricultural colonization’. Findings address a research gap by providing statistically sound evidence for associations between armed-conflicts and land-related grievances, which has rarely been demonstrated empirically. Our results also suggest that forest commons are associated with reduced armed-conflict, and simultaneously provide contributions to carbon storage and to meeting basic needs. Moreover, our forest-conflict transition models provide useful visual means to capture and relay to policymakers-the causes of forest cover-changes in a conflict-affected country. Finally, our findings imply that in dedicating their efforts to resolving land-ownership disputes, the Colombian government might uphold their international climate change commitments via reducing deforestation and hence forest based carbon emissions, while pursuing their national security objective via undermining opportunities for guerrilla groups to operate. © 2017 Elsevier Ltd
Land Use and Biodiversity in Unprotected Landscapes: The Case of Noncultivated Plant Use and Management by Rural Communities in Benin and Togo			To contribute to the development of strategies for sustainable agricultural land use and biodiversity conservation in landscapes without formal protection status, we investigated the local use and management of noncultivated plants as important ecosystem functions of inland valleys in south Benin and Togo, and local perceptions on changes in plant biodiversity and causes for these changes. Local users of noncultivated plants perceived agriculture and construction as major factors contributing to the reduction of (noncultivated) plant biodiversity. However, they also collect many useful species from agricultural fields and the village. A small community forest reserve and a 2-ha community garden were the only organized forms of conservation management. Observed ad hoc conservation initiatives were selective harvesting of plant parts, preserving trees during land clearing, and allowing useful weed species in the field. Future development and conservation efforts in unprotected landscapes with multiple ecosystem functions should acknowledge knowledge, interests, and needs of local communities.
Land Use and Cover Dynamics Since 1964 in the Afro-Alpine Vegetation Belt: Lib Amba Mountain in North Ethiopia			Human-induced land use and land cover (LUC) changes threaten the ecosystem services of the vulnerable tropical afro-alpine vegetation. Several LUC change studies are available for the Ethiopian highlands, but relatively little is known about LUC change in the afro-alpine zones. In this study, LUC changes between 1964 and 2012 were mapped for the afro-alpine zone of Lib Amba Mountain, part of the Abune Yosef Mountains in North Ethiopia. Historical LUC was derived from georeferenced aerial photographs of 1964 and 1982, and the present LUC (2012) from Bing Map satellite imagery. Based on these successive LUC maps a time-depth map, LUC proportions, LUC transition matrices and LUC change trajectories were calculated. Two main phases of LUC change could be distinguished linked to the neo-Boserupian perspective. (i) Between 1964 and 1982, there were large-scale deforestation and general degradation of the vegetation above 3500m, in a period of low population pressure; (ii) Between 1982 and 2012, an intensification of land use prevailed accompanied with a slight regeneration of the vegetation and the Erica arborea L. forest, under increased population pressure. Depth interviews indicated that local and governmental land management measures are very important for the protection against vegetation depletion and soil degradation. Quick recovery of the forest on Lib Amba provides confidence that degraded afro-alpine areas would benefit in a short time from complete protection, given the vicinity of remaining patches of afro-alpine vegetation. Management interventions are thus vital to restore the important ecosystem services of the afro-alpine vegetation belt. © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Land use and land cover change, trade-offs, and synergies between ecosystem services in a dry Afromontane Forest			The role of tropical forests in satisfying various human demands is growing, leading to increasing conflicts, particularly between forest conservation and usage. This creates a challenge for forest managers and decision makers. While conservation mitigates global climate change, utilization is crucial for local subsistence. This competition often results in trade-off relationships between ecosystem services, which are exacerbated by land use change. In this context we studied the spatial and temporal land use and land cover change in the Desa'a forest, a dry Afromontane Forest in norther Ethiopia, from 1985 to 2020 and analyzed trade-off and synergy relationships between one provisioning (food supply) and two regulating ecosystem services (soil conservation, carbon storage) using ArcGIS Pro and R software. Dense forest, constituting 23% of the study area, remained constant throughout the study period. Farmland and bare land decreased by 3% and 13% respectively, while open forest, constituting more than 50% of the area, increased by 16%. The trade-off and synergy analysis revealed ecosystem services relationship fluctuations in the magnitude of the relationships during the studied period. In conclusion, our study has revealed that the trade-offs and synergies of ecosystem services display variations in their timing, geographical distribution, and intensity, much like the ecosystem services hubs and land use/land cover changes. These three interrelated aspects hold significant implications for management decisions and therefore, must be given due consideration. Our findings help in understanding ecosystem services dynamics and can support sustainable forest management and conservation strategies. Incorporating a temporal dimension to trade-off and synergy analyses can reveal how past decisions on the use of land and its resources impact today's ecosystem services and their interactions.
Land use change and soil nutrient transformations in the Los Haitises region of the Dominican Republic			We characterized soil cation, carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) transformations within a variety of land use types in the karst region of the northeastern Dominican Republic. We examined a range of soil pools and fluxes during the wet and dry seasons in undisturbed forest, regenerating forest and active agricultural sites within and directly adjacent to Los Haitises National Park. Soil moisture, soil organic matter (SOM), soil cations, leaf litter C and pH were significantly greater in regenerating forest sites than agricultural sites, while bulk density was greater in active agricultural sites. Potential denitrification, microbial biomass C and N, and microbial respiration g(-1) dry soil were significantly greater in the regenerating forest sites than in the active agricultural sites. However, net mineralization, net nitrification, microbial biomass C, and microbial respiration were all significantly greater in the agricultural sites on g(-1) SOM basis. These results suggest that land use is indirectly affecting microbial activity and C storage through its effect on SOM quality and quantity. While agriculture can significantly decrease soil fertility, it appears that the trend can begin to rapidly reverse with the abandonment of agriculture and the subsequent regeneration of forest. The regenerating forest soils were taken out of agricultural use only 5-7 years before our study and already have soil properties and processes similar to an undisturbed old forest site. Compared to undisturbed mogote forest sites, regenerating sites had smaller amounts of SOM and microbial biomass N, as well as lower rates of microbial respiration, mineralization and nitrification g(-1) SOM. Initial recovery of soil pools and processes appeared to be rapid, but additional research must be done to address the long-term rate of recovery in these forest stands. (C) 2004, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Land Use Change on Coffee Farms in Southern Guatemala and its Environmental Consequences			Changes in commodity prices, such as the fall in coffee prices from 2000 to 2004, affect land use decisions on farms, and the environmental services they provide. A survey of 50 farms showed a 35 % loss in the area under coffee between 2000 and 2004 below 700 m with the majority of this area (64 %) being coffee agroforest systems that included native forest species. Loss of coffee only occurred on large and medium-scale farms; there was no change in area on cooperatives. Coffee productivity declined below 1,100 m altitude for sun and Inga shade coffee, but only below 700 m altitude for agroforest coffee. Coffee productivity was 37-53 % lower under agroforests than other systems. Increases in rubber and pasture were related to low altitude large-scale farms, and bananas and timber plantations to mid-altitude farms. Average aboveground carbon stocks for coffee agroforests of 39 t C ha(-1) was similar to rubber plantations, but one-third to one half that of natural forest and timber plantations, respectively. Coffee agroforests had the highest native tree diversity of the productive systems (7-12 species ha(-1)) but lower than natural forest (31 species ha(-1)). Conversion of coffee agroforest to other land uses always led to a reduction in the quality of habitat for native biodiversity, especially avian, but was concentrated among certain farm types. Sustaining coffee agroforests for biodiversity conservation would require targeted interventions such as direct payments or market incentives specifically for biodiversity.
Land use drives the distribution of free, physically protected, and chemically protected soil organic carbon storage at a global scale			Soil organic carbon (SOC) sequestration is increasingly emphasized as a climate mitigation solution, as scientists, policy makers, and land-managers prioritize enhancing belowground C storage. To identify key underlying drivers of total SOC distributions, we compiled a global dataset of soil C stocks held in three chemical forms, reflecting different mechanisms of organic C protection: free particulate organic C (fPOC), physically protected particulate organic C (oPOC), and mineral-protected soil organic C (mSOC). In our dataset, these three SOC pools were differentially sensitive to effects of climate, soil mineralogy, and ecosystem type, emphasizing the importance of distinguishing between physical and chemical C protection mechanisms. C stocks in all three pools varied among ecosystems: cropland soils stored the least amount in each pool, with forest and grassland soils both containing significantly more fPOC (40-60% greater in each ecosystem) than croplands. oPOC stocks did not significantly differ from zero in croplands, but were substantial in forest and grassland soils. Meanwhile, mSOC stocks were the greatest in grasslands and shrublands (90-100% greater than croplands). In cropland soils, there were no major effects of tillage on C storage in any of the three pools, while manure addition enhanced mSOC stocks, especially when added with inorganic N. Thus, the human land use intensity in croplands appears to reduce SOC storage in all major pools, depending upon management; retaining native vegetation should be emphasized to maintain current global SOC stocks. We collected data from papers which utilized a density fractionation methodology to measure soil organic C (SOC) within the three fraction pools: free particulate organic fraction (fPOC), occluded particulate organic fraction (oPOC), and mineral soil organic carbon (mSOC). To filter through published studies reporting SOC stocks, we chose to extract data from papers which cited one of the following rigorous and influential fractionation methodologies: (Golchin et al., 1994; Shaymukhametov et al., 1984; Six et al., 1998; Sollins et al., 1984, 2006, 2009; Spycher et al., 1983; Steffens et al., 2009). On Google Scholar, there were 3915 papers citing one of the above papers through September 2020. We examined each publication and only extracted data from empirical studies, published in a peer-review journal in English, that measured SOC via density fractionation. When recording oPOC or mSOC data, we only collected data from papers which utilized sonication, sodium hexametaphosphate dispersion, or physical disruption (e.g., from glass beads) to separate oPOC from mSOC (Figure S1). Unless it was specified for a particular soil and reported in the respective study, we set a density cutoff of 1.85 g cm-3 for classifying mSOC. Since some studies isolated C pools along a density gradient, we summed SOC stored in fractions above or below the density cutoff. To make meaningful global comparisons, we chose to only include papers which reported enough information to calculate the C stock in units of g C m2. In cases where C concentrations but not stocks were reported, we used soil depth and bulk density (BD, g cm-3) to calculate the C stock in a given pool (fPOC, oPOC, mSOC). Data were recorded separately for different locations, ecosystem types, treatments, soil depths, and fractions. Because there was a wide range in soil depth increments used within studies, we summed C stocks from specific depth intervals (e.g. 0-10 cm, 10-30 cm) into two categories: topsoil (0-30cm) or subsoil (31+cm). Soil volume associated with each observation was calculated assuming a 1x1 m sampling area and the sampling depth increment reported by the study authors (e.g. 0-10 cm, 15-30 cm). # Land use drives the distribution of free, physically protected, and chemically protected soil organic carbon storage at a global scale [https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.b5mkkwhp0](https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.b5mkkwhp0) ### Files and variables #### File: Willard\_GCB\_2024\_processed\_data.csv **Description:** ##### Variables * UniqueObsCodeThreePool:Code to denote each unique datapoint featuring: Study ID, simplified ecosystem, USDA soil order, Treatment name, fractionation type (fLF, oLF, mSOC), and topsoil or subsoil * Study_ID:Author name and published year * Citation:Author name, published year, journal name, and edition information * Year_sampled:Sampled year * Field_or_Lab: Study system * Latitude:Latitude of sampled location * Longitude:Longitude of sampled location * Country:Country of sampled location * Elevation:Sample elevation * Ecosystem_type:Ecosystem of sampled location * Ecosystem_simplified:Simplified ecosystem of sampled location * Crop_or_forest_type_reported:Cropping or forest type of sampled location * Cropland_addition:Nutrient addition of sampled soil * Cropland_addition_N.kg.ha.yr:Inorganic nitrogen addition of sampled soil in units of kg/ha/yr. * Cropland_addition_Manure.Mg.ha.yr:Manure addition of sampled location in units of kg/ha/yr. * Cropland_tillage:Tillage regimen of sampled soil * Soil_order_reported:Reported soil orderincluding USDA and World Reference Base * Soil_order_simplified:USDA simplified soil order * Soil_texture:Reported soil texture * Horizon:Sampled soil horizon * Soil_volume:Calculated soil volume (100cm **100cm** soil depth) * Top_depth:Top soil depth (cm) * bottom_depth:Bottom soil depth (cm) * Soil_pH_reported:Reported soil pH * Treatment:Treatment name * Rotation:Reported cropland rotation information * Fraction_reported:SOC fraction reported in study * Fraction_harmonized:Harmonized fraction name for dataset unification * Floatation_density:Reported density flotationin units of g/cm^3 * Two_pool:Harmonized fraction for two pool sorting (HF and LF) * Three_pool:Harmonized fraction for three pool sorting (fLF, oLF, mSOC; note manuscript uses terms fPOC, oPOC, and mSOC to convey geochemical characteristics) * Method_used_C:Reported methodology used to differentiate SOC fraction * Primary_C_pool:Primary C pool data reported from study: used to calculate data found in C_stock_for_analysis_three_pool. Obsoleted in Willard_GCB_2024_processed_data.csv due to data recombining. * Units_Primary:Units of primary data(e.g.: g/kg, %) * Units_Primary_Annotated:Annotation of primary units * Secondary_C_pool:Secondary C pool data reported from study (used to calculate to g m^2) : used to calculate data found in C_stock_for_analysis_three_pool. Obsoleted in Willard_GCB_2024_processed_data.csv due to data recombining * Units_Secondary:Units of secondary data(e.g.: g/kg, %) * MAT_reported:Mean annual temperature (degrees Celsius) reported (used when available) * MAP_reported:Mean annual precipitation (mm) reported (used when available) * MAT_added:Mean annual temperature (degrees Celsius) extracted from Terra Climate * MAP_added:Mean annual precipitation (mm) extracted from Terra Climate * MAT_used:Mean annual temperature (degrees Celsius) used * MAP_used:Mean annual precipitation (mm) used * T_PH_H2O:HWSD topsoil pH; extracted from Harmonized World Soil Database * S_PH_H2O:HWSD subsoil pH; extracted from Harmonized World Soil Database * T_CLAY:HWSD topsoil clay percentage; extracted from Harmonized World Soil Database * S_CLAY:HWSD subsoil clay percentage; extracted from Harmonized World Soil Database * T_BULK_DEN:HWSD topsoil bulk density (g/cm^3); extracted from Harmonized World Soil Database * S_BULK_DEN:HWSD subsoil bulk density (g/cm^3); extracted from Harmonized World Soil Database * BD_reported:Bulk density reported (g cm^3; used when available) * BD_used:Bulk density used (g cm^3) * Calculated_C_pool:Calculated C pool size (Primary_C_pool multiplied by Secondary_C_pool C * BD_used * summed_vol where appropriate to units of g m^2; calculated prior to combining along UniqueObsCodeThreePool) * layer:topsoil (0-30cm) or subsoil (31+cm) * UniqueObsCodeTwoPool:Code to denote each unique datapoint featuring: Study ID, simplified ecosystem, USDA soil order, Treatment name, fractionation type (HF or LF), and topsoil or subsoil * C_stock_for_analysis_three_pool:Combined C pool along UniqueObsCodeThreePool: used as response C pool data in manuscript modelsand in units ofg m^2 * PH_three_pool:Combined soil pH along UniqueObsCodeThreePool * summed_vol:summed soil volume along UniqueObsCodeThreePooland in units of cm^3 **Note: NA's denote unreported data from publications** #### File: Willard\_GCB\_2024\_raw\_data.csv **Description:** ##### Variables * Study_ID:Author name and published year * Citation:Author name, published year, journal name, and edition information * Year_sampled: Sampled year * Field_or_Lab:Study system * Latitude:Latitude of sampled location * Longitude:Longitude of sampled location * Country:Country of sampled location * Elevation:Sample elevation * Ecosystem_type:Ecosystem of sampled location * Ecosystem_simplified:Simplified ecosystem of sampled location * Crop_or_forest_type_reported:Cropping or forest type of sampled location * Cropland_addition:Nutrient addition of sampled soil * Cropland_addition_N kg/ha/yr:Inorganic nitrogen addition of sampled soilin units of kg/ha/yr. * Cropland_addition_Manure Mg ha yr:Manure addition of sampled locationin units of kg/ha/yr. * Cropland_tillage:Tillage regimen of sampled soil * Soil_order_reported:Reported soil orderincluding USDA and World Reference Base * Soil_order_simplified:USDA simplified soil order * Soil_texture:Reported soil texture * Horizon:Sampled soil horizon * Soil_volume:Calculated soil volume (100cm*100cm** soil depth) * Top_depth:Top soil depth (cm) * bottom_depth:Bottom soil depth (cm) * Soil_pH_reported:Reported soil pH * Treatment:Treatment name * Rotation:Reported cropland rotation information * Fraction_reported:SOC fraction reported in study * Fraction_harmonized:Harmonized fraction name for dataset unification * Floatation_density:Reported density flotation in units of g/cm^3 * Two_pool:Harmonized fraction for two pool sorting (HF and LF) * Three_pool:Harmonized fraction for three pool sorting (fLF, oLF, mSOC; note manuscript uses terms fPOC, oPOC, and mSOC to convey geochemical characteristics) * Method_used_C:Reported methodology used to differentiate SOC fraction * Primary_C_pool:Primary C pool data reported from study: used to calculate data found in C_stock_for_analysis_three_pool. Obsoleted in Processed_data file due to data recombining. * Units_Primary:Units of primary data(e.g.: g/kg, %) * Units_Primary_Annotated:Annotation of primary units * Secondary_C_pool:Secondary C pool data reported from study (used to calculate to g m^2) : used to calculate data found in C_stock_for_analysis_three_pool. Obsoleted in Processed_data file due to data recombining. * Units_Secondary:Units of secondary data(e.g.: g/kg, %) * MAT_reported:Mean annual temperature (degrees Celsius) reported (used when available) * MAP_reported:Mean annual precipitation (mm) reported (used when available) * MAT_added:Mean annual temperature (degrees Celsius) extracted from Terra Climate * MAP_added:Mean annual precipitation (mm) extracted from Terra Climate * MAT_used:Mean annual temperature (degrees Celsius) used * MAP_used:Mean annual precipitation (mm) used * T_PH_H2O:HWSD topsoil pH; extracted from Harmonized World Soil Database * S_PH_H2O:HWSD subsoil pH; extracted from Harmonized World Soil Database * T_CLAY:HWSD topsoil clay percentage; extracted from Harmonized World Soil Database * S_CLAY:HWSD subsoil clay percentage; extracted from Harmonized World Soil Database * T_BULK_DEN:HWSD topsoil bulk density (g/cm^3); extracted from Harmonized World Soil Database * S_BULK_DEN:HWSD subsoil bulk density (g/cm^3); extracted from Harmonized World Soil Database * BD_reported:Bulk density reported (g cm^3; used when available) * BD_used:Bulk density used (g cm^3) * Calculated_C_pool:Calculated C pool size (Primary_C_pool multiplied by Secondary_C_pool C * BD_used * summed_vol where appropriate to units of g m^2; calculated prior to combining along UniqueObsCodeThreePool)and in units ofg m^2 * layer:topsoil (0-30cm) or subsoil (31+cm) Note: NA's denote unreported data from publications ## Code/software Data analysis was done in R (version 4.3.1). Packages for statistics and graphing included: lme4, lmerTest, MuMIn, plotrix, stringr, dplyr, tidyverse, ggplot2, and lsmeans. ## Access information Data was derived from the following sources: * Provided is the list of publications from which data was extracted and utilized within the analysis: 1. Alcantara, V., Don, A., Vesterdal, L., Well, R. & Nieder, R. Stability of buried carbon in deep-ploughed forest and cropland soils - Implications for carbon stocks. *Sci Rep* **7**, 1-12 (2017). 2. Alhameid, A., Ibrahim, M., Kumar, S., Sexton, P. & Schumacher, T. E. Soil Organic Carbon Changes Impacted by Crop Rotational Diversity under No-Till Farming in South Dakota, USA. *Soil Science Society of America Journal* **81**, 868-877 (2017). 3. Alvarez, C. R., Alvarez, R., Grigera, M. S. & Lavado, R. S. Associations between organic matter fractions and the active soil microbial biomass. *Soil Biol Biochem* **30**, 767-773 (1998). 4. Alvarez, R. & Alvarez, C. R. Soil Organic Matter Pools and Their Associations with Carbon Mineralization Kinetics. *Soil Science Society of America Journal* **64**, 184-189 (2000). 5. Alvaro-Fuentes, J. *et al.* Soil Aggregation and Soil Organic Carbon Stabilization: Effects of Management in Semiarid Mediterranean Agroecosystems. *Soil Science Society of America Journal* **73**, 1519-1529 (2009). 6. Amado, T. J. C. *et al.* Potential of Carbon Accumulation in No‐Till Soils with Intensive Use and Cover Crops in Southern Brazil. *J Environ Qual* **35**, 1599-1607 (2006). 7. Anaya, C. A. & Huber-Sannwald, E. Long-term soil organic carbon and nitrogen dynamics after conversion of tropical forest to traditional sugarcane agriculture in East Mexico. *Soil Tillage Res* **147**, 20-29 (2015). 8. Aoyama, M. DRIFT spectroscopy combined with sodium hypochlorite oxidation reveals different organic matter characteristics in density-size fractions of organically managed soils. *Can J Soil Sci* **96**, 317-327 (2016). 9. Artemyeva, Z. S., Zigova, А., Kirillova, N. P. & Stastny, M. Dynamics of organic matter in soils following a change in landuse on permo-carboniferous rocks in the CeskY brod area (Czech Republic). *Acta Geodynamica et Geomaterialia* **15**, 339-348 (2018). 10. Baisden, W. T., Amundson, R., Cook, A. C. & Brenner, D. L. Turnover and storage of C and N in five density fractions from California annual grassland surface soils. *Global Biogeochem Cycles* **16**, 1-16 (2002). 11. Besnard, E., Chenu, C., Balesdent, J., Puget, P. & Arrouays, D. Fate of particulate organic matter in soil aggregates during cultivation. *Eur J Soil Sci* **47**, 495-503 (1996). 12. Bhattacharyya, R., Tuti, M. D., Kundu, S., Bisht, J. K. & Bhatt, J. C. Conservation Tillage Impacts on Soil Aggregation and Carbon Pools in a Sandy Clay Loam Soil of the Indian Himalayas. *Soil Science Society of America Journal* **76**, 617-627 (2012). 13. Bischoff, N. *et al.* Land-use change under different climatic conditions: Consequences for organic matter and microbial communities in Siberian steppe soils. *Agric Ecosyst Environ* **235**, 253-264 (2016). 14. Blackwood, C. B. & Paul, E. A. Eubacterial community structure and population size within the soil light fraction, rhizosphere, and heavy fraction of several agricultural systems. *Soil Biol Biochem* **35**, 1245-1255 (2003). 15. Boone, R. D., Sollins, P. & Cromack, K. Stand and Soil Changes Along A Mountain Hemlock Death and Regrowth Sequence. *Ecology* **69**, 714-722 (1988). 16. Boone, R. D. Light-fraction soil organic matter: origin and contribution to net nitrogen mineralization. *Soil Biol Biochem* **26**, 1459-1468 (1994). 17. Bosshard, C. *et al.* Incorporation of Nitrogen‐15‐Labeled Amendments into Physically Separated Soil Organic Matter Fractions. *Soil Science Society of America Journal* **72**, 949-959 (2008). 18. Breulmann, M. *et al.* Short-term bioavailability of carbon in soil organic matter fractions of different particle sizes and densities in grassland ecosystems. *Science of the Total Environment* **497-498**, 29-37 (2014). 19. Breulmann, M., Boettger, T., Buscot, F., Gruendling, R. & Schulz, E. Carbon storage potential in size-density fractions from semi-natural grassland ecosystems with different productivities over varying soil depths. *Science of the Total Environment* **545-546**, 30-39 (2016). 20. Brodowski, S., John, B., Flessa, H. & Amelung, W. Aggregate-occluded black carbon in soil. *Eur J Soil Sci* **57**, 539-546 (2006). 21. Cadisch, G., Imhof, H., Urquiaga, S., Boddey, R. M. & Giller, K. E. Carbon turnover (delta13C) and nitrogen mineralization potential of particulate light soil organic matter after rainforest clearing. *Soil Biol Biochem* **28**, 1555-1567 (1996). 22. Chen, Y. *et al.* Changes in soil carbon pools and microbial biomass from urban land development and subsequent post-development soil rehabilitation. *Soil Biol Biochem* **66**, 38-44 (2013). 23. Chen, Z. J. *et al.* Addition of nitrogen enhances stability of soil organic matter in a temperate forest. *Eur J Soil Sci* **68**, 189-199 (2017). 24. Cheng, X., Luo, Y., Xu, X., Sherry, R. & Zhang, Q. Soil organic matter dynamics in a North America tallgrass prairie after 9 yr of experimental warming. *Biogeosciences* **8**, 1487-1498 (2011). 25. Chimento, C., Almagro, M. & Amaducci, S. Carbon sequestration potential in perennial bioenergy crops: The importance of organic matter inputs and its physical protection. *GCB Bioenergy* **8**, 111-121 (2016). 26. Compton, J. E. & Boone, R. D. Long-term impacts of agriculture on soil carbon and nitrogen in New England forests. *Ecology* **81**, 2314-2330 (2000). 27. Conant, R. T., Six, J. & Paustian, K. Land use effects on soil carbon fractions in the southeastern United States. II. Changes in soil carbon fractions along a forest to pasture chronosequence. *Biol Fertil Soils* **40**, 194-200 (2004). 28. Cong, W., Ren, T. & Li, B. Assessing the impact of afforestation on soil organic C sequestration by means of sequential density fractionation. *PLoS One* **10**, 1-20 (2015). 29. Cromack, K., Miller, R. E., Anderson, H. W., Helgerson, O. T. & Smith, R. B. Soil Carbon and Nutrients in a Coastal Oregon Douglas‐Fir Plantation with Red Alder. *Soil Science Society of America Journal* **63**, 232-239 (1999). 30. Crow, S. E., Reeves, M., Schubert, O. S. & Sierra, C. A. Optimization of method to quantify soil organic matter dynamics and carbon sequestration potential in volcanic ash soils. *Biogeochemistry* **123**, 27-47 (2015). 31. Crow, S. E., Deem, L. M., Sierra, C. A. & Wells, J. M. Belowground carbon dynamics in tropical perennial C4 grass agroecosystems. *Front Environ Sci* **6**, 1-12 (2018). 32. Crow, S. E. & Sierra, C. A. Dynamic, Intermediate Soil Carbon Pools May Drive Future Responsiveness to Environmental Change. *J Environ Qual* **47**, 607-616 (2018). 33. Curtin, D., Beare, M. H., Qiu, W. & Sharp, J. Does Particulate Organic Matter Fraction Meet the Criteria for a Model Soil Organic Matter Pool? *Pedosphere* **29**, 195-203 (2019). 34. Cusack, D. F. *et al.* Decadal-scale litter manipulation alters the biochemical and physical character of tropical forest soil carbon. *Soil Biol Biochem* **124**, 199-209 (2018). 35. Degryze, S. *et al.* Soil organic carbon pool changes following land-use conversions. *Glob Chang Biol* **10**, 1120-1132 (2004). 36. Del Galdo, I., Six, J., Peressotti, A. & Cotrufo, M. F. Assessing the impact of land-use change on soil C sequestration in agricultural soils by means of organic matter fractionation and stable C isotopes. *Glob Chang Biol* **9**, 1204-1213 (2003). 37. Del Galdo, I., Oechel, W. C. & Francesca Cotrufo, M. Effects of past, present and future atmospheric CO2 concentrations on soil organic matter dynamics in a chaparral ecosystem. *Soil Biol Biochem* **38**, 3235-3244 (2006). 38. DeMarco, J., Filley, T. & Throop, H. L. Patterns of woody plant-derived soil carbon losses and persistence after brush management in a semi-arid grassland. *Plant Soil* **406**, 277-293 (2016). 39. Demyan, M. S. *et al.* Use of specific peaks obtained by diffuse reflectance Fourier transform mid-infrared spectroscopy to study the composition of organic matter in a Haplic Chernozem. *Eur J Soil Sci* **63**, 189-199 (2012). 40. Deng, W., Wu, W., Wang, H., Luo, W. & Kimberley, M. O. Temporal dynamics of iron-rich, tropical soil organic carbon pools after land-use change from forest to sugarcane. *J Soils Sediments* **9**, 112-120 (2009). 41. Doetterl, S. *et al.* Aboveground vs. belowground carbon stocks in African tropical lowland rainforest: Drivers and implications. *PLoS One* **10**, 1-14 (2015). 42. Dondini, M., Van Groenigen, K.-J., Del Galdo, I. & Jones, M. B. Carbon sequestration under Miscanthus : a study of 13 C distribution in soil aggregates. *GCB Bioenergy* **1**, 321-330 (2009). 43. Dong, X., Guan, T., Li, G., Lin, Q. & Zhao, X. Long-term effects of biochar amount on the content and composition of organic matter in soil aggregates under field conditions. *J Soils Sediments* **16**, 1481-1497 (2016). 44. Dou, X., Xu, X., Shu, X., Zhang, Q. & Cheng, X. Shifts in soil organic carbon and nitrogen dynamics for afforestation in central China. *Ecol Eng* **87**, 263-270 (2016). 45. Dyck, M., Malhi, S. S., Nyborg, M. & Puurveen, D. Effects of Short-term Tillage of a Long-term No-Till Land on Quantity and Quality of Organic C and N in Two Contrasting Soil Types. *Sustainable Agriculture Research* **5**, 43 (2016). 46. Echeverria, M. E., Markewitz, D., Morris, L. A. & Hendrick, R. L. Soil Organic Matter Fractions under Managed Pine Plantations of the Southeastern USA. *Soil Science Society of America Journal* **68**, 950-958 (2004). 47. Eckmeier, E. *et al.* Preservation of fire-derived carbon compounds and sorptive stabilisation promote the accumulation of organic matter in black soils of the Southern Alps. *Geoderma* **159**, 147-155 (2010). 48. Egli, M. *et al.* Effect of north and south exposure on organic matter in high Alpine soils. *Geoderma* **149**, 124-136 (2009). 49. Entry, J. A. & Emmingham, W. H. Influence of forest age on forms of carbon in Douglas-fir soils in the Oregon Coast Range. *Canadian Journal of Forest Research* **28**, 390-395 (1998). 50. Fang, Y., Singh, B. P., Luo, Y., Boersma, M. & Van Zwieten, L. Biochar carbon dynamics in physically separated fractions and microbial use efficiency in contrasting soils under temperate pastures. *Soil Biol Biochem* **116**, 399-409 (2018). 51. Garcia-Franco, N., Albaladejo, J., Almagro, M. & Martinez-Mena, M. Beneficial effects of reduced tillage and green manure on soil aggregation and stabilization of organic carbon in a Mediterranean agroecosystem. *Soil Tillage Res* **153**, 66-75 (2015). 52. Garten, C. T., Post, W. M., Hanson, P. J. & Cooper, L. W. Forest Soil Carbon Inventories and Dynamics along an Elevation Gradient in the Southern Appalachian Mountains. *Biogeochemistry* **45**, 115-145 (1999). 53. Giannetta, B., Plaza, C., Vischetti, C., Cotrufo, M. F. & Zaccone, C. Distribution and thermal stability of physically and chemically protected organic matter fractions in soils across different ecosystems. *Biol Fertil Soils* **54**, 671-681 (2018). 54. Gillabel, J., Denef, K., Brenner, J., Merckx, R. & Paustian, K. Carbon Sequestration and Soil Aggregation in Center-Pivot Irrigated and Dryland Cultivated Farming Systems. *Soil Science Society of America Journal* **71**, 1020-1028 (2007). 55. Glaser, B., Balashov, E., Haumaier, L., Guggenberger, G. & Zech, W. Black carbon in density fractions of anthropogenic soils of .pdf. *Org Geochem* **31**, 669-678 (2000). 56. Golchin, A., Oades, J. M., Skjemstad, J. O. & Clarke, P. Structural and dynamic properties of soil organic matter as reflected by 13c natural abundance, pyrolysis mass spectrometry and solid-state 13c nmr spectroscopy in density fractions of an oxisol under forest and pasture. *Australian Journal of Soil Research* **33**, 59-76 (1995). 57. Grandy, A. S. & Robertson, G. P. Initial cultivation of a temperate-region soil immediately accelerates aggregate turnover and CO2 and N2O fluxes. *Glob Chang Biol* **12**, 1507-1520 (2006). 58. Grandy, A. S. & Robertson, G. P. Aggregation and Organic Matter Protection Following Tillage of a Previously Uncultivated Soil. *Soil Science Society of America Journal* **70**, 1398-1406 (2006). 59. Grasset, L., Rovira, P. & Ambles, A. TMAH-preparative thermochemolysis for the characterization of organic matter in densimetric fractions of a Mediterranean forest soil. *J Anal Appl Pyrolysis* **85**, 435-441 (2009). 60. Grunewald, G., Kaiser, K., Jahn, R. & Guggenberger, G. Organic matter stabilization in young calcareous soils as revealed by density fractionation and analysis of lignin-derived constituents. *Org Geochem* **37**, 1573-1589 (2006). 61. Guan, S. *et al.* Soil organic carbon associated with aggregate-size and density fractions in a Mollisol amended with charred and uncharred maize straw. *J Integr Agric* **18**, 1496-1507 (2019). 62. Guggenberger, G. & Zech, W. Soil organic matter composition under primary forest, pasture, and secondary forest succession, Region Huetar Norte, Costa Rica. *For Ecol Manage* **124**, 93-104 (1999). 63. Han, X. *et al.* Understanding soil carbon sequestration following the afforestation of former arable land by physical fractionation. *Catena (Amst)* **150**, 317-327 (2017). 64. Hao, X. *et al.* Redistribution of Different Organic Carbon Fractions in the Soil Profile of a Typical Chinese Mollisol with Land-Use Change. *Commun Soil Sci Plant Anal* **48**, 2369-2380 (2017). 65. Hassink, J. Density fractions of soil macroorganic matter and microbial biomass as predictors of C and N mineralization. *Soil Biol Biochem* **27**, 1099-1108 (1995). 66. Hatton, P. J. *et al.* Transfer of litter-derived N to soil mineral-organic associations: Evidence from decadal 15N tracer experiments. *Org Geochem* **42**, 1489-1501 (2012). 67. Hatton, P. J. *et al.* Assimilation and accumulation of C by fungi and bacteria attached to soil density fractions. *Soil Biol Biochem* **79**, 132-139 (2014). 68. Herrmann, A. M. & Witter, E. Predictors of gross N mineralization and immobilization during decomposition of stabilized organic matter in agricultural soil. *Eur J Soil Sci* **59**, 653-664 (2008). 69. Hicks Pries, C. E., Bird, J. A., Castanha, C., Hatton, P. J. & Torn, M. S. Long term decomposition: the influence of litter type and soil horizon on retention of plant carbon and nitrogen in soils. *Biogeochemistry* **134**, 5-16 (2017). 70. Haung, Q.-R. *et al.* Effects of Long-Term Fertilization on Soil Organic Carbon and Nitrogen in a Highland Agroecosystem. *Pedosphere* **27**, 727-734 (2009). 71. Huang, S., Peng, X., Huang, Q. & Zhang, W. Soil aggregation and organic carbon fractions affected by long-term fertilization in a red soil of subtropical China. *Geoderma* **154**, 364-369 (2010). 72. Huang, S., Rui, W., Peng, X., Huang, Q. & Zhang, W. Organic carbon fractions affected by long-term fertilization in a subtropical paddy soil. *Nutr Cycl Agroecosyst* **86**, 153-160 (2010). 73. Huang, S., Sun, Y. N., Rui, W. Y., Liu, W. R. & Zhang, W. J. Long-Term Effect of No-Tillage on Soil Organic Carbon Fractions in a Continuous Maize Cropping System of Northeast China. *Pedosphere* **20**, 285-292 (2010). 74. Hunziker, M., Caviezel, C. & Kuhn, N. J. Shrub encroachment by green alder on subalpine pastures: Changes in mineral soil organic carbon characteristics. *Catena (Amst)* **157**, 35-46 (2017). 75. Hunziker, M., Arnalds, O. & Kuhn, N. J. Evaluating the carbon sequestration potential of volcanic soils in southern Iceland after birch afforestation. *Soil* **5**, 223-238 (2019). 76. Jiang, H., Han, X., Zou, W., Hao, X. & Zhang, B. Seasonal and long-term changes in soil physical properties and organic carbon fractions as affected by manure application rates in the Mollisol region of Northeast China. *Agric Ecosyst Environ* **268**, 133-143 (2018). 77. Jing, Y. *et al.* Interactive effects of soil warming, throughfall reduction, and root exclusion on soil microbial community and residues in warm-temperate oak forests. *Applied Soil Ecology* **142**, 52-58 (2019). 78. John, B., Yamashita, T., Ludwig, B. & Flessa, H. Storage of organic carbon in aggregate and density fractions of silty soils under different types of land use. *Geoderma* **128**, 63-79 (2005). 79. Johnsen, K. H., Samuelson, L. J., Sanchez, F. G. & Eaton, R. J. Soil carbon and nitrogen content and stabilization in mid-rotation, intensively managed sweetgum and loblolly pine stands. *For Ecol Manage* **302**, 144-153 (2013). 80. Jones, E. & Singh, B. Organo-mineral interactions in contrasting soils under natural vegetation. *Front Environ Sci* **2**, 1-15 (2014). 81. Kader, M. A., Sleutel, S., DHaene, K. & De Neve, S. Limited influence of tillage management on organic matter fractions in the surface layer of silt soils under cerealroot crop rotations. *Australian Journal of Soil Research* **48**, 16-26 (2010). 82. Kalinina, O. *et al.* Self-restoration of post-agrogenic chernozems of Russia: Soil development, carbon stocks, and dynamics of carbon pools. *Geoderma* **162**, 196-206 (2011). 83. Kalinina, O. *et al.* Self-restoration of post-agrogenic Albeluvisols: Soil development, carbon stocks and dynamics of carbon pools. *Geoderma* **207-208**, 221-233 (2013). 84. Kalinina, O. *et al.* Self-restoration of post-agrogenic soils of Calcisol-Solonetz complex: Soil development, carbon stock dynamics of carbon pools. *Geoderma* **237**, 117-128 (2015). 85. Kalinina, O. *et al.* Post-agricultural restoration: Implications for dynamics of soil organic matter pools. *Catena (Amst)* **181**, 104096 (2019). 86. Karbozova-Saljnikov, E., Funakawa, S., Akhmetov, K. & Kosaki, T. Soil organic matter status of Chernozem soil in North Kazakhstan: Effects of summer fallow. *Soil Biol Biochem* **36**, 1373-1381 (2004). 87. Kim, S. Y., Pramanik, P., Gutierrez, J., Hwang, H. Y. & Kim, P. J. Comparison of methane emission characteristics in air-dried and composted cattle manure amended paddy soil during rice cultivation. *Agric Ecosyst Environ* **197**, 60-67 (2014). 88. Knowles, M. E., Ross, D. S. & Gorres, J. H. Effect of the endogeic earthworm Aporrectodea tuberculata on aggregation and carbon redistribution in uninvaded forest soil columns. *Soil Biol Biochem* **100**, 192-200 (2016). 89. Koarashi, J., Nishimura, S., Atarashi-Andoh, M., Muto, K. & Matsunaga, T. A new perspective on the 137 Cs retention mechanism in surface soils during the early stage after the Fukushima nuclear accident. *Sci Rep* **9**, 1-10 (2019). 90. Kogel-Knabner, I. & Ziegler, F. Carbon distribution in different compartments of forest soils. *Geoderma* **56**, 515-525 (1993). 91. Kogut, B. M., Artemyeva, Z. S., Kirillova, N. P., Yashin, M. A. & Soshnikova, E. I. Organic Matter of the Air-Dry and Water-Stable Macroaggregates (2-1 mm) of Haplic Chernozem in Contrasting Variants of Land Use. *Eurasian Soil Science* **52**, 141-149 (2019). 92. Kolbl, A. *et al.* Grazing changes topography-controlled topsoil properties and their interaction on different spatial scales in a semi-arid grassland of Inner Mongolia, P.R. China. *Plant Soil* **340**, 35-58 (2011). 93. Kolbl, A., Marschner, P., Fitzpatrick, R., Mosley, L. & Kogel-Knabner, I. Linking organic matter composition in acid sulfate soils to pH recovery after re-submerging. *Geoderma* **308**, 350-362 (2017). 94. Kondo, M., Uchida, M. & Shibata, Y. Radiocarbon-based residence time estimates of soil organic carbon in a temperate forest: Case study for the density fractionation for Japanese volcanic ash soil. *Nucl
Land use maps of Upper reaches of Changhua Watershed, Hainan			To protect biodiversity and improve environmental conditions, China has invested billions of dollars in reforestation and payments for ecosystem service programs. Here, we examine the Sloping Land Conversion Program, the largest such programin the world and found that after 13 years of implementation at our study site, it has had negative impacts on natural tropical forests. GIS and remote sensing techniques revealed that both natural forests and natural shrub and grasslands were replaced by non-native monocultural plantations on Hainan Island, China, a key tropical biodiversity hotspot. Under current Chinese policy, these plantations are classified simply as forests, with the assumption that they are equivalent to natural forests. This lack of a distinction in forest quality has led to substantial deforestation and plantation expansion, including encroachment into protected areas on Hainan. Additional social and economic drivers of these changes were identified by examining the participants in this program and their actions. Without a new ecologically based definition of forests and new goals for reforestation, such programs designed to improve ecosystem services, and fores t quality may actually threaten remaining natural forests and other vegetation types in Hainan and in other areas of mainland China.
Land use policies and deforestation in Brazilian tropical dry forests between 2000 and 2015			Tropical Dry Forests (TDFs) have been broadly converted into pastures and crops, with direct consequences to biodiversity, ecosystem services, and social welfare. Such land use and cover changes (LUCC) usually are strongly influenced by government environmental and development policies. The present study aimed at analyzing LUCC in Brazilian TDFs between 2000 and 2015, using the north of Minas Gerais state (128 000 km2) as a case study. We evaluated the potential biophysical and social-economic drivers of TDF loss, natural regeneration and net area change at the county level. Further, we determined the effects of these LUCC variables on socioeconomic indicators. We identified a considerable change in TDF cover, expressed as 9825 km2 of deforestation and 6523 km2 of regeneration, which resulted in a net loss of 3302 km2. The annual rate of TDF cover change was -1.2%, which is extremely high for a vegetation type that is protected as part of the Atlantic Rain Forest biome since 1993. TDF deforestation was directly affected by county area and by the increase in cattle density, and inversely affected by terrain declivity, indicating that land conversion is mostly driven by cattle ranching in flat regions. TDF regeneration was directly affected by county area and inversely affected by the increase in population density and terrain declivity. LUCC variables did not affect welfare indicators, undermining claims from rural sectors that TDF protection would cause a socioeconomic burden for northern Minas Gerais. Our results highlight the importance of naturally regenerating secondary forests to the maintenance of ecosystem integrity and its services, which are frequently neglected in conservation strategies. Hegemonic macroeconomic policies affecting TDFs have been deeply rooted in deforestation for commodities production, and need urgent review because they cause long-term environmental impacts without evidence of welfare gains. © 2018 The Author(s). Published by IOP Publishing Ltd.
Land Use, Conservation, Forestry, and Agriculture in Puerto Rico			Global food security concerns emphasize the need for sustainable agriculture and local food production. In Puerto Rico, over 80 percent of food is imported, and local production levels have reached historical lows. Efforts to increase local food production are driven by government agencies, non-government organizations, farmers, and consumers. Integration of geographic information helps plan and balance the reinvention and invigoration of the agriculture sector while maintaining ecological services. We used simple criteria that included currently protected lands and the importance of slope and forest cover in protection from erosion to identify land well-suited for conservation, agriculture and forestry in Puerto Rico. Within these categories we assessed U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) farmland soils classification data, lands currently in agricultural production, current land cover, and current land use planning designations. We found that developed lands occupy 13 percent of Puerto Rico; lands well-suited for conservation that include protected areas, riparian buffers, lands surrounding reservoirs, wetlands, beaches, and salt flats, occupy 45 percent of Puerto Rico; potential working lands encompass 42 percent of Puerto Rico. These include lands well-suited for mechanized and non-mechanized agriculture, such as row and specialty crops, livestock, dairy, hay, pasture, and fruits, which occupy 23 percent of Puerto Rico; and areas suitable for forestry production, such as timber and non-timber products, agroforestry, and shade coffee, which occupy 19 percent of Puerto Rico.
Land use/land cover change-induced greenhouse gas emissions in the global biosphere reserve of tropical Afromontane forest			Land use/land cover (LULC) change is a prominent problem and source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in tropical forests. However, little to no evidence is available on the contribution of biosphere reserves to reversing LULC change trajectories and reducing GHG emissions, particularly in tropical Afromontane forests. The objective of this study was to quantify the LULC changeinduced GHG emissions from 1999 to 2020 in tropical Afromontane forests that were designated the Sheka Forest Biosphere Reserve (SFBR) by the MAB program of UNESCO in 2012. The IPCC Tier 1 approach was used to estimate GHG emissions. The results showed that the aggregated GHG emissions were 0.4 tonnes of CO2e ha � 1 yr � 1 in 1999, while they climbed to 1.46 tonnes of CO2e ha-1 yr � 1 in 2010 and 5.2 tonnes of CO2e ha � 1 yr � 1 in 2020. Deforestation and forest degradation, the expansion of cropland, the development of tea plantations, settlement expansion, and the forest degradation of wetlands contributed to increased emissions by 40.4%, 32.2%, 17.6%, 8.3%, and 1.5% in 2010 and by 60%, 20%, 5.2%, 14.4%, and 0.33% in 2020, respectively. As a result, compared to 9.03 tonnes of CO2e ha � 1 yr � 1 in 1999, the overall GHG mitigation potential of the SFBR decreased by 12.6% in 2010 and 40.2% in 2020. The findings suggest that the SFBR's capacity to reduce GHG emissions was neither enhanced nor maintained by its designation as a forest biosphere reserve. Therefore, regularly monitoring the effectiveness of interventions and reconciling conflicting land use priorities would be essential for maintaining Afromontane forests and reducing GHG emissions. Promoting tree planting, afforestation, reforestation, and restoring degraded forest landscapes would play a vital role to minimize GHG emissions and enhance the mitigation potential of the ecosystem.
Land-cover change and carbon sequestration under diverse land use systems in Guatemala			0
Landscape and crop management strategies to conserve pollination services and increase yields in tropical coffee farms			Agricultural intensification has reduced biodiversity and leads to fundamental trade-offs between food production and conservation. Conventional approaches to food production are thus no longer suitable. In the present work, we discuss the influence of local management and landscape context variables on coffee yield and crop pollination services. We used 34 coffee farms (15 with low impact and 19 with high impact management) located in Chapada Diamantina, Bahia, Brazil. We analysed the floral visitor patterns and yield and their relationships with landscape and management context over two years. Using a GLM analysis, we found that farms close to natural areas and with low management intensity have higher potential to reduce yield gaps and maintain biodiversity. Biodiversity in turn (represented here by pollinators) improved yields by 30%, and yields were lower on larger, intensively managed farms. Low impact farms, on the other hand, may depend not only on diversified landscapes but also on proper investment in sustainable production practices. Combining landscape and management strategies should thus generate synergies between multiple ecosystem services, such as pollination, yield, farm profitability, and others not analysed here, such as natural enemies and nutrient cycling, among others. © 2017 Elsevier B.V.
Landscape conservation as a strategy for recovering biodiversity: Lessons from a long-term program of pasture restoration in the southern Atlantic Forest			Although ecological restoration has entered the global agenda to reverse different anthropogenic disturbances, we still know little about how this solution interacts with other conservation strategies, to avoid the progressive loss of species and ecosystem services. Here we evaluate one of the pioneering restoration programs in the southern Brazilian Atlantic Forest, where the combination of conservation and restoration efforts has been carried out for 20 years. Specifically, we tested how landscape characteristics, restoration strategies and environmental characteristics affect the results of the restoration of pastures. We established 65 circular plots (total 4.0 ha) along restoration areas (3-10 years) and sampled trees and shrubs composing the canopy (DBH >= 5 cm) and understorey (DBH < 5 cm, height > 1.3 m). We analysed the landscape metrics (proportion of old-growth forests in 200, 500 and 1,000 m buffers around each plot; and area and distance of the nearest-neighbouring old-growth forests). We explored the multiple effects of landscape, restoration strategy (reforestation, natural regeneration) and environmental variables (soil, pasture grass types) on the species composition and multiple diversity metrics of restoration areas. The species composition was very similar among restoration ages and restoration strategies. We found positive and strong effects of old-growth forest (200 m buffer) proportion on the species richness and Shannon diversity (canopy and understorey), above-ground biomass (canopy) and functional diversity (understorey) of restoration areas. The restoration strategies affected forest structure, and, in general, the reforestation strategy increased above-ground biomass, Shannon, functional and phylogenetic diversities (in canopy), and percentage of endemic species and biomass (understorey), when compared to natural regeneration. The 20-year experience in the southern Atlantic Forest showed that programs focused on landscape conservation associated with a mixture of restoration strategies (i.e. natural regeneration in larger areas and active restoration in more disturbed sites), can be an efficient strategy to ensure biodiversity and ecosystem services in tropical landscapes. Synthesis and applications. To manage degraded tropical lands and achieve global targets for biodiversity and ecosystem services, it is necessary to first ensure the conservation of natural remnants and then use multiple restoration strategies in less resilient areas.
Landscape context influences local management effects on birds and bats in Amazonian cacao agroforestry systems			Agricultural expansion and intensification are major drivers of biodiversity loss, particularly in tropical regions. Cacao agroforestry systems can both support and benefit from high levels of biodiversity via associated pest control services from birds and bats, although their potential to do so likely depends on local management and the landscape context. However, how interactions between local-scale agroforestry practices and landscape-scale habitat features shape bird and bat communities in these systems remains poorly understood. We studied birds and bats in 28 smallholder cacao agroforests in the Peruvian Amazon, comparing two regions with contrasting levels of agricultural intensification. We analyzed how local tree diversity and canopy cover interact with surrounding landscape tree cover and regional agricultural intensity to influence species richness and community composition. Results showed that local tree diversity increased bird richness, but only in the intensively farmed region. Local canopy cover had contrasting effects: it negatively impacted bird richness, abundance, and bat activity in more open landscapes (<55 % tree cover), but positively in forested landscapes (>80 % tree cover). Notably, these interactions were significant when considering the landscape tree cover at small spatial scales (250 m), but not at 500 m or 1000 m. Our findings highlight the importance of adapting cacao agroforestry management to the surrounding landscape. Retaining high local canopy cover supports flying vertebrate diversity and associated ecosystem services in forested landscapes, while restoration of landscape tree cover could enhance bird and bat populations that may contribute to pest suppression services in deforested areas.
Landscape Context Mediates Avian Habitat Choice in Tropical Forest Restoration			Birds both promote and prosper from forest restoration. The ecosystem functions birds perform can increase the pace of forest regeneration and, correspondingly, increase the available habitat for birds and other forest-dependent species. The aim of this study was to learn how tropical forest restoration treatments interact with landscape tree cover to affect the structure and composition of a diverse bird assemblage. We sampled bird communities over two years in 13 restoration sites and two old-growth forests in southern Costa Rica. Restoration sites were established on degraded farmlands in a variety of landscape contexts, and each included a 0.25-ha plantation, island treatment (trees planted in patches), and unplanted control. We analyzed four attributes of bird communities including frugivore abundance, nectarivore abundance, migrant insectivore richness, and compositional similarity of bird communities in restoration plots to bird communities in old-growth forests. All four bird community variables were greater in plantations and/or islands than in control treatments. Frugivore and nectarivore abundance decreased with increasing tree cover in the landscape surrounding restoration plots, whereas compositional similarity to old-growth forests was greatest in plantations embedded in landscapes with high tree cover. Migrant insectivore richness was unaffected by landscape tree cover. Our results agree with previous studies showing that increasing levels of investment in active restoration are positively related to bird richness and abundance, but differences in the effects of landscape tree cover on foraging guilds and community composition suggest that trade-offs between biodiversity conservation and bird-mediated ecosystem functioning may be important for prioritizing restoration sites.
Landscape structure shapes the diversity of beneficial insects in coffee producing landscapes			The expansion of monocultures and the overuse of agrochemicals have resulted in the loss of beneficial insects and disruption of ecosystem services such as pollination and biological control in agricultural landscapes. Bees, wasps and flower flies were our model groups to investigate how landscape structure attributes affect alpha and beta diversity of different beneficial insect groups in Brazilian landscapes containing coffee crops. Species richness and abundance of wasps, and bee richness were positively correlated with forest cover at multiple spatial extents. Bee abundance, and species richness and abundance of flower flies did not respond to any landscape predictor. The community composition of wasps and bees in landscapes with low forest cover was composed of subsets of the communities located in forested landscapes, leading to species loss in structurally impoverished landscapes. High variations in landscape diversity and edge density between landscapes resulted in flower fly species replacement suggesting that pairs of landscapes with high and low diversity of habitat types and edge density harbor different species. Such results indicate that initiatives for the conservation of beneficial insects in the Atlantic Forest biodiversity hotspot must focus on forest conservation and restoration, because high levels of forest loss can result in the loss of wasp and bee species with potential negative consequences for the provision of pollination and pest control services in agroecosystems. Our findings can aid conservationists and policy makers to define priority actions for biodiversity conservation as well as the selection of appropriate spatial scales in landscape planning and management.
Landscapes on the Move: Land-Use Change History in a Mexican Agroforest Frontier			An unprecedented magnitude of land-use/land-cover changes have led to a rapid conversion of tropical forested landscapes to different land-uses. This comparative study evaluates and reconstructs the recent history (1976-2019) of land-use change and the associated land-use types that have emerged over time in two neighboring rural villages in Southern Mexico. Qualitative ethnographic and oral histories research and quantitative land-use change analysis using remote sensing were used. Findings indicate that several interacting historical social-ecological drivers (e.g., colonization program, soil quality, land conflicts with indigenous people, land-tenure, availability of surrounding land where to expand, Guatemala's civil war, several agricultural development and conservation programs, regional wildfire, Zapatista uprising, and highway construction) have influenced each village's own unique land-use change history and landscape composition: the smaller village is characterized by a dominating pasture landscape with some scattered agricultural and forest areas, while the larger village has large conserved forest areas intermixed with pastures, agriculture, oil palm and rubber plantations. The differential histories of each village have also had livelihood diversification implications. It is suggested that landscape history research in tropical agroforest frontiers is necessary because it can inform land-use policies and forest conservation strategies that are compatible with local livelihoods and conservation goals.
Land-sea interactions at the east coast of Hainan Island, South China Sea: A synthesis			The structure and function of coastal ecosystems is affected by land-based human activities, including changes in water, sediment and pollutant input, as well as land reclamation in coastal areas. Many coastal areas can be considered over-stressed systems as a whole, the ecosystem services of which are strongly impaired. This is particularly important in tropical regions, where the coastal zone is under the influence of a strong climate variability including monsoons and frequent extreme weather events, such as typhoons. During the past decades the continuous development of Hainan's coastal zone and its hinterland, in combination with episodic natural events (e.g., typhoons), caused environmental changes in its coastal ecosystems. However, little is known on the consequences of environmental changes for the biogeochemistry and ecology and, hence, the natural resources of the Hainan coastal ecosystems. The Sino-German inter-disciplinary LANCET (land-sea interactions along coastal ecosystems of tropical China: Hainan) project was designed to address these issues on a local to regional scale and at the same time, to contribute to the global data base in which this type of information from tropical regions is still under-represented. The results obtained from LANCET have been delivered to the local government for an adaptive management at the ecosystem level, and the knowledge is believed to be relevant to other studies of tropical and coastal regions. (C) 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Landslides in the Andes: Forests can provide cost-effective landslide regulation services			Landslides cause billions of dollars (USD) in damage and hundreds of life losses every year in mountainous areas globally, and these effects are exacerbated by climate change and increased human occupation of vulnerable areas. In many mountainous regions forests deliver slope stability, helping to prevent landslides. However, forests are progressively converted into other land uses in many mountainous regions. In this study, we focus on the Colombian Andes, the most populated and deadly landslide-prone part of Colombia. We aim to determine the difference in frequency of landslides from forested and non-forested areas, and subsequently, quantify the potential costs and benefits of protecting forest and of restoring forest from agricultural lands. To that end, we combine economic data with geographical information related to public and private infrastructure, land use, and landslide susceptibility. Analyzing the national landslide database of Colombia, we established that landslides are almost six times (581%) more likely to occur on non-forested lands than on forested lands. From an economic perspective, by preventing landslides, forests provide a net benefit through the provision of slope stability services. Our most conservative estimates indicate it is 16 times more cost-effective to promote forest corridors, via conservation or reforestation along roads by paying farmers and cattle herders their opportunity costs, than for the public to pay the expected value of landslide damage. Our analysis provides strong evidence that vegetated hillsides can provide a cost-effective ecosystem service approach to mitigate economic losses due to landslides in one of the world's most landslide prone areas. (C) 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Land-use change and carbon flux between 1970s and 1990s in central highlands of Chiapas, Mexico			We present results of a study in an intensively impacted and highly fragmented landscape in which we apply field-measured carbon (C) density values to land-use/land-cover (LU/LC) statistics to estimate the flux of C between terrestrial ecosystems and the atmosphere from the 1970s and 1990s. Carbon densities were assigned to common LU/LC classes on vegetation maps produced by Mexican governmental organizations and, by differencing areas and C pools, net C flux was calculated from the central highlands of Chiapas, Mexico, during a 16-year period. The total area of closed forests was reduced by half while degraded and fragmented forests expanded 56% and cultivated land and pasture areas increased by 8% and 30%, respectively. Total mean C densities ranged from a high of 504 tons C/ha in the oak and evergreen cloud forests class to a low of 147 tons C/ha in the pasture class. The differences in total C densities among the various LU/LC classes were due to changes in biomass while soil organic matter C remained similar. We estimate that a total of 19.99 x 10(6) tons C were released to the atmosphere during the period of time covered by our study, equal to approximately 34% of the 1975 vegetation C pool. The Chiapas highlands, while comprising just 0.3% of Mexico's surface area, contributed 3% of the net national C emissions.
Land-use change impact on time-averaged carbon balances: Rubber expansion and reforestation in a biosphere reserve, South-West China			The expansion of rubber plantations (Hevea brasiliensis mall. Arg) is a major driving force for deforestation and forest degradation in mountainous South-East Asia. In China, the unclear distinction between natural forest and commercial plantations has permitted the expansion of rubber into protected forest areas of nature reserves. However, the impact of such land-use changes on landscape carbon balances within nature reserves has rarely been investigated. We selected the Naban River Watershed National Nature Reserve (NRWNNR) in Xishuangbanna, China as a case study area and evaluated carbon stocks using the Rapid Carbon Stock Appraisal (RaCSA) method based on tree, plot, land use and landscape assessments, integrating field sampling with remote sensing and GIS technology. Six dominant land use systems were surveyed: lowland forest (<800 m above sea level), highland forest (>800 m a.s.l.), lowland rubber, highland rubber, bush and grassland and agricultural crops. Land use type-specific time-averaged carbon stocks (C-ta) were calculated based on total above ground biomass (AGB). Soil organic carbon (surface 30 cm) and below ground biomass were measured, but not included in C-ta calculations due to large uncertainties unrelated to land use change. The C-ta of lowland and highland rubber plantations were 58 Mg C ha(-1) and 28 Mg C ha(-1) respectively, showing larger carbon sequestration potential than nonforest land use types (agricultural crops, bush and grassland) but much lower than C-ta of natural forest (156-185 Mg C ha(-1)). Sensitivity analysis of C-ta variability showed that forest C stocks have the largest influence on landscape carbon balance. Time series analysis of land-use and land-cover maps (1989, 2007, 2012) demonstrated that during 23 years, the whole landscape of the nature reserve (26,574 ha) gained 0.644 Tg C. Despite rubber expansion, biosphere zoning strategy (i.e. experimental, buffer, core zones), and reforestation activities conducted in NRWNNR were able to enhance the carbon stocks. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Land-use Change Impacts on Soil Processes in Tropical and Savannah Ecosystems: An Introduction			0
Land-use change shifts and magnifies seasonal variations of the decomposer system in lowland tropical landscapes			Deforestation and agricultural expansion in the tropics affect local and regional climatic conditions, leading to synergistic negative impacts on land ecosystems. Climatic changes manifest in increased inter- and intraseasonal variations and frequency of extreme climatic events (i.e., droughts and floods), which have evident consequences for aboveground biodiversity. However, until today, there have been no studies on how land use affects seasonal variations below ground in tropical ecosystems, which may be more buffered against climatic variation. Here, we analyzed seasonal variations in soil parameters, basal respiration, microbial communities, and abundances of soil invertebrates along with microclimatic conditions in rainforest and monocultures of oil palm and rubber in Sumatra, Indonesia. About 75% (20 out of 26) of the measured litter and soil, microbial, and animal parameters varied with season, with seasonal changes in 50% of the parameters depending on land use. Land use affected seasonal variations in microbial indicators associated with carbon availability and cycling rate. The magnitude of seasonal variations in microbial parameters in the soil of monocultures was almost 40% higher than in the soil of rainforest. Measured parameters were associated with short-term climatic conditions (3-day period air humidity) in plantations, but not in rainforest, confirming a reduced soil buffering ability in plantations. Overall, our findings suggest that land use temporally shifts and increases the magnitude of seasonal variations of the belowground ecosystem compartment, with microbial communities responding most strongly. The increased seasonal variations in soil biota in plantations likely translate into more pronounced fluctuations in essential ecosystem functions such as nutrient cycling and carbon sequestration, and these ramifications ultimately may compromise the stability of tropical ecosystems in the long term. As the observed seasonal dynamics is likely to increase with both local and global climate change, these shifts need closer attention for the long-term sustainable management of plantation systems in the tropics.
Land-use dynamics influence estimates of carbon sequestration potential in tropical second-growth forest			Many countries have made major commitments to carbon sequestration through reforestation under the Paris Climate Agreement, and recent studies have illustrated the potential for large amounts of carbon sequestration in tropical second-growth forests. However, carbon gains in second-growth forests are threatened by non-permanence, i.e. release of carbon into the atmosphere from clearing or disturbance. The benefits of second-growth forests require long-term persistence on the landscape, but estimates of carbon potential rarely consider the spatio-temporal landscape dynamics of second-growth forests. In this study, we used remotely sensed imagery from a landscape in the Peruvian Amazon to examine patterns of second-growth forest regrowth and permanence over 28 years (1985-2013). By 2013, 44% of all forest cover in the study area was second growth and more than 50% of second-growth forest pixels were less than 5 years old. We modeled probabilities of forest regrowth and clearing as a function of landscape factors. The amount of neighboring forest and variables related to pixel position (i.e. distance to edge) were important for predicting both clearing and regrowth. Forest age was the strongest predictor of clearing probability and suggests a threshold response of clearing probability to age. Finally, we simulated future trajectories of carbon sequestration using the parameters from our models. We compared this with the amount of biomass that would accumulate under the assumption of second-growth permanence. Estimates differed by 900 000 tonnes, equivalent to over 80% of Peru's commitment to carbon sequestration through 'community reforestation' under the Paris Agreement. Though the study area has more than 40 000 hectares of second-growth forest, only a small proportion is likely to accumulate significant carbon. Instead, cycles between forest and non-forest are common. Our results illustrate the importance of considering landscape dynamics when assessing the carbon sequestration potential of second-growth forests. © 2017 IOP Publishing Ltd.
Land-use protection for climate change mitigation			Land-use change, mainly the conversion of tropical forests to agricultural land, is a massive source of carbon emissions and contributes substantially to global warming(1-3). Therefore, mechanisms that aim to reduce carbon emissions from deforestation are widely discussed, A central challenge is the avoidance of international carbon leakage if forest conservation is not implemented globally'', Here, We show that forest conservation schemes, even if implemented globally, could lead to another type of carbon leakage by driving cropland expansion in non-forested areas that are not subject to forest conservation schemes (non-forest leakage). These areas have a smaller,. but still considerable potential to store carbon(5,6). We show that a global forest policy could reduce carbon emissions by 77 Gt CO2, but would still allow for decreases in carbon stocks of non-forest land by 96 Gt CO2, until 2100 due to non-forest leakage effects. Furthermore; abandonment of agricultural hand and associated carbon uptake through vegetation regrowth is hampered. Effective mitigation measures thus require financing structures and conservation investments that cover the full range of carbon-rich ecosystems. However, our analysis indicates that greater agricultural productivity increases would be needed to compensate for such restrictions on agricultural expansion.
Land-use trade-offs between tree biodiversity and crop production in the Atlantic Forest			Trade-offs in ecosystem services (ES) have received increasing attention because provisioning services often come at the expense of biodiversity loss. When land-use patterns are not maximally efficient relative to productivity, provisioning services, such as crop production, can often be increased without losing biodiversity. The Atlantic Forest (AF) encompasses dense, mixed, and seasonal forests and has high levels of endemism and anthropogenic threat. We examined trade-offs between biodiversity and crop production in the AF to provide insights into land-use management decisions. We developed a biodiversity metric that combines information on tree species richness, evolutionary distinctiveness, and rarity at the local level. We examined the extent to which the nature of ES trade-offs differ among the 3 forest types. We assessed how annual deforestation rates and land management practices affect biodiversity and agricultural revenues. Finally, we tested whether it is possible to achieve the same total regional revenue without reducing biodiversity by improving local management practices. The 3 forest types had similar patterns in ES trade-offs, although within mixed forest patterns differed. Biodiversity appeared to be more sensitive to land-use change than crop revenues. Certain crops yielded up to 10 times higher values in some sites. Enhanced crop productivity may increase revenues without reducing biodiversity. Our results showed that to enhance human well-being without further conversion of AF, maximizing crop productivity is needed . Increasing efficiency of management outcomes by maintaining higher biodiversity and increasing provisioning services depends on knowledge of forest type, the comparative advantage of planting crops in the best places, and preserving species in a balanced manner across forests.Compensaciones de Uso de Suelo entre la Biodiversidad de arboles y la Produccion Agricola en el Bosque Atlantico Las compensaciones en los servicios ecosistemicos (SE) han recibido mayor atencion porque los servicios de aprovisionamiento a menudo conllevan la perdida de biodiversidad. Cuando los patrones de uso de suelo no son maximamente eficientes en relacion con la productividad, los servicios de aprovisionamiento, como la produccion agricola, a menudo pueden ser incrementados sin perder biodiversidad. El Bosque Atlantico (BA) comprende bosques densos, mixtos y estacionales y tiene altos niveles de endemismo y amenazas antropogenicas. Examinamos las compensaciones entre biodiversidad y produccion agricola en el BA para proporcionar ideas para las decisiones de manejo de uso de suelo. Desarrollamos una medida de la biodiversidad que combina informacion sobre la riqueza de arboles, la singularidad evolutiva y rareza a nivel local Examinamos el grado en que la naturaleza de las compensaciones de los SE difiere entre los 3 tipos de bosque. Evaluamos como afectan las tasas anuales de deforestacion y las practicas de manejo a la biodiversidad y a las ganancias agricolas. Finalmente, probamos si es posible obtener la misma ganancia regional total son reducir la biodiversidad mediante la mejora de las practicas de manejo locales. Los 3 tipos de bosque tuvieron patrones similares de compensaciones de SE, aunque los patrones difirieron en los bosques mixtos. La biodiversidad parecio ser mas sensible al cambio de uso de suelo que a las ganancias agricolas. Ciertos cultivos proporcionaron valores 10 veces mas altos en algunos sitios. El incremento de la produccion agricola puede incrementar las ganancias sin reducir la biodiversidad. Nuestros resultados muestran que para incrementar el bienestar humano sin mayor alteracion del BA se requiere maximizar la produccion agricola. El incremento de la eficiencia del manejo al mantener mas biodiversidad y aumentar los servicios de aprovisionamiento depende del conocimiento del tipo de bosque, de la ventaja comparativa de sembrar cultivos en los mejores sitios y la preservacion de especies de manera equilibrada en los bosques.Resumen???? ???????????????????, ????????????????????????????????????????????, ????????????????, ????????????????????????????????, ????, ????????????????????????????????????????????, ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????, ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????, ???????????????????, ????????????????????????????????????????????, ????????????????????, ???????????????????????, ????????????????????????, ??????????????????????????, ??????????????????????????, ??????????????????????????????????????????????, ???????????????????????, ???????????????????????: ???; ??: ???? Article impact statement: Human well-being can be enhanced without further conversion of Atlantic Forest by improving agricultural practice.
Large variations in afforestation-related climate cooling and warming effects across short distances			The time for the climatic benefits of afforestation via carbon-sequestration to offset the warming effects of reduced albedo and longwave radiation emission varies greatly across short distances, according to a study of paired forested and non-forested ecosystems along an aridity gradient.Climate-related benefits of afforestation depend on the balance of the often-contrasting effects of biogeochemical (carbon sequestration) and biogeophysical (radiation balance) effects. These effects are known to vary at the continental scale (e.g., from boreal to tropical regions). Here, we show in a four-year study that the biogeochemical vs. biogeophysical balance in paired forested and non-forested ecosystems across short distances (approximately 200 Km) and steep aridity gradient (aridity index 0.64 to 0.18) can change dramatically. The required time for the forestation cooling effects via carbon sequestration, to surpass warming effects associated with the forests' reduced albedo and suppressed longwave radiation, decreased from 213 years in the driest sites to 73 years in the intermediate and 43 years in the wettest sites. Climate-related benefits of forestation, previously considered at large-spatial scales, should be considered at high-spatial resolutions in climate-change mitigation programs aimed at taking advantage of the vast non-forested dry regions.
Large-scale ecological restoration of high-diversity tropical forests in SE Brazil			The complex interactions among endangered ecosystems, landowners' interests, and different models of land tenure and use, constitute an important series of challenges for those seeking to maintain and restore biodiversity and augment the flow of ecosystem services. Over the past 10 years, we have developed a data-based approach to address these challenges and to achieve medium and large-scale ecological restoration of riparian areas on private lands in the state of Sao Paulo, southeastern Brazil. Given varying motivations for ecological restoration, the location of riparian areas within landholdings, environmental zoning of different riparian areas, and best-practice restoration methods were developed for each situation. A total of 32 ongoing projects, covering 527,982 ha, were evaluated in large sugarcane farms and small mixed farms, and six different restoration techniques have been developed to help upscale the effort. Small mixed farms had higher portions of land requiring protection as riparian areas (13.3%), and lower forest cover of riparian areas (18.3%), than large sugarcane farms (10.0% and 36.9%, respectively for riparian areas and forest cover values). In both types of farms, forest fragments required some degree of restoration. Historical anthropogenic degradation has compromised forest ecosystem structure and functioning, despite their high-diversity of native tree and shrub species. Notably, land use patterns in riparian areas differed markedly. Large sugarcane farms had higher portions of riparian areas occupied by highly mechanized agriculture, abandoned fields, and anthropogenic wet fields created by siltation in water courses. In contrast, in small mixed crop farms, low or non-mechanized agriculture and pasturelands were predominant. Despite these differences, plantations of native tree species covering the entire area was by far the main restoration method needed both by large sugarcane farms (76.0%) and small mixed farms (92.4%), in view of the low resilience of target sites, reduced forest cover, and high fragmentation, all of which limit the potential for autogenic restoration. We propose that plantations should be carried out with a high-diversity of native species in order to create biologically viable restored forests, and to assist long-term biodiversity persistence at the landscape scale. Finally, we propose strategies to integrate the political, socio-economic and methodological aspects needed to upscale restoration efforts in tropical forest regions throughout Latin America and elsewhere. (C) 2010 Elsevier BA/. All rights reserved.
Leaf area index and root biomass variation at different secondary forest ages in the eastern Amazon			In the Amazon region, small farmers use secondary forests as the only source of nutrients for agriculture, performing slash and burn in a rotation system. Secondary forests cover a large area of these landscapes and are crucial to maintaining soil fertility. The main objectives of this study were to gain insight into the seasonal variations in leaf area index (LAI) and root biomass growth, and to improve the accuracy of carbon sequestration estimates in early successional tropical secondary forests following shifting cultivation. Secondary vegetation of three different ages (1 year, 6 years and 10 years after shifting cultivation) were monitored monthly with a LI-COR Plant Canopy Analyzer, and root growth was seasonally measured down to a depth of 400 cm using ingrowth bags. The youngest secondary forests showed strong LAI seasonality, and the seasonality in LAI decreased in the oldest forest. The roots grew throughout the year even though the growth rates were higher during the dry season, which supported a dense biomass of leaves over the year. This study clearly indicates that information on deep rooting and seasonality of leaf area in secondary tropical forests is essential for understanding ecosystem ecophysiology, as well as community ecology and biogeochemical cycles. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Leaf decomposition depends on nutritional trait values but increasing trait variability does not always increase decomposition efficiency			The mass ratio (MRH) and niche complementarity (NCH) hypotheses can explain how leaf trait composition drives decomposition, an ecosystem process linked to nutrient cycling and carbon sequestration. However, few studies have used an experiment designed to disentangle the role of the mechanisms proposed by these hypotheses. This is especially true regarding the role of leaf functional traits for decomposition rates in tropical ecosystems. Here, we quantified the biomass loss of 120 leaf mixtures assembled according to four quasi-orthogonal combinations of different mean trait values (community-weighted mean; CWM) and trait variability (functional diversity; FD) of three leaf functional traits (leaf nitrogen and leaf magnesium concentrations and specific leaf area). We found that CWM values of leaf nutritional traits were positively related to greater biomass loss. This supports the hypothesis that the mean trait values of leaf mixtures can drive biomass loss (MRH). However, contrary to NCH expectations, in some circumstances, increasing trait variability of leaf nutritional traits decreased biomass loss. Our results reinforce some previous evidence that, together, CWM and FD can explain leaf decomposition and highlight that the mean resource quality of leaf mixtures is a driver of biomass loss. Also, as previously reported for temperate ecosystems, trait variability does not always increase leaf decomposition in tropical ecosystems. Therefore, there is a need to consider simultaneously both MRH and NCH in future studies, using an appropriate design, keeping in mind that both mechanisms will always be present in any species mixture or combination.
Leaf litter decomposition and diversity of arthropod decomposers in tropical Muyong forest in Banaue, Philippines			The Muyong forest, an indigenous secondary forest in Banaue, Ifugao, Philippines, plays a crucial role in the Muyong–Payoh system, a continuum of secondary forest and rice terrace, of the Banaue rice terraces by providing water and nutrients to the rice plants in the Payoh terraces. In recent decades, the planting of introduced tree species in the Muyong forest has threatened the sustainable provision of ecosystem services such as water balance and nutrient cycling. To further understand nutrient cycling in the Muyong–Payoh systems, this study was conducted in Poitan, Banaue, Ifugao to gather preliminary baseline data on floral diversity, leaf litterfall rate, leaf litter decomposition rate, and diversity and succession of arthropods in decomposing leaf litter in a Muyong forest. Vegetation analysis was done by identifying and describing the trees growing inside the five 10 m × 10 m quadrat sampling plots. Monthly leaf litter fall was collected in 1 m × 1 m litter traps, and the dry weight was determined after oven-drying at 65 °C for 48 h. Leaf litter decomposition experiment was established by laying out 12 nylon mesh bags containing fresh leaf litter in each of the four sites on the forest floor and one bag was retrieved every month to determine the change in dry weight of the leaf litter. Six bulk soil samples were collected from the Muyong forest floor and analyzed for organic matter, pH, available P and exchangeable K. Fresh leaf litter samples were analyzed for total N, P and K contents. Arthropods in the collected decomposing leaf litter were extracted using Berlese funnel and later identified up to families level using arthropod taxonomic key. The diversity of plants in the Muyong forest includes thirty-eight tree species belonging to 19 families dominated by indigenous tree species. Results showed that the monthly leaf litter fall was higher during the dry months of March to May and lower during the wet months. The estimated total leaf litter fall in Muyong forest was comparable to published litter fall from tropical secondary forests. The N, P and K contents of fresh leaf litter range from 1.0 to 1.2, 0.11 and 0.40%, respectively. The first month of decomposition has the fastest rate while the decomposition rate during the next 4 months ranged from 0.125 to 0.251. Complete decomposition or mass lost in the leaf litter in the Muyong forest took place within 5 months. The soil arthropods identified in the decomposing leaf litter were composed of 13 orders and 28 families. Majority of the collected arthropods were insects while other species including mites, spiders, millipedes and sowbugs were also present. Detrivore and fungivore Families were found to be dominant in the decomposing leaf litter. Moreover, the composition and succession of arthropod decomposer community varied in the three sampling methods and with the changing quality of the litter material as decomposition progressed. The wide diversity and succession of leaf litter decomposers consisting of detritivores, predators, fungivore and herbivore coupled with abundant rainfall and warm temperature are the two main factors that contribute to the fast rate of leaf litter decomposition and nutrient turn over in the Muyong forest. Thus, the Muyong forest can sustain the productivity of rice planted in the adjoining downstream Payoh terraces. Hence, the conservation and management of the Muyong forest is critical in maintaining the ecological functions of the Muyong–Payoh continuum. © 2017, The International Society of Paddy and Water Environment Engineering and Springer Japan KK, part of Springer Nature.
Leaf-cutting ants negatively impact the regeneration of the Caatinga dry forest across abandoned pastures			The mechanisms affecting forest regeneration in human-modified landscapes are attracting increasing attention as tropical forests have been recognized as key habitats for biodiversity conservation, provision of ecosystem services, and human well-being. Here we investigate the effect of the leaf-cutting ants (LCA) Atta opaciceps on regenerating plant assemblages in Caatinga dry forest. Our study encompassed 15 Atta opaciceps colonies located in landscape patches with a gradient of forest cover from 8.7% to 87.8%, where we monitored regenerating individuals (seedlings and saplings of woody and herbaceous plants) in different habitats (nests, foraging areas, and control areas) over one year. We recorded 2,977 regenerating plant individuals, distributed among 55 species from 23 families. Herbaceous plants represented 82.1% and 58.2% of the total number of individuals and species, respectively. Species richness of both the whole and herbaceous plant assemblages increased along the forest cover gradient, but without difference between the habitats. Total plant abundance was highest in control areas followed by foraging areas and nests and this pattern held for both woody and herbaceous plants. Although forest cover did not influence the abundance of herbaceous plants and the whole plant assemblage, it positively affects woody plant abundance across control areas. Forest cover and habitat changed species composition of both the entire regenerating and the herbaceous assemblages. These results together indicate that LCA negatively impact regenerating plant assemblages, particularly in those sites with increased forest cover. As LCA proliferate in human-modified landscapes, they may prevent plant regeneration of disturbed areas.
Leguminous trees from tropical dry forest generate fertility islands in pastures			Isolated trees in several ecosystems can contribute to the accumulation of soil organic matter (SOM), carbon (C), and essential nutrients such as nitrogen (N) in soil. We investigated the potential of Lysiloma acapulcense (Kunth) Benth. and Vachellia pennatula (Schltdl. & Cham.) Seigler & Ebinger to promote SOM, organic C, and nutrient accumulation in pastures. Lysiloma acapulcense and V. pennatula accumulated similar total N (3.5 and 3.2 mg g−1) but more than open pasture (2.4 mg g−1), and total P (0.29 and 0.31 mg g−1) under their canopies than in open pasture (0.21 mg g−1). Both species influence processes that increase soil fertility but in different directions. Lysiloma acapulcense seems to accumulate higher organic carbon (100.6 mg g−1), SOM (17.3%), and NH4+ (10.0 mg kg−1) under its canopy than in open pasture (73.2 mg g−1, 12.6%, and 6.4 mg kg−1, respectively). V. pennatula is capable of reducing soil C:N and C:P ratios (27.6 and 285.3) compared to open pasture (31.3 and 362.7). Lysiloma acapulcense seems to maintain soil processes that promote C storage, which have as a consequence greater C and N retention, whereas V. pennatula seems to maintain soil processes that promote greater availability of P and N in soil. The species of L. acapulcense could be used to improve soil structure in a context of management of dry rangelands, whereas V. pennatula could be used to improve soil nutrient retention in the same context. Including specific tree species in dry ecosystems management could generate opportunities for diversification of soil fertility strategies. © 2017 Taylor & Francis.
Lessons Learned from the Water Producer Project in the Atlantic Forest, Brazil			Forest and landscape restoration (FLR) is a powerful strategy for large-scale tropical forest recovery, and payment for ecosystem services (PES) is used to support FLR programs and projects on privately-owned land. In this article, we discuss the lessons learned from the Water Producer Project, a pioneer, multiple-stakeholder, and PES-supported FLR project in the Atlantic Forest, south-eastern Brazil. The project was implemented in four landscapes located in two municipalities. Altogether, 41 PES contracts with landowners were signed, resulting in various FLR practices being implemented in a total of 342.4 ha (64.2 ha for riparian forest restoration, 90.8 ha for soil conservation, and 187.4 for forest conservation) of land, which represents 39% of the project goal. As of the end of the project, only 50% (USD 49,250) of the available PES funds had been spent. However, funds spent on project planning, implementation, communication, and monitoring were 12 times greater than those spent on PES. Several challenges restricted the progress and monitoring of the project. The main issue was landowner participation and/or engagement. In terms of lessons learned, we highlight that PES schemes are more complex than initially thought, and that sufficient funding does not guarantee the success of FLR projects. It is essential to promote landowner participation and engagement by considering them key players in FLR projects. Finally, acceptance from landowners was higher and implementation was easier for forest conservation practices that required no land-use changes. Thus, we suggest that similar future projects should focus on targeting private properties in marginal agricultural lands with a high probability of natural regeneration. Alternatively, future projects could focus on lands with remnant forest cover of high conservation value.
Leucaena leucocephala feeding systems for cattle production in Mexico			The impacts of leucaena (Leucaena leucocephala) feeding systems on cattle production, environmental services and animal welfare in Mexico are discussed. A total of about 12,000 ha of leucaena have been established in the tropical regions of Mexico, where most of the information for the current review was obtained. Incorporating leucaena in a grass pasture increases dry matter intake of grazing cattle and reduces the level of methane produced. This results in improved liveweight gains and milk yields as well as a reduction in the level of greenhouse gas released. Additional benefits are increases in soil carbon and nitrogen levels and less stress on animals as the leucaena plants provide shade and reduce environmental temperatures. While these benefits are substantial, the area developed to leucaena represents less than 0.1% of the area which could potentially be developed. Strategies to increase adoption of these grass-legume systems by farmers need to be developed to make effective use of the systems for increasing beef and milk production while reducing the undesirable environmental outcomes normally associated with ruminant production.
Leucaena macrophylla: An ecosystem services provider?			Leucaena macrophylla, a tree native to southern Mexico's tropical dry forest, belongs to a genus that is popular worldwide as a component of agroforestry systems. However, despite appreciation by local communities, this species is poorly studied and has not been evaluated as a multipurpose tree in its native range. This work evaluated whether L. macrophylla has the qualities necessary to serve as a multipurpose tree for agroforestry systems and a provider of ecosystem services in its original distribution, specifically, in soil nutrient amelioration and recovery, fuelwood production, and provision of quality livestock fodder. Leaves contained high values of nitrogen and calcium, and litter decomposition was relatively rapid (similar to 50 % of mass lost over first 6 months). Despite somewhat low wood density, this species' high calorific value and low ash and moisture contents yielded a relatively high firewood value index (FVI = 2,594.65), suggesting high potential as a fuelwood. In terms of fodder quality, protein and digestible fiber contents were high and in vitro digestibility was adequate, as was condensed tannin concentration. It is important to mention, however, that L. macrophylla showed higher-than-ideal contents of lignin, both in fresh leaves and in litter. However, this apparently does not drastically reduce overall quality (i.e. decomposition rate and in vitro digestibility), and appropriate management techniques such as composting can mitigate its effects. Given its potential for providing a variety of ecosystem services, we recommend that L. macrophylla be installed in agroforestry systems in its native range to evaluate its effect on crop productivity.
Leveraging Climate Regulation by Ecosystems for Agriculture to Promote Ecosystem Stewardship			One in every five patches of tropical forest near agriculture in Brazil appears to contribute more to agricultural production by preventing crop-killing extreme heat exposure than it could produce if it were converted to cropland itself. In this commentary, I refer to this and other forms of climate regulation by ecosystems and beneficial for agriculture as E4A. E4A is a readily employable and largely untapped concept for protecting and restoring tropical ecosystems. The promise of E4A lies in demonstrating sizeable production-protection synergies relevant for critical actors. Using a consultative research process, I gauged the current and future status of E4A science and action in tropical land use decision-making. Stakeholders flagged unmet demand for E4A in support of decisions tied to numerous regulatory, governance, and business processes. Results from a complementary literature review revealed gaps in research, advocacy, and entrepreneurship. I close by discussing opportunities to relieve E4A pain points to catalyze tropical ecosystem stewardship.
Leveraging the potentials of soil carbon sequestration in sustaining forest ecosystems in Malaysia			The forest ecosystem is believed to have the capacity of sequestering and storing large quantities of carbon in biomass and soil. In Malaysia, the forest ecosystem contains an estimated 23.48 Million tonnes of Carbon (C) or 86.17M tonnes CO2 equivalent, and sequesters up to 4 tonnes of Carbon ha-1 Yr-1. However, this estimate does not include the carbon in soil despite the soil contributing up to 46% of the total carbon found in the forest ecosystems. Many forest carbon inventories and valuation studies conducted in Malaysia seem to overlook the contribution of soil carbon thereby grossly under-estimating the actual carbon stock in the forest ecosystem. Soil carbon is important in climate change mitigation and in improving land productivity among other vital ecological functions. Unlocking the potentials of forest soil to sequester carbon may help in sustainable forest management. Malaysia occupies a unique position in leveraging these opportunities by mainstreaming soil carbon in sustainable management of the forestry sector.
Liana Dynamics in Southeast Asia: Causes and Consequences			Tropical ecosystems are particularly valuable not only because they harbour high biodiversity, but also because they provide a number of ecosystem services, carbon storage being among the most important ones. Forests in the tropics have been under significant pressure due to timber harvest, land use change and fragmentation. Furthermore, there is a growing body of evidence suggesting that climate change is likely to have a significant impapact on tropical systems. The interaction between forest degradation and climate change threatens the sustainability of tropical ecosystems and good knowledge of the forest dynamics is needed to inform effective forest management and conservation efforts.   Lianas are large woody vines that have been observed to raise in abundance in neotropical forests most likely due to human-mediated global change. They have the potential to contribute to forest degradation by inducing collateral damage during tree fall by pulling neighbouring trees down, smothering seedlings and biasing forest regeneration towards faster growing species, ultimately reducing the forest capacity to store carbon. Therefore, pantropical understanding of liana dynamics is of increasing importance.  Lianas in Southeast Asia have been particularly understudied and this project aims to contribute to filing this knowledge gap. Analysis of liana cover will determine what are the best predictors of diversity and abundance and comparison between is rare vs. common and early vs. late-successional species will pinpoint the traits that make lianas successful. Unprecedented large scale sequencing of functional elements in non-model organisms will provide insights of liana evolution and employed strategies. Further components of the project will look into the impact of liana on carbon storage as well as effect of palm oil cultivation and forest fragmentation on liana cover
Liana effects on biomass dynamics strengthen during secondary forest succession			Secondary forests are important carbon sinks, but their biomass dynamics vary markedly within and across landscapes. The biotic and abiotic drivers of this variation are still not well understood. We tested the effects of soil resource availability and competition by lianas on the biomass dynamics of young secondary tropical forests in Panama and assessed the extent to which liana effects were mediated by soil resource availability. Over a five-year period, growth, mortality, and recruitment of woody plants of >= 1 cm diameter were monitored in 84 plots in 3- 30-year-old secondary forests across the Agua Salud site in central Panama. Biomass dynamics and the effects of lianas and soil resources were examined using ( generalized) linear mixed-effect models and a model averaging approach. There was strong spatial and temporal variation in liana biomass within and across the plots. The relative biomass of lianas had a strong negative effect on overall tree growth, growth of understory trees decreased with soil fertility and dry season soil water content, and the effect of lianas on tree mortality varied with soil fertility. Tree recruitment was not associated with any of the predictor variables. Our model indicates that tree biomass growth across our landscape was reduced with 22% due to competition with lianas, and that the effect of lianas increased during succession, from 19% after five years to 32% after 30 years. The projected liana-induced growth reduction after 60 years was 47%, which was consistent with data from a nearby site. Our study shows that the observed liana proliferation across tropical forests may reduce the sequestration and storage of carbon in young secondary forests, with important implications for the carbon balance of tropical forest landscapes and consequently for global climate change. Our study highlights the need to incorporate lianas and soil variables in research on the biomass dynamics of secondary forest across tropical landscapes, and the need for well-replicated longitudinal studies to cover landscape-level variability in the relevant abiotic and biotic components.
Liana Impacts on Carbon Cycling, Storage and Sequestration in Tropical Forests			Mature tropical forests sequester large quantities of atmospheric CO2, which they store as plant biomass. These forests are changing however, including an increase in liana abundance and biomass over recent decades in Neotropical forests. We ask here how this increase in lianas might impact the tropical forest carbon cycle and their capacity for carbon storage and sequestration. Lianas reduce tree growth, survival, and leaf productivity; however, lianas also invest significantly in leaf production, and the increase in lianas could conceivably offset liana-induced reductions in tree canopy productivity with no adverse effects to the forest-level canopy productivity. By contrast, lianas decrease the total ecosystem uptake of carbon by reducing tree biomass productivity. Lianas themselves invest little in woody biomass, and store and sequester only a small proportion of the biomass in tropical forests. As lianas increase they may effectively displace trees, but the greater liana carbon stocks are unlikely to compensate for liana-induced losses in net carbon sequestration and storage by trees. A potentially important additional consideration is the impact of lianas on the tree community. By competing more intensely with shade-tolerant, more densely wooded trees than with fast-growing, light-wooded trees, lianas may shift tree composition toward faster-growing species, which store relatively little carbon, and thereby further reduce the carbon storage capacity of tropical forests. Overall, current evidence indicates that the increase in lianas will negatively impact the carbon balance of tropical forests, with potentially far-reaching consequences for global atmospheric CO2 levels and associated climate change.
Lianas always outperform tree seedlings regardless of soil nutrients: results from a long-term fertilization experiment			Lianas are a prominent growth form in tropical forests, and there is compelling evidence that they are increasing in abundance throughout the Neotropics. While recent evidence shows that soil resources limit tree growth even in deep shade, the degree to which soil resources limit lianas in forest understories, where they coexist with trees for decades, remains unknown. Regardless, the physiological underpinnings of soil resource limitation in deeply shaded tropical habitats remain largely unexplored for either trees or lianas. Theory predicts that lianas should be more limited by soil resources than trees because they occupy the quick-return end of the leaf economic spectrum, characterized by high rates of photosynthesis, high specific leaf area, short leaf life span, affinity to high-nutrient sites, and greater foliar nutrient concentrations. To address these issues, we asked whether soil resources (nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium), alone or in combination, applied experimentally for more than a decade would cause significant changes in the morphology or physiology of tree and liana seedlings in a lowland tropical forest. We found evidence for the first time that phosphorus limits the photosynthetic performance of both trees and lianas in deeply shaded understory habitats. More importantly, lianas always showed significantly greater photosynthetic capacity, quenching, and saturating light levels compared to trees across all treatments. We found little evidence for nutrient x growth form interactions, indicating that lianas were not disproportionately favored in nutrient-rich habitats. Tree and liana seedlings differed markedly for six key morphological traits, demonstrating that architectural differences occurred very early in ontogeny prior to lianas finding a trellis (all seedlings were self-supporting). Overall, our results do not support nutrient loading as a mechanism of increasing liana abundance in the Neotropics. Rather, our finding that lianas always outperform trees, in terms of photosynthetic processes and under contrasting rates of resource supply of macronutrients, will allow lianas to increase in abundance if disturbance and tree turnover rates are increasing in Neotropical forests as has been suggested.
Lianas and soil nutrients predict fine-scale distribution of above-ground biomass in a tropical moist forest			Prediction of carbon dynamics in response to global climate change requires an understanding of the processes that govern the distribution of carbon stocks. Above-ground biomass (AGB) in tropical forests is regulated by variation in soil fertility, climate, species composition and topography at regional scales, but the drivers of fine-scale variation in tropical forest AGB are poorly understood. The factors that control the growth and mortality of individual trees may be obscured by the low resolution of studies at regional scales. In this paper, we evaluated the effects of soil nutrients, topography and liana abundance on the fine-scale spatial distribution of AGB and density of trees for a lowland tropical moist forest in Panama using additive regression models. Areas with larger values of AGB were negatively associated with the presence of lianas, which may reflect competition with lianas and/or the association of lianas with disturbed or open-canopy patches within forests. AGB was positively associated with soils possessing higher pH and K concentrations, reflecting the importance of below-ground resource availability on AGB independently of stem density.Synthesis. Our results shed new light on the factors that influence fine-scale tree AGB and carbon stocks in tropical forests: liana abundance is the strongest predictor, having a negative impact on tree AGB. The availability of soil nutrients was also revealed as an important driver of fine-scale spatial variation in tree AGB.
Lianas do not reduce tree biomass accumulation in young successional tropical dry forests			Young successional tropical forests are crucial in the global carbon cycle because they can quickly sequester large quantities of atmospheric carbon. However, lianas (woody vines) can significantly decrease biomass accumulation in young regenerating forests. Lianas are abundant in tropical dry forests, and thus we hypothesized that lianas reduce biomass accretion in dry forests. Lianas may be particularly detrimental to the growth of young trees, which are vulnerable to competition from lianas. Alternatively, lianas may have a stronger negative effect on the largest trees because lianas seek the high-light environment at the top of the forest canopy. We tested these hypotheses using a liana-removal experiment in 13 dry forest stands that ranged from 1 to 70 years in southwestern Panama. We measured biomass accumulation annually for more than 10,000 stems from 2013 to 2017. Contrary to our expectations, liana removal had no effect on tree biomass accumulation across our successional forests and throughout our study period. Liana removal did not benefit smaller trees or larger trees. Lianas did not increase biomass accumulation on recruits, and did not increase biomass loss due to mortality. Surprisingly, removing lianas had a negative effect on three out of 41 tree species. Lianas had no effect on biomass accumulation and loss, possibly because: (1) trees allocated resources to roots instead of stems, (2) trees and lianas partitioned water, (3) higher irradiance after liana removal reduced soil moisture, or (4) low water availability might have been such a strong stressor that it reduced plant–plant competition. © 2021, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature.
Lianas reduce biomass accumulation in early successional tropical forests			Early successional tropical forests could mitigate climate change via rapid accumulation of atmospheric carbon. However, liana (woody vine) abundance and biomass has been increasing in many tropical forests over the past decades, which may slow the speed at which secondary forests accumulate biomass. Lianas decrease biomass accumulation in tropical forests, and may have a particularly strong effect on young forests by stalling tree growth. As forests mature, trees may outgrow or shed lianas, thus escaping some of the negative effects of lianas. Alternatively, lianas may have the strongest effect in older successional forests if the effect of lianas is commensurate with their density, which increases dramatically in the first decades of forest succession. We tested these two hypotheses using a landscape liana-removal experiment in 30 forest stands that ranged from 10 to 35 yr old in Central Panama. We measured tree growth and biomass accumulation in the stands every year from 2014 to 2017. We found that the effect of liana removal on large trees (>= 20-cm diameter) decreased with forest age, supporting the hypothesis that lianas have the strongest negative effects on trees, and thus biomass uptake and carbon storage, in very young successional forests. Large trees accumulated more biomass in the absence of lianas in younger forests than in older forests (compared to controls) even after accounting for the effect of canopy completeness and crown illumination, implying that the detrimental effects of lianas go well beyond resource availability and crown health. There was no significant effect of lianas on small trees (1-20-cm diameter), likely because lianas seek light and thus do not deploy their leaves on small trees that are trapped in the forest understory. Our results show that high liana density early in forest succession reduces forest biomass accumulation by negatively impacting large trees, thus decreasing the capacity of young secondary forests to mitigate climate change. Although the negative effects of lianas on forest biomass diminish as forests age, they do not disappear, and thus lianas are an important component of tropical forest carbon budgets throughout succession.
Life in the treetops-An overview of forest canopy science and its future directions			Societal Impact StatementForests are currently under global threat from human activities, despite the fact that recent findings confirm trees are critical for the health of humans as well as for the entire planet. Advances in whole forest research, which includes the upper reaches and not just the forest floor, are providing critical information about carbon storage, biodiversity, water cycles, and other essential ecosystem services provided by trees. The methods to study forest canopies are relatively new and vastly underfunded, despite our growing recognition of the global importance of trees. In addition to advancing exploration of the treetops, the forest canopy toolkit is also proving instrumental to jumpstart innovative actions to conserve forest ecosystems.SummaryForest canopies are home to an estimated 50% of terrestrial biodiversity but remain relatively unexplored until just four decades ago. As one of the first global arbornauts, I share an abbreviated history of canopy science, and how treetop access has inspired forest conservation, especially in the tropics where forests remain relatively unexplored. The arboreal toolkit of ropes and harnesses, canopy walkways, dirigible and inflatable rafts, construction cranes, drones, and LIght Detection And Ranging (LIDAR) has revealed that forests provide many important ecosystem services, essential for life on earth. Yet despite millions of research dollars, extensive time, and extraordinary intellectual capital, the degradation of tropical rain forests is accelerating and does not correlate with the extent of scientific investments. A few case studies illustrate how canopy access methods can inspire innovative approaches to conservation, especially in tropical forests where deforestation is rampant: (a) Use treetop walkways for education and ecotourism, not just research, so that indigenous communities can earn sustainable income without logging; (b) Incorporate citizen scientists into forest field research through BioBlitzes or virtual technologies that are now relatively inexpensive and far-reaching; (c) Inspire girls, especially in low-income countries, to become stewards of their local forests; and (d) Seek diverse stakeholders in forest conservation actions, including religious and corporate leaders. I summarize how treetop exploration can inspire a renaissance in botany, engaging the public about the importance of trees, especially tropical forests and their biodiversity.
Life-cycle assessment of biochar production systems in tropical rural areas: Comparing flame curtain kilns to other production methods			A life-cycle assessment (LCA) using end point methods was performed for the generation and sequestration of one kg biochar by various pyrolysis methods suitable for rural tropical conditions. Flame curtain kilns, a novel, simple and cost-effective technology of biochar generation, were compared to earth mound non-improved kilns, retort kilns with off-gases combustion, pyrolytic cook-stoves allowing the use of the gas flame for cooking purposes, and iv) gasifiers with electricity production. The impact categories of climate change, particulate matter emissions, land use effects, minerals and fossil fuels were combined to provide the overall impact of biochar generation. In the LCA ranking, earth mound kilns were shown to have negative potential environmental impacts because of their gas and aerosol emissions. Flame curtain kilns had slightly lower potential impact than retort kilns and much lower impact than earth-mound kilns because of the avoidance of start-up wood and low material use and gas emissions. Making biochar from flame curtain kilns was observed to be environmentally neutral in a life-cycle perspective, as the production emissions were compensated for by carbon sequestration. Pyrolytic cook-stoves and gasifiers showed the most positive potential environmental impact in the LCA due to avoided firewood consumption and emissions from electricity generation, respectively. The generation and sequestration of biochar per se by flame curtain kilns was not found to result in direct environmental benefits. Co-benefits in the form of rural applicability, cost-efficiency and agricultural effects due to soil improvement are needed to warrant biochar implementation by this method. © 2017 The Authors
Lightning is a major cause of large tree mortality in a lowland neotropical forest			The mortality rates of large trees are critical to determining carbon stocks in tropical forests, but the mechanisms of tropical tree mortality remain poorly understood. Lightning strikes thousands of tropical trees every day, but is commonly assumed to be a minor agent of tree mortality in most tropical forests. We use the first systematic quantification of lightning-caused mortality to show that lightning is a major cause of death for the largest trees in an old-growth lowland forest in Panama. A novel lightning strike location system together with field surveys of strike sites revealed that, on average, each strike directly kills 3.5 trees (> 10 cm diameter) and damages 11.4 more. Given lightning frequency data from the Earth Networks Total Lightning Network and historical total tree mortality rates for this site, we conclude that lightning accounts for 40.5% of the mortality of large trees (> 60 cm diameter) in the short term and probably contributes to an additional 9.0% of large tree deaths over the long term. Any changes in cloud-to-ground lightning frequency due to climatic change will alter tree mortality rates; projected 25-50% increases in lightning frequency would increase large tree mortality rates in this forest by 9-18%. The results of this study indicate that lightning plays a critical and previously underestimated role in tropical forest dynamics and carbon cycling.
Lime and gypsum application increases biological activity, carbon pools, and agronomic productivity in highly weathered soil			The application of lime and gypsum has been recognized as an important strategy for correcting soil acidity and for improving soil fertility, soil aggregation, and agronomic productivity in highly weathered soils. We hypothesized that the combined application of lime and gypsum would create favorable conditions for biological activity and result in increased SOC storage and agronomic productivity. Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate the long-term (i.e., 15 years) impact of lime and gypsum application on the biological activity, SOC stocks, and agronomic productivity of plots under no-till soil management. The experiment was established in 1998 at a site with clayey Oxisol in southern Brazil, and was designed with a split-plot arrangement, completely randomized blocks, and three replicates. The main plot was subject to three lime treatments: (i) control (no lime); (ii) incorporated lime (IL):incorporation of 4.5 Mg lime ha(-1) to a depth of 0-20 cm by; and (iii) surface lime (SL): surface application of 4.5 Mg lime ha(-1), which was equally divided among three annual applications during the first three years of the experiment. The subplots were comprised by surface applications of gypsum at 0, 3, 6, or 9 Mg ha(-1). Soil samples were collected in 1998, before of the experiment, and in October 2013, in order to evaluate soil enzyme activities, SOC pool stocks, crop productivity, C-biomass input, and soil fertility attributes. Both forms of lime application significant improved the stocks of several SOC pools, crop productivity, biomass-C input rates, soil fertility attributes, and enzyme activity. The SOC stocks were positively correlated with Ca2+ content and biomass-C input, demonstrating the potential of calcium to improve C accumulation. Enzyme activities were significantly affected by both soil fertility and SOC pools, with increases in hot water extractable organic C yielding the greatest increases in enzyme activity. In addition, we also found that gypsum application significantly increased the stocks of labile SOC pools and arylsulfatase activity. However, effects of gypsum application were less apparent than those of lime application and the combination of surface lime (4.5 Mg ha(-1)) and gypsum (9 Mg ha(-1)) application yielded the greatest long-term increase in the stock of total organic C stock. Thus, the results of the present study suggest that lime and gypsum application, along with no-till management and biomass-C input, constitutes an efficient strategy for improving the biological activity, C stocks, and productivity of agricultural soils. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Limits to forests-based mitigation in integrated assessment modelling: global potentials and impacts under constraining factors			Forests-based measures such as afforestation/reforestation (A/R) and reducing deforestation (RDF) are considered promising options to mitigate climate change, yet their mitigation potentials are limited by economic and biophysical factors that are largely uncertain. The range of mitigation potential estimates from integrated assessment models raises concerns about the capacity of land systems to provide realistic, cost-effective and permanent land-based mitigation. We use the Global Change Analysis Model to quantify the economic mitigation potential of forests-based measures by simulating a climate policy including a tax on greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture, forestry, and other land uses. In addition, we assess how constraining unused arable land (UAL) availability, forestland expansion rates, and global bioenergy demand may influence the forests-based mitigation potential by simulating scenarios with alternative combinations of constraints. Results show that the average forests-based mitigation potential in 2020-2050 increases from 738 MtCO2.yr-1 through a forestland increase of 86 Mha in the fully constrained scenario to 1394 MtCO2.yr-1 through a forestland increase of 146 Mha when all constraints are relaxed. Regional potentials in terms of A/R and RDF differ strongly between scenarios: unconstrained forest expansion rates mostly increase A/R potentials in northern regions (e.g., +120 MtCO2.yr-1 in North America); while unconstrained UAL conversion and low bioenergy demand mostly increase RDF potentials in tropical regions (e.g., +76 and +68 MtCO2.yr-1 in Southeast Asia, respectively). This study shows that forests-based mitigation is limited by many factors that constrain the rates of land use change across regions. These factors, often overlooked in modelling exercises, should be carefully addressed for understanding the role of forests in global climate mitigation and defining pledges towards the Paris Agreement.
Linking above and belowground carbon sequestration, soil organic matter properties, and soil health in Brazilian Atlantic Forest restoration			Forest restoration mitigates climate change by removing CO2 and storing C in terrestrial ecosystems. However, incomplete information on C storage in restored tropical forests often fails to capture the ecosystem's holistic C dynamics. This study provides an integrated assessment of C storage in above to belowground subsystems, its consequences for greenhouse gas (GHG) fluxes, and the quantity, quality, and origin of soil organic matter (SOM) in restored Atlantic forests in Brazil. Relations between SOM properties and soil health indicators were also explored. We examined two restorations using tree planting ('active restoration'): an 8-year-old forest with green manure and native trees planted in two rounds, and a 15-year-old forest with native-planted trees in one round without green manure. Restorations were compared to reformed pasture and primary forest sites. We measured C storage in soil layers (0-10, 10-20, and 20-30 cm), litter, and plants. GHG emissions were assessed using CH4 and CO2 fluxes. SOM quantity was evaluated using C and N, quality using humification index (HLIFS), and origin using & delta;13C and & delta;15N. Nine soil health indicators were interrelated with SOM attributes. The primary forest presented the highest C stocks (107.7 Mg C ha-1), followed by 15- and 8-year-old restorations and pasture with 69.8, 55.5, and 41.8 Mg C ha-1, respectively. Soil C stocks from restorations and pasture were 20% lower than primary forest. However, 8- and 15-year-old restorations stored 12.3 and 28.3 Mg ha-1 more aboveground C than pasture. The younger forest had & delta;13C and & delta;15N values of 2.1 and 1.7 & PTSTHOUSND;, respectively, lower than the 15-year-old forest, indicating more C derived from C3 plants and biological N fixation. Both restorations and pasture had at least 34% higher HLIFS in deeper soil layers (10-30 cm) than primary forest, indicating a lack of labile SOM. Native and 15-year-old forests exhibited higher soil methane influx (141.1 and 61.9 & mu;g m-2 h-1). Forests outperformed pasture in most soil health indicators, with 69% of their variance explained by SOM properties. However, SOM quantity and quality regeneration in both restorations approached the pristine forest state only in the top 10 cm layer, while deeper soil retained agricultural degradation legacies. In conclusion, active restoration of the Atlantic Forest is a superior approach compared to pasture reform for GHG mitigation. Nonetheless, the development of restoration techniques to facilitate labile C input into deeper soil layers (>10 cm) is needed to further improve soil multifunctionality and long-term C storage.
Linking Anthropogenic Landscape Perturbation to Herbivory and Pathogen Leaf Damage in Tropical Tree Communities			Anthropogenic disturbance of tropical humid forests leads to habitat loss, biodiversity decline, landscape fragmentation, altered nutrient cycling and carbon sequestration, soil erosion, pest/pathogen outbreaks, among others. Nevertheless, the impact of these alterations in multitrophic interactions, including host-pathogen and vector-pathogen dynamics, is still not well understood in wild plants. This study aimed to provide insights into the main drivers for the incidence of herbivory and plant pathogen damage, specifically, into how vegetation traits at the local and landscape scale modulate such interactions. For this purpose, in the tropical forest of Calakmul (Campeche, Mexico), we characterised the foliar damage caused by herbivores and pathogens in woody vegetation of 13 sampling sites representing a gradient of forest disturbance and fragmentation in an anthropogenic landscape from well preserved to highly disturbed and fragmented areas. We also evaluated how the incidence of such damage was modulated by the vegetation and landscape attributes. We found that the incidence of damage caused by larger, mobile, generalist herbivores, was more sensitive to changes in landscape configuration, while the incidence of damage caused by small and specialised herbivores with low dispersal capacity was more influenced by vegetation and landscape composition. In relation to pathogen symptoms, the herbivore-induced foliar damage seems to be the main factor related to their incidence, indicating the enormous importance of herbivorous insects in the modulation of disease dynamics across tropical vegetation, as they could be acting as vectors and/or facilitating the entry of pathogens by breaking the foliar tissue and the plant defensive barriers. The incidence of pathogen damage also responded to vegetation structure and landscape configuration; the incidence of anthracnose, black spot, and chlorosis, for example, were favoured in sites surrounded by smaller patches and a higher edge density, as well as those with a greater aggregation of semi-evergreen forest patches. Fungal pathogens were shown to be an important cause of foliar damage for many woody species. Our results indicate that an increasing transformation and fragmentation of the tropical forest of southern Mexico could reduce the degree of specialisation in plant-herbivore interactions and enhance the proliferation of generalist herbivores (chewers and scrapers) and of mobile leaf suckers, and consequently, the proliferation of some symptoms associated with fungal pathogens such as fungus black spots and anthracnose. The symptoms associated with viral and bacterial diseases and to nutrient deficiency, such as chlorosis, could also increase in the vegetation in fragmented landscapes with important consequences in the health and productivity of wild and cultivated plant species. This is a pioneering study evaluating the effect of disturbances on multitrophic interactions, offering key insights on the main drivers of the changes in herbivory interactions and incidence of plant pathogens in tropical forests.
Linking climate change research with food security and poverty reduction in the tropics			Climate change is a reality and will affect the poor in developing countries in many ways. The effectiveness of global change research could be substantially improved by linking International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) study with Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) centres based in the tropics. These centres are carrying interdisciplinary research and development on how to achieve food security and reduce rural poverty through the innovative management of natural resources. A CGIAR intercentre working group on climate change (ICWG-CC) identified joint opportunities that take advantage of the comparative advantages of both institutions. CGIAR centres will focus on adaptation and mitigation research in developing countries. A natural resource management research approach is suggested, which consists of six steps: (1) identifying and quantifying the extent of food insecurity, rural poverty and resource degradation; (2) conducting technological and policy research on economic and environmental functions; (3) optimising the trade-offs between global environmental benefits and private farmer benefits; (4) extrapolating and disseminating results, including research on policy implementation; (5) assessing impact and (6) providing feedback.Two examples of current CGIAR research illustrate this approach. Agroforestry alternatives to slash and burn (ASB) agriculture at tropical forest margins were identified and the trade-offs between carbon sequestration and farmer profitability provided options to policy makers. Land tenure problems were resolved with participatory policy research. Agroforestry practices sequester an additional 57 Mg C per ha, three times that of croplands or grasslands are able to do. Soil nutrient capital is being replenished in subhumid tropical Africa through improved leguminous tree fallows, rock phosphate and biomass transfers of Tithonia diversifolia, helping farmers to attain food security. Afterwards, when farmers shift to high-value tree or vegetable crop production, poverty is reduced. The transformation of low productivity croplands to sequential agroforestry is estimated to triple system carbon stocks in 20 years. (C) 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Linking deforestation scenarios to pollination services and economic returns in coffee agroforestry systems			The ecological and economic consequences of rain forest conversion and fragmentation for biodiversity, ecosystem functioning, and ecosystem services like protection of soils, water retention, pollination, or biocontrol are poorly understood. In human-dominated tropical landscapes, forest remnants may provide ecosystem services and act as a source for beneficial organisms immigrating into adjacent annual and perennial agro-ecosystems. In this study, we use empirical data on the negative effects of increasing forest distance on both pollinator diversity and fruit set of coffee to estimate future changes in pollination services for different land use scenarios in Sulawesi, Indonesia. Spatially explicit land use simulations demonstrate that depending on the magnitude and location of ongoing forest conversion, pollination services are expected to decline continuously and thus directly reduce coffee yields by up to 18%, and net revenues per hectare up to 14% within the next two decades ( compared to average yields of the year 2001). Currently, forests in the study area annually provide pollination services worth 46 Euros per hectare. However, our simulations also revealed a potential win-win constellation, in which ecological and economic values can be preserved, if patches of forests ( or other natural vegetation) are maintained in the agricultural landscape, which could be a viable near future option for local farmers and regional land use planners.
Linking plant traits to ecosystem service provision through a management gradient in a tropical dry forest			The exploitation of pristine forests decreases their functional diversity and ecosystem service provision. The forest management strategies of some rural societies, though, can increase the provision of specific ecosystem services useful to the community. This is tightly linked to shifts in forest functional traits, but few studies have investigated the changes to multiple provisioning, cultural and regulating ecosystem services across a traditional forest management gradient. This can give insights into the role of traditional management systems in the conservation of ecosystem services. Here we used a plot network of 60 tropical dry forest plots in Sri Lanka to test whether different forest management intensities are linked to differences in forest functional traits and ecosystem service provision through different tree size classes. Furthermore, we investigated the link between functional traits and ecosystem service provision with both redundancy analysis and linear mixed models. We found that the most intensely managed forest plots had some early successional traits such as light wood, small seeds and large leaves but, unexpectedly, taller trees than the least intensely managed plots. The intensely and moderately managed plots had a greater abundance of species delivering cultural and provisioning services than the least managed plots. We found significant links between the provision of construction services and mean tree height, and the delivery of cultural services and wood density. The links between functional traits and ecosystem services were clearest for individuals smaller than 10 cm DBH. Overall, the forest use and management by this rural community increased ecosystem provisioning services. For the first time we have characterised different links between species' functional traits and the ecosystem services they provide in a tropical dry forest. We highlight that the differences across forest management intensities were clearest for trees in the smaller cohorts, which are generally ignored by many researches. Similar studies will identify relevant functional traits that will help discover new species providing key ecosystem services. Understanding the interactions between rural societies and the forests they manage will foster the creation of guidelines for sustainably enhancing forest cultural and provisioning services.
Linking vegetation and soil functions during secondary forest succession in the Atlantic forest			Secondary forest succession can be an effective and low-cost strategy to increase forest cover and the associated biodiversity and soil functions. However, little is known about how soil functions develop during succession, and how vegetation attributes influence soil functions, especially in highly biodiverse and fragmented landscapes in the tropics. Here we assessed a wide range of indicators of taxonomic (e.g. number of tree species), structural (e.g. basal area, canopy openness) and functional diversity (e.g. community weighted means of functional traits) of tree species, as well as indicators for soil functions related to soil organic matter accumulation, nutrient cycling and soil cover in secondary forest patches ranging from 5 to 80 years. Two recently abandoned agricultural fields were included as the starting point of forest succession and two primary forest patches served as references for the end point of forest succession. Four ecological hypotheses, centred around the role of functional diversity, structural diversity and biomass, were tested to explore mechanisms in which forest vegetation may influence soil functions. Most measures of structural, taxonomic and functional diversity converged to values found in primary forests after 25-50 years of succession, whereas functional composition changed from acquisitive to conservative species. Soil carbon and nutrient cycling showed a quick recovery to the levels of primary forests after 15 years of succession. Although soil cover also increased during succession, levels of primary forests were not reached within 80 years. Variation in tree height and trait dominance were identified as aboveground drivers of carbon and nutrient cycling, while aboveground biomass was the main driver of litter accumulation, and the associated soil cover and water retention. Our results indicate that secondary forest succession can lead to a relative fast recovery of nutrient and carbon cycling functions, but not of soil cover. Our findings highlight the essential role of secondary forests in providing multiple ecosystem services. These results can be used to inform management and reforestation programmes targeted at strengthening soil functions, such as soil cover, nutrient and carbon cycling.
Litter decomposition and nutrient release for two tropical N-fixing species in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil			Litter production and decomposition are critical to forest productivity, nutrient cycling, and carbon sequestration in tropical woody ecosystems. However, nutrient release and leaf litter stoichiometry in tropical legume tree plantations over the long term after outplanting are poorly understood or even unknown. Toward improving our understanding of the pattern of changes in the decomposition of N-fixing leaf litters and their possible impact on carbon storage, we measured litter production, mass loss and nutrient release for 240 d during litter decomposition for two tropical legume tree species (Plathymenia reticulata and Hymenaea courbaril), in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Litter production for P. reticulata was 5.689 kg ha(-1) a(-1) and 3.231 kg ha(-1) a(-1) for H. courbaril. The patterns of mass loss rates were similar; however, nutrient release was greater for P. reticulata, while H. courbaril showed immobilization of nutrients, especially for N, which increased by almost 20% in the early phase of decomposition followed by gradual release. Litter from the N-fixing species did differ in nutrient chemistries over time, which was not surprising given that initial nutrient concentrations varied broadly, except for C and P. Most of the nutrient concentrations increased as the remaining litter mass decreased in both species, except for C and K. The C:N and N:P ratios differed between the species, but N:P did not correlate to mass loss. Both species had N-rich leaves, but P. reticulata decomposition was very likely P-limited, while H. courbaril seemed to be co-limited by N and P. The results showed different patterns in nutrient release and the stoichiometry involved in the decomposition dynamics of the two tropical N-fixing species, even though they have similar litter decay rates. Both species, but especially P. reticulata, may help re-establish nutrient cycling in disturbed ecosystems.
Litter decomposition rate constants across the global temperature gradient			The responses of organic matter decomposition to temperature rise is increasingly important topic. Most of the previous studies measured temperature dependence of soil respiration under laboratory incubation, while we analyzed the temperature dependence of organic matter decomposition under field conditions. To identify the factors regulating litter decomposition rate constants and their temperature sensitivity, we compiled the data of site information [Country, District, Vegetation or land use, Plant type, Mean annual air temperature (C), Mean annual precipitation (mm y-1), Soil type (Soil Taxonomy), Soil pH, and Decomposition rate constant (Table S1), Organic horizon C stock (Mg C ha-1), Litterfall C input (Mg C ha-1 y-1), Litter turnover (y) (Table S2). These parameters allow us to compare decomposition rate constants and provide temperature dependence indicators of organic matter decomposition (activation energy and Q10) across the global temperature gradient. We compiled the data of in-situ decomposition rates of cellulose filter paper, leaf litter (i.e., leaves of coniferous and broadleaved trees; leaf/straw of maize, rice, and wheat/barley), root litter, lichen litter, moss litter, and SOM and site information (climatic properties, plant type, soil type) from 68 studies (Tables S1 and S2, respectively).We extracted substrate decomposition data from in situ field incubation studies using litterbags buried (incorporated) in soil from the literature by searching for litter bag or cellulose or organic matter, decomposition, turnover, mass loss, and soil in Google Scholar. When rate constants of substrate decomposition in a single exponential decay function were not available in the published studies, original data, which were either actual substrate mass (g) or the remaining fraction of the initial substrate mass at each incubation time (y), were digitized from figures or extracted from tables. To ensure the comparability of published studies, we excluded the published studies of litter decomposition experiments conducted in the laboratory or litter on the surface. The method of the field incubation of substrates were concisely summarized in the following sections. Measuring cellulose and litter decomposition The methods to quantify the decomposition rates of organic matter in the data sources differed slightly between substrates. Cellulose filter papers (99% cellulose; e.g., 55 mm diameter) and root litter bags (root diameter < 2 mm) were packed in a nylon mesh bag (mesh pore size ≤ 100 mum) and buried in the surface mineral soil (A horizon, 5 cm depth), while leaf litter bags (leaf fragments [ca. 10 * 10 mm size] were buried at the boundary between the organic horizon and the mineral soil. The litter-bag method (Hayakawa et al., 2014) was used to quantify the decomposition rates of cellulose, leaf litter, root litter, lichen litter, and moss litter. The remaining weight of the substrate (70°C, 24 h) was calculated on an ash-free basis by subtracting the weight of the soil adhering to the substrate, which was estimated by dry combustion (600°C, 4 h). The proportion of the remaining substrate was calculated by dividing the remaining weight by the initial substrate weight. We fitted the data to a single exponential decay function (Eq. 1) below to obtain the decomposition rate constant (k). Rr/ Ri = e-kt (Eq. 1) where Rr is the remaining proportion of the substrate (%), Ri is the initial proportion of the substrate (i.e., 100%), k is the decomposition rate constant (y-1), and t is time (y). In case of forest ecosystems, we also provided an alternative estimation on the litter-C turnover rate (y-1) as a comparison to the decomposition rate constants obtained from the litter bag method. By assuming that the organic layer C stock reaches a steady-state in forests, the litter-C turnover rate (y-1) in the organic layer was calculated by dividing litterfall C input (Mg C ha-1 y-1) by the organic layer C stock (Mg C ha-1) (Olson, 1963). Measuring SOM decomposition Decomposition rates of SOM can be estimated using isotopes (13C isotopic signatures and bomb 14C). The turnover of SOM in warm temperate to tropical regions can be traced in vegetation change between C3 and C4 plants, using the difference in their litter 13C isotopic signatures (24 to 34 for C3 plants and 6 to 19 for C4 plants) and soil C stocks (Fujii et al., 2020). The changes in C3-derived and C4-derived SOC stocks were plotted respectively against time after vegetation change (y). The data were fitted to a single exponential decay function (Eq. 1) to estimate the decomposition rate constant k (y-1). The mean residence times were estimated from 1/k, assuming a steady-state. In polar or boreal ecosystems, where studies on vegetation shifts between C3 and C4 plants were not available, SOM turnover was estimated using bomb 14C (Trumbore, 2000). Radiocarbon produced by atmospheric nuclear weapons testing between 1955 and 1964 was assimilated by plants and transferred to the soil. The 14C measurements of the archive and present soil samples or measuring/modeling the soil CO2 flux provide the mean residence times of organic matter (Trumbore, 2000). # Litter decomposition rate constants across the global temperature gradient This README file was generated on 2024-01-31 by Kazumichi Fujii. GENERAL INFORMATION Decomposition rate constants of organic substrates in soil across the global temperature gradient # Principal Investigator Contact Information Name: Kazumichi Fujii Institution: Forestry and Forest Products Research Institute Address: Tsukuba 305-8687, Japan. Email: # Abstract To identify the factors regulating litter decomposition rate constants and their temperature sensitivity, we compiled the data of site information [Country, District, Vegetation or land use, Plant type, Mean annual air temperature (C), Mean annual precipitation (mm y-1), Soil type (Soil Taxonomy), Soil pH, Organic horizon C stock (Mg C ha-1), Litterfall C input (Mg C ha-1 y-1), Litter turnover (y). ## Description of the data and file structure DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: Soil_water_project_tables.xlsx 1. Number of variables: 11 (Table 1), 11 (Table 2) 2. Number of cases/rows: 194 (Table 1), 73 (Table 2) 3. Variable List: Table S1: *Country *District *Vegetation_landuse_EcosystemType *Plant type *MAT [Mean annual air temperature (C)] *MAP [Mean annual precipitation (mm y-1)] *Soil_Tax [Soil Taxonomy] *Soil_pH *Substrate *Decomposition rate constant *Ref. Table S2: *Country *District *Vegetation_landuse_EcosystemType *Plant type *MAT [Mean annual air temperature (C)] *MAP [Mean annual precipitation (mm y-1)] *Soil_Tax [Soil Taxonomy] *Soil_pH *Additional_calculation [Litterfall_C_MgChayr, OrganicCstock_MgCha, litter_Turnover_yr] *Data_value *Ref. 1. Missing data codes: NA (data not available) 2. Specialized formats or other abbreviations used: MAT represents Mean annual air temperature (C). MAP represents Mean annual precipitation (mm y-1). Soil_Tax represents soil types classified based on Soil Taxonomy (Soil survey staff, 2022). ## Sharing/Access information Licenses/restrictions placed on the data: CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Links to other publicly accessible locations of the data: None Data was derived from the following sources: 1. Fujii et al. (2021a) 2. Fujii et al. (2020) 3. Rochette et al. (1999) 4. Moore (1984) 5. Gregorich et al. (1995) 6. Ryan et al. (1995) 7. Turetsky et al. (2008) 8. Trumbore & Harden (1997) 9. Sparrow et al. (1992) 10. McCune & Daly (1994) 11. Trumbore et al. (1996) 12. Moore et al. (2007) 13. Sedia & Ehrenfeld(2006) 14. Tarkalson et al. (2008) 15. Six et al. (1998) 16. Clapp et al.(2000) 17.Lehman et al. (2008) 17. Grandy et al. (2013) 18. House et al. (1997) 19. Harmon et al. (2009) 20. Velkamp (1994) 21. Cerri & Andreux (1990) 22. Desjardins et al. (1994) 23. Tonucci et al. (2017) 24. Lima et al. (2006) 25. Neil et al. (1996) 26. Sisti et al. (2004) 27. Zotarelli et al. (2007) 28. Machado et al. (2003) 29. Caldiz et al. (2007) 30. Hopkins et al. (1990) 31. Nilsson et al. (1990) 32. Wardle et al. (2003) 33. Lang et al. (2009) 34. Cornelissen et al. (2007) 35. Sjogersten & Wookey (2004) 36. Andren & Paustian (1987) 37. Kurka & Starr(1997) 38. Starr & Ukonmaanaho(2004) 39. Zurbrugg et al. (2010) 40. Balesdent et al. (1988) 41. Balesdent et al. (1987) 42. Foereid et al. (2004) 43. Sherman & Steinberger (2012) 44. Fujii et al. (2021b) 45. Eusufzai et al. (2013) 46. Ono et al. (2011) 47. Hayakawa et al. (2014) 48. Nakatsubo et al. (1997) 49. Ando et al. (1986) 50. Maeda & Onikura (1977) 51. Fujii et al. (2021b) 52. Liu et al. (2000) 53. Xiao et al. (2014) 54. Gao et al. (2016) 55. Ladha et al. (2004) 56. Reddy et al. (1994) 57. Schmidt et al. (2016) 58. Mitani et al. (2021) 59. Kitayama et al. (2004) 60. Fujii et al. (2019) 61. Curtin et al. (2008) 62. Gao et al. (2016) 63. Dalal et al. (2011) 64. Diels et al. (1992) 65. Rezig et al. (2014) 66. Gilot-Villenave et al.(1996) 67. Daudu et al. (2009). References: Aerts R (1997) Climate, leaf litter chemistry and leaf litter decomposition in terrestrial ecosystems: a triangular relationship. Oikos, 79: 439-449. Allen SE, Grimshaw HM, Parkinson JA, Quarmby C (1974) Chemical Analysis of Ecological Materials. Wiley, New York. Ando Y, Shoji S, Oikawa T, Kanno T (1986) Decomposition of rice straw and nitrogen dynamics in paddy soils. Japanese Journal of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, 57: 359-364. Andren O, Paustian K (1987) Barley straw decomposition in the field: a comparison of models. Ecology, 68: 1190-1200. Bakker MA, Carreno‐Rocabado G, Poorter L (2011) Leaf economics traits predict litter decomposition of tropical plants and differ among land use types. Functional Ecology, 25: 473-483. Balesdent J, Mariotti A, Guillet B (1987) Natural 13C abundance as a tracer for studies of soil organic matter dynamics. Soil Biology and Biochemistry,19: 25-30. Balesdent J, Wagner GH, Mariotti A (1988) Soil organic matter turnover in long‐term field experiments as revealed by carbon‐13 natural abundance. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 52: 118-124. Balesdent J, Mariotti A, Boisgontier D (1990) Effect of tillage on soil organic carbon mineralization estimated from 13C abundance in maize fields. Journal of Soil Science, 41: 587-596. Berg B, McClaugherty C (2003) Decomposition as a process. In: Berg B, McClaugherty C (Eds) Plant litter-decomposition, humus formation, carbon sequestration, Springer, Berlin, pp 11-30. Bosatta E, Agren GI (1999) Soil organic matter quality interpreted thermodynamically. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 31:1889-1891. Bragazza L, Buttler A, Siegenthaler A, Mitchell EA (2009) Plant litter decomposition and nutrient release in peatlands. Geoph. Monog. Series, 184, 99-110. Caldiz MS, Brunet J, Nihlgard B (2007) Lichen litter decomposition in Nothofagus forest of northern Patagonia: biomass and chemical changes over time. The Bryologist, 110: 266-273. Cerri CC, Andreux F (1990) Changes in organic carbon content in Oxisols cultivated with sugar cane and pasture, based on 13C natural abundance measurement. In Transactions 14th International Congress of Soil Science, Kyoto, Japan, August 1990, Volume IV (pp. 98-103). Chen S, Wang J, Zhang T, Hu Z (2020) Climatic, soil, and vegetation controls of the temperature sensitivity (Q10) of soil respiration across terrestrial biomes. Global Ecology and Conservation, 22: e00955. Clapp CE, Allmaras RR, Layese MF, Linden DR, Dowdy RH (2000) Soil organic carbon and 13C abundance as related to tillage, crop residue, and nitrogen fertilization under continuous corn management in Minnesota. Soil and Tillage Research, 55: 127-142. Cornelissen JH et al. (2007) Global negative vegetation feedback to climate warming responses of leaf litter decomposition rates in cold biomes. Ecology letters, 10: 619-627. Craine J, Fierer N, McLauchlan K (2010a) Widespread coupling between the rate and temperature sensitivity of organic matter decay. Nature Geoscience, 3: 854-857. Craine JM, Spurr R, McLauchlan K, Fierer N (2010b) Landscape-level variation in temperature sensitivity of soil organic carbon decomposition. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 42: 373-375. Curtin D, Francis GS, McCallum FM (2008) Decomposition rate of cereal straw as affected by soil placement. Soil Research, 46: 152-160. Dala RC, Cowie BA, Allen DE, Yo SA (2011) Assessing carbon lability of particulate organic matter from delta13C changes following land-use change from C3 native vegetation to C4 pasture. Soil Research, 49: 98-103. Davidson EA, Janssens IA, Luo Y (2006) On the variability of respiration in terrestrial ecosystems: moving beyond Q10. Global Change Biology, 12: 154-164. Desjardins T, Andreux F, Volkoff B, Cerri CC (1994) Organic carbon and 13C contents in soils and soil size-fractions, and their changes due to deforestation and pasture installation in eastern Amazonia. Geoderma, 61: 103-118. Don A, Schumacher J, Freibauer A (2011) Impact of tropical land‐use change on soil organic carbon stocks-a meta‐analysis. Global Change Biology, 17: 1658-1670. Drewnik M (2006) The effect of environmental conditions on the decomposition rate of cellulose in mountain soils. Geoderma, 132: 116-130. Dungait JA, Hopkins DW, Gregory AS, Whitmore AP (2012) Soil organic matter turnover is governed by accessibility not recalcitrance. Global Change Biology, 18: 1781-1796. Eusufzai MK, Deb SK, Maeda T, Fujii K (2013) Mass loss and C and N release from decomposing fresh and composted residues as affected by cold climate conditions. Environment and Natural Resources Research, 3: 116. Gao H, Chen X, Wei J, Zhang Y, Zhang L, Chang J, Thompson ML (2016) Decomposition dynamics and changes in chemical composition of wheat straw residue under anaerobic and aerobic conditions. PloS one, 11: e0158172. Fierer N, Craine JM, McLauchlan K, Schimel JP (2005) Litter quality and the temperature sensitivity of decomposition. Ecology, 86: 320-326. Foereid B, de Neergaard A, Hogh-Jensen H (2004) Turnover of organic matter in a Miscanthus field: effect of time in Miscanthus cultivation and inorganic nitrogen supply. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 36: 1075-1085. Fontaine S, Mariotti A, Abbadie L (2003) The priming effect of organic matter: a question of microbial competition?. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 35: 837-843. Fujii K, Funakawa S, Hayakawa C, Kosaki T (2009) Quantification of proton budgets in soils of cropland and adjacent forest in Thailand and Indonesia. Plant and Soil, 316: 241-255. Fujii K, Hayakawa C, Inagaki Y, Kosaki T (2020) Effects of land use change on turnover and storage of soil organic matter in a tropical forest. Plant and Soil, 446: 425-439. Fujii K, Morioka K, Hayakawa C, Inagaki Y, Hangs RD, Anderson DW, McConkey BG (2020) Litter decomposition and soil organic carbon stabilization in a Kastanozem of Saskatchewan, Canada. Geoderma Regional, 23, e00348. Garcia‐Palacios P, Maestre FT, Kattge J, Wall DH (2013) Climate and litter quality differently modulate the effects of soil fauna on litter decomposition across biomes. Ecology letters, 16: 1045-1053. Gregorich EG, Monreal CM, Ellert BH (1995) Turnover of soil organic matter and storage of corn residue carbon estimated from natural 13C abundance. Canadian Journal of Soil Science, 75: 161-167. Haaf D, Six J, Doetterl S (2021) Global patterns of geo-ecological controls on the response of soil respiration to warming. Nature Climate Change, 11: 623-627. Harmon ME, Silver WL, Fasth B, Chen HUA, Burke IC, Parton WJ., Currie WS, Lidet (2009) Long‐term patterns of mass loss during the decomposition of leaf and fine root litter: an intersite comparison. Global Change Biology, 15: 1320-1338. Hayakawa C, Funakawa S, Fujii K, Kadono A, Kosaki T (2014) Effects of climatic and soil properties on cellulose decomposition rates in temperate and tropical forests. Biology and Fertility of Soils 50: 633-643. Hopkins DW, Ibrahim DM, O'donnell AG, Shiel RS (1990) Decomposition of cellulose, soil organic matter and plant litter in a temperate grassland soil. Plant and Soil, 124: 79-85. House GJ, Worsham AD, Sheets TJ, Stinner RE (1987) Herbicide effects on soil arthropod dynamics and wheat straw decomposition in a North Carolina no-tillage agroecosystem. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 4: 109-114. Jacobson KM, Jacobson PJ (1998) Rainfall regulates decomposition of buried cellulose in the Namib Desert. Journal of Arid Environments, 38: 571-583. Katterer T, Reichstein M, Andren O, Lomander A (1998) Temperature dependence of organic matter decomposition: a critical review using literature data analyzed with different models. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 27: 258-262. Kimetu JM, Lehmann J, Ngoze SO, Mugendi DN, Kinyangi JM, Riha S, Verchot L, Recha, JW, Pell AN (2008) Reversibility of soil productivity decline with organic matter of differing quality along a degradation gradient. Ecosystems, 11: 726-739. Kitayama K, Aiba SI, Takyu M, Majalap N, Wagai R (2004) Soil phosphorus fractionation and phosphorus-use efficiency of a Bornean tropical montane rain forest during soil aging with podozolization. Ecosystems, 7: 259-274. Knorr W, Prentice IC, House JI, Holland EA (2005) Long-term sensitivity of soil carbon turnover to warming. Nature, 433(7023): 298-301. Kurka AM, Starr M (1997) Relationship between decomposition of cellulose in the soil and tree stand characteristics in natural boreal forests. Plant and Soil, 197: 167-175. Lal R (2004) Soil carbon sequestration impacts on global climate change and food security. Science, 304: 1623-1627. Lal R (2006) Enhancing crop yields in the developing countries through restoration of the soil organic carbon pool in agricultural lands. Land Degradation and Development, 17:197-209. Lang SI, Cornelissen JH, Klahn T, Van Logtestijn RS, Broekman R, Schweikert W, Aerts R (2009) An experimental comparison of chemical traits and litter decomposition rates in a diverse range of subarctic bryophyte, lichen and vascular plant species. Journal of Ecology, 97: 886-900. Leifeld J, Von Lutzow M (2014) Chemical and microbial activation energies of soil organic matter decomposition. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 50: 147-153. Lenton TM, Huntingford C (2003) Global terrestrial carbon storage and uncertainties in its temperature sensitivity examined with a simple model. Global Change Biology, 9: 1333-1352. Li J, Pei J, Cui J, Chen X, Li B, Nie M, Fang C (2017). Carbon quality mediates the temperature sensitivity of soil organic carbon decomposition in managed ecosystems. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 250, 44-50. Lima AM, Silva IR, Neves JC, Novais RF, Barros NF, Mendonca ES, Smyth TJ, Moreira MS, Fernando P, Leite FP (2006). Soil organic carbon dynamics following afforestation of degraded pastures with eucalyptus in southeastern Brazil. Forest Ecology and Management, 235: 219-231. Liu W, Fox JE, Xu Z (2000) Leaf litter decomposition of canopy trees, bamboo and moss in a montane moist evergreen broad-leaved forest on Ailao Mountain, Yunnan, south-west China. Ecological Research, 15: 435-447. Lloyd J, Taylor JA (1994) On the temperature dependence of soil respiration. Functional Ecology, 8: 315-323. Machado PLOA, Sohi SP, Gaunt JL (2003) Effect of no‐tillage on turnover of organic matter in a Rhodic Ferralsol. Soil Use and Management,19: 250-256. Maeda K, Onikura Y (1977) Decomposition of rice straw and nitrogen dynamics in paddy soils. Japanese Journal of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, 48: 567-568 (in Japanese) Mikan CJ, Schimel JP, Doyle AP (2002) Temperature controls of microbial respiration in arctic tundra soils above and below freezing. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 34: 1785-1795. Minasny B, Malone BP, McBratney AB, Angers DA, Arrouays D, Chambers A, Field DJ (2017) Soil carbon 4 per mille. Geoderma, 292: 59-86. Moore TR (1984) Litter decomposition in a subarctic spruce‐lichen woodland, Eastern Canada. Ecology, 65: 299-308. Moore TR, Bubier JL, Bledzki L (2007) Litter decomposition in temperate peatland ecosystems: the effect of substrate and site. Ecosystems, 10: 949-963. Mori K, Bernier N, Kosaki T, Ponge JF (2009). Tree influence on soil biological activity: What can be inferred from the optical examination of humus profiles?. European Journal of Soil Biology, 45: 290-300. Murayama S, Asakawa Y, Ohno Y (1990) Chemical properties of subsurface peats and their decomposition kinetics under field conditions. Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, 36: 129-140. Nakatsubo T, Uchina M, Horikoshi T, Nakane K (1997) Comparative study of the mass loss rate of moss litter in boreal and subalpine forests in relation to temperature. Ecological Research, 12: 47-54. Nilsson MC, Wardle DA, Dahlberg A (1999) Effects of plant litter species composition and diversity on the boreal forest plant-soil system. Oikos, 86: 16-26. Olson JS 1963 Energy storage and the balance of producers and decomposers in ecological systems. Ecology, 44: 322-331. Ono K, Hiradate S, Morita S, Ohse K, Hirai K (2011) Humification processes of needle litters on forest floors in Japanese cedar (Cryptomeria japonica) and Hinoki cypress (Chamaecyparis obtusa) plantations in Japan. Plant and Soil, 338: 171-181. Purwanto BH, Alam S (2020) Impact of intensive agricultural management on carbon and nitrogen dynamics in the humid tropics. Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, 66: 50-59. Raich JW, Schlesinger WH (1992) The global carbon dioxide flux in soil respiration and its relationship to vegetation and climate. Tellus B, 44: 81-99. Reddy MV, Reddy VR, Yule DF, Cogle AL, George PJ (1994) Decomposition of straw in relation to tillage, moisture, and arthropod abundance in a semi-arid tropical Alfisol. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 17: 45-50. Reichstein M, Katterer T, Andren O, Ciais P, Schulze ED, Cramer W, Valentini R (2005) Temperature sensitivity of decomposition in relation to soil organic matter pools: critique and outlook. Biogeosciences, 2: 317-321. Rezig FA, Elhadi EA, Abdalla MR (2014) Decomposition and nutrient release pattern of wheat (Triticum aestivum) residues under different treatments in desert field conditions of Sudan. International Journal of Recycling of Organic Waste in Agriculture, 3: 10. Rimmer DL (2006) Free radicals, antioxidants, and soil organic matter recalcitrance. European Journal of Soil Science, 57: 91-94. Ruess RW, Hendrick RL, Burton AJ, Pregitzer KS, Sveinbjornsson B, Allen MF, Maurer GE (2003) Coupling fine root dynamics with ecosystem carbon cycling in black spruce forests of interior Alaska. Ecological Monographs, 73: 643-662. Ryan MC, Aravena R, Gillham RW (1995) The use of C13 natural abundance to investigate the turnover of microbial biomass and active fractions of soil organic matter under two tillage treatments. In: Lal R, Kimble J, Levine E, Stewart BA (Eds.), Soil and global change, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp. 351-360. Sanderman J, Hengl T, Fiske GJ (2017) Soil carbon debt of 12,000 years of human land use. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114: 9575-9580. Schlesinger WH, Bernhardt ES (2013) Biogeochemistry: an analysis of global change. Academic press. Schmidt MW, Torn MS, Abiven S, Dittmar T, Guggenberger G, Janssens IA, Trumbore SE (2011) Persistence of soil organic matter as an ecosystem property. Nature, 478(7367): 49-56. Sedia EG, Ehrenfel JG (2006). Differential effects of lichens and mosses on soil enzyme activity and litter decomposition. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 43: 177-189. Sherman C, Steinberger Y (2012) Microbial functional diversity associated with plant litter decomposition along a climatic gradient. Microbial Ecology, 64: 399-415. Shi Z, Allison SD, He Y, Levine PA, Hoyt AM, Beem-Miller J, Zhu Q, Wieder WR, Trumbore S, Randerson JT (2020) The age distribution of global soil carbon inferred from radiocarbon measurements. Nature Geoscience, 13: 555-559. Sisti CP, dos Santos HP, Kohhann R, Alves BJ, Urquiaga S, Boddey RM (2004) Change in carbon and nitrogen stocks in soil under 13 years of conventional or zero tillage in southern Brazil. Soil and Tillage Research, 76: 39-58. Six J, Elliott ET, Paustian K, Doran JW (1998) Aggregation and soil organic matter accumulation in cultivated and native grassland soils. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 62: 1367-1377. Six J, Feller C, Denef K, Ogle S, de Moraes Sa JC, Albrecht A (2002) Soil organic matter, biota and aggregation in temperate and tropical soils-Effects of no-tillage. Agronomie, 22: 755-775. Sjogersten S, Wookey PA (2004) Decomposition of mountain birch leaf litter at the forest-tundra ecotone in the Fennoscandian mountains in relation to climate and soil conditions. Plant and Soil, 262: 215-227. Slessarev EW, Lin Y, Bingham NL, Johnson JE, Dai Y, Schimel JP, Chadwick OA (2016) Water balance creates a threshold in soil pH at the global scale. Nature, 540(7634): 567-569. Sparrow SD, Sparrow EB, Cochran VI (1992) Decomposition in forest and fallow subarctic soils. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 14: 253-259. Starr M, Ukonmaanaho L (2004) Levels and characteristics of TOC in throughfall, forest floor leachate and soil solution in undisturbed boreal forest ecosystems. Water, Air and Soil Pollution: Focus, 4: 715-729. Talbot JM, Treseder KK (2012) Interactions among lignin, cellulose, and nitrogen drive litter chemistry-decay relationships. Ecology, 93: 345-354 Tarkalson DD, Kachman SD, Knops JM, Thies JE, Wortmann CS (2008) Decomposition of Bt and non-Bt corn hybrid residues in the field. Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems, 80: 211-222. Tonucci RG, Nair VD, Nair PR, Garcia R (2017) Grass vs. tree origin of soil organic carbon under different land-use systems in the Brazilian Cerrado. Plant and Soil, 419: 281-292. Trap J, Hattenschwiler S, Gattin I, Aubert M (2013) Forest ageing: an unexpected driver of beech leaf litter quality variability in European forests with strong consequences on soil processes. Forest Ecology and Management, 302: 338-345. Trumbore SE (2000) Age of soil organic matter and soil respiration: radiocarbon constraints on belowground C dynamics. Ecological Applications, 10: 399-411. Trumbore SE, Chadwick OA, Amundson R (1996) Rapid exchange between soil carbon and atmospheric carbon dioxide driven by temperature change. Science, 272(5260): 393-396. Trumbore SE, Harden JW (1997) Accumulation and turnover of carbon in organic and mineral soils of the BOREAS northern study area. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 102(D24): 28817-28830. Turetsky MR, Crow SE, Evans RJ, Vitt DH, Wieder RK (2008) Trade‐offs in resource allocation among moss species control decomposition in boreal peatlands. Journal of Ecology, 96: 1297-1305. Veldkamp E (1994) Organic carbon turnover in three tropical soils under pasture after deforestation. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 58: 175-180. Von Lutzow M, Kogel-Knabner I (2009) Temperature sensitivity of soil organic matter decompositionwhat do we know?. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 46: 1-15. Wagai R, Kishimoto‐Mo AW, Yonemura S, Shirato Y, Hiradate S, Yagasaki Y (2013) Linking temperature sensitivity of soil organic matter decomposition to its molecular structure, accessibility, and microbial physiology. Global Change Biology, 19: 1114-1125. Wang Z, Liu S, Bu ZJ, Wang S (2018) Degradation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) during Sphagnum litters decay. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 25: 18642-18650. Wardle DA, Nilsson MC, Zackrisson O, Gallet C (2003) Determinants of litter mixing effects in a Swedish boreal forest. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 35: 827-835. Wynn JG, Bird MI (2007) C4-derived soil organic carbon decomposes faster than its C3 counterpart in mixed C3/C4 soils. Global Change Biology, 13: 2206-2217. Zhang D, Hui D, Luo Y, Zhou G (2008) Rates of litter decomposition in terrestrial ecosystems: global patterns and controlling factors. Journal of Plant Ecology, 1: 85-93. Zhou T, Shi P, Hui D, Luo Y (2009) Global pattern of temperature sensitivity of soil heterotrophic respiration (Q10) and its implications for carbon‐climate feedback. Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences, 114(G2). Zotarelli L, Alves BJR, Urquiaga S, Boddey RM, Six J (2007) Impact of tillage and crop rotation on light fraction and intra-aggregate soil organic matter in two Oxisols. Soil and Tillage Research, 95: 196-206. Zhu B, Cheng W (2011) Rhizosphere priming effect increases the temperature sensitivity of soil organic matter decomposition. Global Change Biology, 17: 2172-2183. Copyright: CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication
Litter manipulation and the soil arthropod community in a lowland tropical rainforest			Tropical soil arthropod communities are highly diverse and provide a number of important ecosystem services, including the maintenance of soil structure, regulation of hydrological processes, nutrient cycling and decomposition. Experiments in temperate regions suggest that litter dynamics are important in determining the abundance, richness and community composition of soil fauna, but there is little information for lowland tropical forests. We used a long-term litter manipulation experiment (removing, doubling and control) in a neotropical forest to investigate the consequences of changing litter dynamics on the soil arthropod community. The abundance and biomass of arthropods were reduced significantly by the removal of litter, but not affected by litter addition. Litter manipulation had no effect on simple measures of taxonomic richness or diversity, but multivariate ordination techniques revealed a significant shift in arthropod community composition with the removal, but not addition, of litter. This suggests the overall importance of top-down controls on the arthropod community in this ecosystem, with bottom-up influences only important following the removal of large quantities of litter. Of the parameters measured, the faunal composition of experimental plots was best predicted by litter depth and the concentrations of total carbon and readily-exchangeable phosphorus (in order of importance), highlighting the influential role of soil chemical properties, in addition to the physical properties of litter, in shaping soil arthropod communities. Comparison with the results of a previous study of litter-dwelling fauna in the same litter manipulation experiment suggested that the soil and litter arthropod communities are influenced by different parameters: total carbon and litter depth for the soil community, but sodium and calcium for the litter community, although phosphorus was important in both environments. We conclude that arthropod community composition is controlled by different factors in the soil than in the litter and is affected by decreasing, but not increasing, depth of litter. (C) 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Litter Traits of Native and Non-Native Tropical Trees Influence Soil Carbon Dynamics in Timber Plantations in Panama			Tropical reforestation initiatives are widely recognized as a key strategy for mitigating rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Although rapid tree growth in young secondary forests and plantations sequesters large amounts of carbon (C) in biomass, the choice of tree species for reforestation projects is crucial, as species identity and diversity affect microbial activity and soil C cycling via plant litter inputs. The decay rate of litter is largely determined by its chemical and physical properties, and trait complementarity of diverse litter mixtures can produce non-additive effects, which facilitate or delay decomposition. Furthermore, microbial communities may preferentially decompose litter from native tree species (homefield advantage). Hence, information on how different tree species influence soil carbon dynamics could inform reforestation efforts to maximize soil C storage. We established a decomposition experiment in Panama, Central America, using mesocosms and litterbags in monoculture plantations of native species (Dalbergia retusa Hemsl. and Terminalia amazonia J.F.Gmel., Exell) or teak (Tectona grandis L.f.) to assess the influence of different litter types and litter mixtures on soil C dynamics. We used reciprocal litter transplant experiments to assess the homefield advantage and litter mixtures to determine facilitative or antagonistic effects on decomposition rates and soil respiration in all plantation types. Although litter properties explained some of the variation in decomposition, the microclimate and soil properties in the plantations also played an important role. Microbial biomass C and litter decomposition were lower in Tectona than in the native plantations. We observed non-additive effects of mixtures with Tectona and Dalbergia litter on both decomposition and soil respiration, but the effect depended on plantation type. Further, there was a homefield disadvantage for soil respiration in Tectona and Terminalia plantations. Our results suggest that tree species diversity plays an important role in the resilience of tropical soils and that plantations with native tree species could help maintain key processes involved in soil carbon sequestration.
Litterfall and decomposition in relation to soil carbon pools along a secondary forest chronosequence in Puerto Rico			Secondary forests are becoming increasingly widespread in the tropics, but our understanding of how secondary succession affects carbon (C) cycling and C sequestration in these ecosystems is limited. We used a well-replicated 80-year pasture to forest successional chronosequence and primary forest in Puerto Rico to explore the relationships among litterfall, litter quality, decomposition, and soil C pools. Litterfall rates recovered rapidly during early secondary succession and averaged 10.5 (+/- 0.1 SE) Mg/ha/y among all sites over a 2-year period. Although forest plant community composition and plant life form dominance changed during succession, litter chemistry as evaluated by sequential C fractions and by C-13-nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy did not change significantly with forest age, nor did leaf decomposition rates. Root decomposition was slower than leaves and was fastest in the 60-year-old sites and slowest in the 10- and 30-year-old sites. Common litter and common site experiments suggested that site conditions were more important controls than litter quality in this chronosequence. Bulk soil C content was positively correlated with hydrophobic leaf compounds, suggesting that there is greater soil C accumulation if leaf litter contains more tannins and waxy compounds relative to more labile compounds. Our results suggest that most key C fluxes associated with litter production and decomposition re-establish rapidly-within a decade or two-during tropical secondary succession. Therefore, recovery of leaf litter C cycling processes after pasture use are faster than aboveground woody biomass and species accumulation, indicating that these young secondary forests have the potential to recover litter cycling functions and provide some of the same ecosystem services of primary forests.
Litterfall-Associated Carbon Deposition and Vertical Profiles of Soil Organic Carbon in Different Land-Use Systems			Litterfall is one of the major inputs for soil nutrients. Understanding the connection of litterfall and soil organic carbon (SOC) as the part of ecological processes is a key step towards carbon sequestration as a climate change mitigation strategy. Yet, it remains inadequate to support by empirical pieces of evidence particularly in tropical ecosystems. In this study, litter traps were used to monitor the monthly organic carbon deposition over a year through litterfall, and soil samples were collected vertically up to 30 cm depth to define the SOC depth distribution in three different land use types located at Wondo Genet district, southern Ethiopia. The results were interpreted by deploying both the carbon stratification ratio (CSR) and carbon flow balance ratio (CFBR) as ecological indicators. The results revealed that both the annual litterfall amount and associated organic carbon input in plantation forest (958.4 +/- 112 g center dot m-2 center dot yr-1; 391.4 +/- 112 g center dot C center dot m-2 center dot yr-1) were higher than those in the homegarden (183.5.4 +/- 26 g center dot m-2 center dot yr-1; 67.4 +/- 10 g center dot C center dot m-2 center dot yr-1), conceivably due to few litter contributors (trees) present in the homegarden. The CSR of the homegarden (1.3 +/- 0.01) was found between the ratio obtained for crop (1.2 +/- 0.01) and plantation forest (1.4 +/- 0.01), indicating that it is definitely a combination of pure plantation forest and crop system. The CFBR was higher in plantation forest (3.4 yr-1) than in soil of homegarden (0.77 yr-1), implying the net accumulation of soil carbon over time in the latter system. Hence, homegardens could be considered as a system of climate-smart practice with multiple-biogeochemistry pathways, which simultaneously address the social-absolute needs. Given the current tendency of transforming homegarden agroforestry to monoculture types owing to economical drivers, such indicators can dictate of making rational decisions related to land use planning and soil fertility management.
Local knowledge of impacts of tree cover on ecosystem services in smallholder coffee production systems			The potential for tree components of coffee agroforestry systems to provide ecosystem services is widely recognized. Management practices are a key factor in the amount and quality of ecosystem services provided. There is relatively abundant information on ecosystem services provision within agroforestry systems, but comparatively scant information regarding how coffee farmers manage their plantations, the factors influencing their farming practices and the extent to which farmers' local knowledge - as opposed to global scientific understanding - underpins management decisions. Policymakers and scientists too frequently design development programs and projects in the coffee sector. On occasion technicians are included in the design process, but farmers and their knowledge are always excluded. This research explores farmers' knowledge regarding how trees affect coffee productivity and ecosystem services in Costa Rica. Farmers' knowledge on the effects of trees on coffee productivity was compared with that of other knowledge sources: coffee processors, technicians and scientists. Farmers were shown to have detailed knowledge regarding ecosystem services that their coffee agroforestry systems provide as well as on the interactions between trees and coffee productivity. When asked on the services that trees provide, farmers classified trees according to water protection, soil formation, or contribution to biodiversity conservation. These classifications were related to tree attributes such as leaf size, biomass production or root abundance. Comparison of coffee productivity knowledge from different knowledge sources revealed considerable complementarity and little contradiction.The effects of shade trees on biophysical conditions and their interactions with coffee productivity were well understood by farmers. They recorded and classified shade trees as 'fresh' (suitable for integration with coffee) or 'hot' (unsuitable) based on their leaf texture and size, foliage density, crown shape, and root system attributes. The fresh/hot classification significantly related to positive/negative provision of services. This classification was widely used by farmers, and unknown by coffee technicians.Detailed local knowledge included several different topics, such as the role of trees in soil formation and in abundance of pollinators. Farmers were also aware of the influence of these ecosystem services on crop productivity. Generally, management decisions were made to maintain coffee productivity rather than ecosystem services. Based on these results, it is suggested that technical interventions addressing the improvement of coffee plantations are more likely to be successful if they take into account not only the scientific information on agroforestry interactions but also the knowledge possessed by farmers. Lack of comprehension of local coffee knowledge could be expected to reduce the success of development programs and projects aimed at improving productivity or other ecosystem services. (c) 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Locating international REDD+ power relations: Debating forests and trees in international climate negotiations			The Reduction of Deforestation and Forest Degradation initiative (REDD+) was initially hailed widely as a smart and cost-effective way to mitigate climate change and has moved quickly compared to other strands of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) negotiations. Much of the initiative's original appeal - and a good deal of subsequent controversy around it - relates to framing the world's tropical forests as carbon sinks and compensating developing countries that manage to reverse or avoid deforestation. REDD+ negotiations can thus be seen a site where the standard divisions between Annex 1 and non-Annex 1 ('developed' and 'developing') were being challenged and interrogated by the negotiating parties and the broader network of actors around the climate regime. This article suggests that such complex and changing global governance policy fields need to be analysed as 'places' in their own right, populated by actors engaged in field-specific power relations that may not reflect international hierarchies or power relations manifested in other international settings. Based in a unique set of interviews supplemented by primary data analysis, this article unpacks the power relations of REDD+ negotiations by examining how those involved seek to assume competence, designate and recognize leadership, and shape outcomes. In tracing the dynamics of claiming competence, the 'competition' between two disciplinary milieus around forests as an international policy object and also delegates' shifting between reliance on expert knowledge and political 'know-how' in the negotiations themselves are identified. To understand the politics of recognition - that is to have a claim to competence or position acknowledged by others - the perceived qualities and resources of recognized leadership are examined and the absence of global superpowers amongst REDD+ leadership is problematized and discussed. Finally, in terms of wielding influence over outcomes, the fate of two quite similar ideas - one that has become incorporated into REDD+ methodology and another that is failing to be - further illustrate how the field is marked by internal power practices and that not all actors are equally well-positioned to achieve desired outcomes. © 2015 Elsevier Ltd.
Logging and soil nutrients independently explain plant trait expression in tropical forests			Plant functional traits regulate ecosystem functions but little is known about how co-occurring gradients of land use and edaphic conditions influence their expression. We test how gradients of logging disturbance and soil properties relate to community-weighted mean traits in logged and old-growth tropical forests in Borneo. We studied 32 physical, chemical and physiological traits from 284 tree species in eight 1 ha plots and measured long-term soil nutrient supplies and plant-available nutrients. Logged plots had greater values for traits that drive carbon capture and growth, whilst old-growth forests had greater values for structural and persistence traits. Although disturbance was the primary driver of trait expression, soil nutrients explained a statistically independent axis of variation linked to leaf size and nutrient concentration. Soil characteristics influenced trait expression via nutrient availability, nutrient pools, and pH. Our finding, that traits have dissimilar responses to land use and soil resource availability, provides robust evidence for the need to consider the abiotic context of logging when predicting plant functional diversity across human-modified tropical forests. The detection of two independent axes was facilitated by the measurement of many more functional traits than have been examined in previous studies.
Logging damage and injured tree mortality in tropical forest management			Using insights from the forest ecology literature, we analyze the effect of injured trees on stand composition and carbon stored in above-ground biomass and the implications for forest management decisions. Results from a Faustmann model with data for a tropical forest on Kalimantan show that up to 50% of the basal area of the stand before harvest can consist of injured trees. Considering injured trees leads to an increase in the amount of carbon in above-ground biomass of up to 165%. These effects are larger under reduced impact logging than under conventional logging. The effects on land expectation value and cutting cycle are relatively small. The results suggest that considering injured trees in models for tropical forest management is important for the correct assessment of the potential of financial programs to store carbon and conserve forest ecosystem services in managed tropical forests, such as reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and payment for ecosystem services. Recommendations for Resource Managers Considering the role of injured trees is important for managing tropical forests These trees can cover up to 50% of basal area and contain more than 50% of the carbon stored in above-ground biomass Reduced impact logging leads to a larger basal area of injured trees and more carbon stored in injured trees than conventional logging Injured trees play an important role when assessing the potential for carbon storage in the context of payment for forest ecosystem services.
Logging emissions from a Forest Stewardship Council certified forest in Guyana			Logging is a dominant land-use activity across the tropics and a significant source of greenhouse gas emissions. This study quantifies emissions from selective logging in a Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) certified concession in Guyana that includes carbon in extracted logs, tree carbon left in the forest, and incidental tree mortality caused by felling and logging infrastructure. We also estimate carbon emissions from sawmilling of round logs. Emissions from harvested trees from stump to mill gate were 8.44 Mg CO2 m-3 (131.96 Mg CO2 ha-1). The main sources of emissions were from trees killed during felling (34%) and unextracted biomass of harvested trees (32%). On average, 15.5% of the harvested tree biomass and 43% of the log biomass was converted to sawn lumber (0.78 Mg CO2 m-3 of round log volume). We find similar levels of logging emissions in our study with those reported for non-FSC concessions in Guyana (8.54 Mg CO2 m-3) and Suriname (8.94 Mg CO2 m-3) but higher in two FSC-certified concessions in Suriname (6.65 Mg CO2 m-3). Adopting forest management practices that reduce residual stand mortality from felling and improved milling technology to reduce wood waste will help meet future demand for wood products and support climate mitigation goals.
LONG-TERM ASSESSMENT OF FIRE-INDUCED CARBON LOSS IN SOUTHEAST ATLANTIC FOREST			Fires threaten tropical forests such as Atlantic Forest in Brazil, compromising the ecosystem service of carbon stock. However, there is a literature gap regarding these studies in these ecosystems. Therefore, we conducted this analysis in different land use and land cover (LULC) classes, considering seasonality and topographic, hydrological, anthropogenic and fire variables correlations, during 2000-2020. The InVEST Carbon model was used, applied to carbon biomass pre-fire and pos-fire, based on field work and linear regression, weighted by pre- and post-fire NBR spectral index. The results, in 21 years, revealed a total loss after fire of 55.7GgC (43%), and of these, 79% is in old-growth Ombrophilous dense. In general, fire negatively impacts the carbon stock of native forests by an average of 38% (ranging from 19.9% to 69.1%, depending on phytophysiognomy and seasonality), Eucalyptus plantations by 87.1%, high- altitude grasslands by 79.5% and pasture in 90.4%. Burn frequency and severity as well as distance from rivers and roads were significantly correlated with carbon loss. A small portion of this biome has shown a high potential for fire-induced carbon loss, indicating a danger for the whole Atlantic Forest conservation and to international agreements commitments.
Long-term carbon stock recovery in a neotropical-logged forest			This article assesses the effect of different logging levels on loss of above-ground biomass and the contribution of different ecological groups of species in the long-term recovery of C stocks. A randomized complete blocks design was established in 1987 with three felling treatments: diameter above 20 cm, 40 cm and 60 cm. All the trees and palms bigger than 10 cm dbh were measured. The average stock in old growth forests was 84.3 t C/ha. Low- and medium-impact treatments led to C reductions in 10% and 44%, respectively; for low impact, a significant increase was detected after the 25-year measurements, which could be related to a possible CO2 fertilization effect. For high impact, 79% of C was lost, but the original level recovered after 20 years. The ecological succession process, subsequent to logging, is an efficient mechanism to restore C stocks.
Long-term charcoal-induced changes to soil properties in temperate regions of northern Iran			The long-term performance and benefits of charcoal application on the carbon sequestration and properties of forest soils in temperate or non-tropical regions has not been studied in detail in spite of its important role in global warming. This study was conducted to describe the long-term charcoal-induced changes in organic carbon (OC) content and other soil properties of temperate deciduous forests in Mazandaran province, northern Iran. Three sites were sampled to collect composite soil samples from two depths (0-20 and 20-40cm) inside and outside of a plot of charcoal-enriched soils surrounding a historical charcoal production site (abandoned for more than 120years). The presence of charcoal in soils for about 120years elevated significantly the black carbon, total OC, natural soil OC, total nitrogen, dissolved organic matter, soil OC density, exchangeable bases, saturated hydraulic conductivity, available water capacity and available Fe, Mn and Zn compared to the adjacent reference soils. Cation exchange capacity (CEC) and pH were 15.5cmol(c)kg(-1) and 0.5 units, respectively, higher than the adjacent reference soils at 0-20cm soil depth. However, electrical conductivity (EC), bulk density and available Cu were higher in the adjacent reference soil. The aged charcoal had no significant effect on the microbial respiration rate of studied soils. The results of this study provide new insights and strong support for the long-term benefits of biochar application as a management strategy for improving soil productivity as well as sequestering large quantities of durable carbon in soils of the region and mitigating global warming.
Long-term effect of selective logging on floristic composition: A 25 year experiment in the Brazilian Amazon			Selective logging is one of the most prominent land uses in tropical forests and although it involves harvesting a limited number of trees, the impact on forest structure, composition and aboveground biomass can be significant. Although these impacts are well documented, what is little known is the extent to which selective logging affects tree floristic composition and its recovery process. Understanding how floristic composition is affected by logging activities is essential for determining subsequent cutting cycles, for the maintenance of carbon stocks and for biodiversity conservation. This research investigates the effect of logging on long-term trends on the recovery of species composition in a tropical forest using a unique logging experiment where measurements have been taken annually over a period of 25 years. Changes in 12 long-term 1-hectare (ha) permanent plots were assessed where different selective logging intensities occurred. In the first years after logging, floristic composition differed widely between intact and selectively logged forests, with exploited areas deviating from pre-logged composition. Over time, exploited areas shifted towards the original composition, with more pronounced changes in this trend after similar to 13 years. Shifts in floristic composition were caused mainly by a significant increase in light-demanding fast-growing pioneer species and their subsequent continuous high mortality rates after 13 years of the recovery process. In contrast, the control plots showed similar shifts in composition over time, suggesting external factors such as long-term climate changes may be driving these shifts. The results suggest that 25 years after an experimental selective logging has taken place, floristic composition tends to recover closer to the pre-logged status. Thus, in the absence of further human disturbances, experimental selectively logged forests in low to moderate intensities are compatible with biodiversity conservation, at least during the first cycle of exploitation. Reconciling conservation strategies with the recovery of stocks of commercial timber species would be greatly improved by using these results and lead towards more sustainable forest management plans.
Long-Term Effects of Ecological Restoration Projects on Ecosystem Services and Their Spatial Interactions: A Case Study of Hainan Tropical Forest Park in China			Ecological restoration projects aim to comprehensively intervene in damaged or deteriorating ecosystems, restore them, improve the provision of ecosystem services, and achieve harmonious coexistence between humans and nature. Implementing ecological restoration projects leads to continuous changes in land use/land cover. Studying the long-term changes in land use/land cover and their impacts on ecosystem services, as well as the trade-off and synergy between these services, helps evaluate the long-term effectiveness of ecological restoration projects in restoring ecosystems. Therefore, this study analyzes the land use/land cover, and ecosystem services of the Hainan Tropical Forest Park in China to address this. Since 2000, the area has undergone multiple ecological restoration projects, divided roughly into two stages: 2003-2013 and 2013-2021. The InVEST model is used to quantify three essential ecosystem services in mountainous regions (water yield, carbon storage, and soil conservation), and redundancy analysis identifies the primary driving factors influencing their changes. We conducted spatial autocorrelation analysis to examine the interplay among ecosystem services under long-term land use/land cover change. The results indicate a decrease in the total supply of water yield (-5.14%) and carbon storage (-3.21%) in the first phase. However, the second phase shows an improvement in ecosystem services, with an increase in the total supply of water yield (11.45%), carbon storage (27.58%), and soil conservation (21.95%). The redundancy analysis results reveal that land use/land cover are the primary driving factors influencing the changes in ecosystem services. Furthermore, there is a shift in the trade-off and synergy between ecosystem services at different stages, with significant differences in spatial distribution. The findings of this study provide more spatially targeted suggestions for the restoration and management of tropical montane rainforests in the future.
Long-term impacts of anthropogenic perturbations on dynamics and speciation of organic carbon in tropical forest and subtropical grassland ecosystems			Anthropogenic perturbations have profoundly modified the Earth's biogeochemical cycles, the most prominent of these changes being manifested by global carbon (C) cycling. We investigated long-term effects of human-induced land-use and land-cover changes from native tropical forest (Kenya) and subtropical grassland (South Africa) ecosystems to agriculture on the dynamics and structural composition of soil organic C (SOC) using elemental analysis and integrated C-13 nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) and synchrotron-based Fourier transform infrared-attenuated total reflectance (Sr-FTIR-ATR) spectroscopy. Anthropogenic interventions led to the depletion of 76%, 86% and 67% of the total SOC; and 77%, 85% and 66% of the N concentrations from the surface soils of Nandi, Kakamega and the South African sites, respectively, over a period of up to 100 years. Significant proportions of the total SOC (46-73%) and N (37-73%) losses occurred during the first 4 years of conversion indicating that these forest- and grassland-derived soils contain large amounts of labile soil organic matter (SOM), potentially vulnerable to degradation upon human-induced land-use and land-cover changes. Anthropogenic perturbations altered not only the C sink capacity of these soils, but also the functional group composition and dynamics of SOC with time, rendering structural composition of the resultant organic matter in the agricultural soils to be considerably different from the SOM under natural forest and grassland ecosystems. These molecular level compositional changes were manifested: (i) by the continued degradation of O-alkyl and acetal-C structures found in carbohydrate and holocellulose biomolecules, some labile aliphatic-C functionalities, (ii) by side-chain oxidation of phenylpropane units of lignin and (iii) by the continued aromatization and aliphatization of the humic fractions possibly through selective accumulation of recalcitrant H and C substituted aryl-C and aliphatic-C components such as (poly)-methylene units, respectively. These changes appeared as early as the fourth year after transition, and their intensity increased with duration of cultivation until a new quasi-equilibrium of SOC was approached at about 20 years after conversion. However, subtle but persistent changes in molecular structures of the resultant SOM continued long after (up to 100 years) a steady state for SOC was approached. These molecular level changes in the inherent structural composition of SOC may exert considerable influence on biogeochemical cycling of C and bioavailability of essential nutrients present in association with SOM, and may significantly affect the sustainability of agriculture as well as potentials of the soils to sequester C in these tropical and subtropical highland agroecosystems.
Long-term patterns in tropical reforestation: Plant community composition and aboveground biomass accumulation			Primary tropical forests are renowned for their high biodiversity and carbon storage, and considerable research has documented both species and carbon losses with deforestation and agricultural land uses. Economic drivers are now leading to the abandonment of agricultural lands, and the area in secondary forests is increasing. We know little about how long it takes for these ecosystems to achieve the structural and compositional characteristics of primary forests. In this study, we examine changes in plant species composition and aboveground biomass during eight decades of tropical secondary succession in Puerto Rico, and compare these patterns with primary forests. Using a well-replicated chronosequence approach, we sampled primary forests and secondary forests established 10, 20, 30, 60, and 80 years ago on abandoned pastures. Tree species composition in all secondary forests was different from that of primary forests and could be divided into early (10-, 20-, and 30-year) vs. late (60- and 80-year) successional phases. The highest rates of aboveground biomass accumulation occurred in the first 20 years, with rates of C sequestration peaking at 6.7 +/- 0.5 Mg C (.) ha(-1) (.) yr(-1). Reforestation of pastures resulted in an accumulation of 125 Mg C/ha in aboveground standing live biomass over 80 years. The 80 year-old secondary forests had greater biomass than the primary forests, due to the replacement of woody species by palms in the primary forests. Our results show that these new ecosystems have different species composition, but similar species richness, and significant potential for carbon sequestration, compared to remnant primary forests.
Long-Term Trends in Tropical Tree Growth: a Pantropical Study			0
Long-term variations of climate and carbon fluxes over the Amazon basin			[1] The Amazon basin contains some of the most productive ecosystems on the planet, yet we have little understanding of their long-term behavior. By examining historical climate records over the Amazon, we identify several modes of climatic variability-including previously undocumented long-term modes. Furthermore, using a process-based ecosystem model, we show that these variations in climate generate variations in terrestrial carbon fluxes on short (3-4 year), intermediate (8-9 year), and long (24-28 year) time scales. The long-term cycles in terrestrial carbon balance have not been previously suggested. Finally, we find that time-lags between productivity and decomposition enhance the short-term variations in net carbon balance, while slightly dampening the long-term variations. Given the worldwide attention on terrestrial carbon cycling, and the potential for "carbon sinks'', we suggest that an improved understanding of long-term climatic and ecosystem processes is crucial. Other regions should be examined for potential long-term carbon cycle variations.
Look downthere is a gapthe need to include soil data in Atlantic Forest restoration			Consideration of soil quality indicators is fundamental for understanding and managing ecosystems. Despite the evidence regarding the importance of soil for provision of local and global ecosystem services, such as water regulation and carbon sequestration, soil remains an under-investigated and undermined aspect of the environment. Here we evaluate to what extent soil indicators are taken into account in restoration. We focused on the Brazilian Atlantic Forest, a highly fragmented biome and a global biodiversity hotspot. We conducted a systematic literature review and we showed that the majority (59%) of the studies on restoration did not consider any soil indicator. Studies that demonstrated the importance of soil indicators most commonly reported soil pH (71%, n = 44), followed by potassium content (66%, n = 41) and phosphorus (64.5%, n = 40), while the least reported indicator was water retention (6.5%, n = 4). Only 40% of the retrieved studies included information about reference sites or project baseline information. We complement our literature review with a case study on restoration in two areas of the Atlantic Forest. We found a relation between soil indicators such as soil organic matter, nitrogen, sodium and sand content, and aboveground indicators, confirming a necessity to include soil screening in restoration. Moreover, we found that prior to restoration none of these soil indicators were analyzed. This study highlights the gap that exists in soil data in restoration in studies on the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. We urge scientists and practitioners to include basic soil analysis to maximize the successful outcomes of restoration.
Loss of biodiversity and ecosystem functioning in Indo-Malayan peat swamp forests			The tropical peat swamp forests of Indonesia and Malaysia are unusual ecosystems that are rich in endemic species of flora, fauna and microbes despite their extreme acidic, anaerobic, nutrient poor conditions. They are an important refuge for many endangered species including orang utans. Ecosystem functioning is unusual: microbial decomposition is inhibited because the leaves are sclerophyllous and toxic to deter herbivory in the nutrient poor environment, yet bacteria are abundant and active in the surface layers of the peat, where they respire DOC leached from newly fallen leaves. The bacteria are subsequently consumed by aquatic invertebrates that are eaten by fish, and bacterially respired CO2 is assimilated by algae, so bacteria are thus vital to carbon and nutrient cycling. Peat swamp forests are highly sensitive to the impacts of logging, drainage and fire, due to the interdependence of the vegetation with the peat substrate, which relies on the maintenance of adequate water, canopy cover and leaf litter inputs. Even minor disturbances can increase the likelihood of fire, which is the major cause of CO2 emissions from regional peat swamp forests and which impact ecosystems worldwide by contributing to climate change. Indo-Malayan peat swamps affect the hydrology of surrounding ecosystems due to their large water storage capacity which slows the passage of floodwaters in wet seasons and maintains stream base flows during dry seasons. These forests are of global importance yet they are inadequately protected and vanishing rapidly, particularly due to agricultural conversion to oil palm, logging, drainage and annual fires.
Loss of carbon sequestration potential after several decades of shifting cultivation in the Southern Yucatan			Cumulative losses from shifting cultivation in the tropics can affect the local to regional to global balance of carbon and nutrient cycles. We determined whether shifting cultivation in the Southern Yucatan causes feedbacks that limit future forest productivity and carbon sequestration potential. Specifically, we tested how the recovery of carbon stocks changes with each additional cultivation-fallow cycle. Live aboveground biomass, coarse woody debris, fine woody debris, forest floor litter and soil were sampled in 53 sites (39 secondary forests 2-25 years old, with one to four cultivation-fallow cycles, and 14 mature forests) along a precipitation gradient in Campeche and Quintana Roo, Mexico. From the first to the third or fourth cultivation-fallow cycle, mean carbon stocks in live aboveground biomass debris declined 64%. From the first to the third cycle, coarse woody debris declined by 85%. Despite declining inputs to soil with each cuitivation-fallow cycle, soil carbon stocks did not further decline after the initial conversion from mature to secondary forest. The combined aboveground and soil carbon stock declined almost 36% after conversion from mature forest, however two additional cultivation cycles did not promote further significant decline, largely because of the stability of the soil carbon pool. Although age was the dominant factor in predicting total carbon stocks of secondary forests under shifting cultivation, the number of cultivation-fallow cycles should not be neglected. Understanding change beyond the first cycle of deforestation will enhance forest management at a local scale by improving predictions of secondary forest productivity and related agricultural productivity. A multi-cycle approach to deforestation is critical for regional and national evaluation of forest-based carbon sequestration. Finally, models of the global carbon cycle can be better constrained with more accurate quantification of carbon fluxes from land-use change. (C) 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Loss of labile organic carbon from subsoil due to land-use changes in subtropical China			Topsoil carbon (C) stocks are known to decrease as a consequence of the conversion of natural ecosystems to plantations or croplands; however, the effect of land use change on subsoil C remains unknown. Here, we hypothesized that the effect of land use change on labile subsoil organic C may be even stronger than for topsoil due to upward concentration of plantations and crops root systems. We evaluated soil labile organic C fractions, including particulate organic carbon (POC) and its components [coarse POC and fine POC], light fraction organic carbon (LFOC), readily oxidizable organic carbon, dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and microbial biomass down to 100 cm soil depth from four typical land use systems in subtropical China. Decrease in fine root biomass was more pronounced below 20 cm than in the overlying topsoil (70% vs. 56% for plantation and 62% vs. 37% for orchard. respectively) driving a reduction in subsoil labile organic C stocks. Land use changes from natural forest to Chinese fir plantation, Chinese chestnut orchard, or sloping tillage reduced soil organic C stocks and that of its labile fractions both in top and subsoil (20-100 cm). POC reduction was mainly driven by a decrease in fine POC in topsoil, while DOC was mainly reduced in subsoil. Fine POC, LFOC and microbial biomass can be useful early indicators of changes in topsoil organic C. In contrast, LFOC and DOC are useful indicators for subsoil. Reduced proportions of fine POC, LFOC, DOC and microbial biomass to soil organic C reflected the decline in soil organic C quality caused by land use changes. We conclude that land use changes decrease C sequestration both in topsoil and subsoil, which is initially indicated by the labile soil organic C fractions. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Low mortality in tall tropical trees			The dynamics of the tallest trees in tropical forests are of special interest due to their carbon content, canopy dominance, and the large canopy gaps created when they die. Known ecological mechanisms that may influence tall tree survival lead to conflicting predictions. Hydraulic stress and exposure to high winds and desiccation should increase death rates, yet the tallest trees have the greatest access to light and escape damage caused by falling boles and branches. The uncertainty in tall tree mortality rates has been difficult to address due to their low density, which makes mortality rates challenging to estimate accurately. Here, we use a combination of LiDAR remote sensing and field measurements to show that the mortality rate over 8.5 years among individuals >40 m tall in 444 ha of lowland Neotropical rain forest was 1.2% per year, less than half the landscape-scale average for all canopy trees (2.7% per year). The low mortality is likely explained by species-specific traits that decrease the mortality risk and/or ecological advantages of height that outweigh the risks. Regardless of the mechanisms, the low mortality rate has important implications for tropical forest carbon budgets, as we estimated that a single tall individual represents 2-11% of total live aboveground carbon stocks per hectare. Our findings suggest that height-specific dynamics may be surprisingly different from traditional diameter-specific dynamics, emphasizing the importance of extending ecological studies to investigate the role of tree height in forest dynamics.
Low-cost agricultural waste accelerates tropical forest regeneration			Lower-cost tropical forest restoration methods, particularly those framed as win-win business-protected area partnerships, could dramatically increase the scale of tropical forest restoration activities, thereby providing a variety of societal and ecosystem benefits, including slowing both global biodiversity loss and climate change. Here we describe the long-term regenerative effects of a direct application of agricultural waste on tropical dry forest. In 1998, as part of an innovative agricultural waste disposal service contract, an estimated 12,000 Mg of processed orange peels and pulp were applied to a 3 ha portion of a former cattle pasture with compacted, rocky, nutrient-poor soils characteristic of prolonged fire-based land management and overgrazing in area de Conservacion Guanacaste, northwestern Costa Rica. After 16 years, the experimental plot showed a threefold increase in woody plant species richness, a tripling of tree species evenness (Shannon Index), and a 176% increase in aboveground woody biomass over an adjacent control plot. Hemispheric photography showed significant increases in canopy closure in the area where orange waste was applied relative to control. Orange waste deposition significantly elevated levels of soil macronutrients and important micronutrients in samples taken 2 and 16 years after initial orange waste application. Our results point to promising opportunities for valuable synergisms between agricultural waste disposal and tropical forest restoration and carbon sequestration.
Lower land-use emissions responsible for increased net land carbon sink during the slow warming period			The terrestrial carbon sink accelerated during 1998-2012, concurrently with the slow warming period, but the mechanisms behind this acceleration are unclear. Here we analyse recent changes in the net land carbon sink (NLS) and its driving factors, using atmospheric inversions and terrestrial carbon models. We show that the linear trend of NLS during 1998-2012 is about 0.17 +/- 0.05 Pg C yr(-2), which is three times larger than during 1980-1998 (0.05 +/- 0.05 Pg C yr(-2)). According to terrestrial carbon model simulations, the intensification of the NLS cannot be explained by CO2 fertilization or climate change alone. We therefore use a bookkeeping model to explore the contribution of changes in land-use emissions and find that decreasing land-use emissions are the dominant cause of the intensification of the NLS during the slow warming period. This reduction of land-use emissions is due to both decreased tropical forest area loss and increased afforestation in northern temperate regions. The estimate based on atmospheric inversions shows consistently reduced land-use emissions, whereas another bookkeeping model did not reproduce such changes, probably owing to missing the signal of reduced tropical deforestation. These results highlight the importance of better constraining emissions from land-use change to understand recent trends in land carbon sinks.
Lowland tapirs facilitate seed dispersal in degraded Amazonian forests			The forests of southeastern Amazonia are highly threatened by disturbances such as fragmentation, understory fires, and extreme climatic events. Large-bodied frugivores such as the lowland tapir (Tapirus terrestris) have the potential to offset this process, supporting natural forest regeneration by dispersing a variety of seeds over long distances to disturbed forests. However, we know little about their effectiveness as seed dispersers in degraded forest landscapes. Here, we investigate the seed dispersal function of lowland tapirs in Amazonian forests subject to a range of human (fire and fragmentation) and natural (extreme droughts and windstorms) disturbances, using a combination of field observations, camera traps, and light detection and ranging (LiDAR) data. Tapirs travel and defecate more often in degraded forests, dispersing much more seeds in these areas [9,822 seeds per ha/year (CI95% = 9,106; 11,838)] than in undisturbed forests [2,950 seeds per ha/year (CI95% = 2,961; 3,771)]. By effectively dispersing seeds across disturbed forests, tapirs may contribute to natural forest regeneration-the cheapest and usually the most feasible way to achieve large-scale restoration of tropical forests. Through the dispersal of large-seeded species that eventually become large trees, such frugivores also contribute indirectly to maintaining forest carbon stocks. These functions may be critical in helping tropical countries to achieve their goals to maintain and restore biodiversity and its ecosystem services. Ultimately, preserving these animals along with their habitats may help in the process of natural recovery of degraded forests throughout the tropics. in Portuguese is available with online material.
LTREB: Legacy effects of compounding disturbances in the Amazon: implications for ecosystem carbon and water cycling			The carbon stored in the Amazon���s forests is equivalent to ten years of current global carbon fossil-fuel emissions. This large carbon reservoir has seemingly grown over the past few decades and mitigated some of the negative effects on the global climate system associated with greenhouse gas emissions. At the same time, Amazon forests transfer enough moisture to the atmosphere to influence regional precipitation patterns. Interactions between climate change, deforestation, logging, windstorms, and wildfires have threatened the carbon stocks and climate regulatory functions of Amazon forests. Growing concerns that ongoing climate change combined with human disturbances will change Amazon forests into open savannas across large regions. This long term experiment in environmental biology award focuses on a forest that lies at the edge between continuous neotropical forests and savannas. This is an area where native vegetation has been fragmented and is frequently subject to interactions between human and natural disturbances such as fires, droughts, and windstorms. This award evaluates forest resilience from seasonally dry evergreen tropical forests to multiple disturbances based on long- term ecological measurements of a highly threatened Amazon forest. The project���s outcomes could inform regional land and fire management, particularly the development of new strategies to avoid catastrophic wildfires that reduce the capacity of forests to provide ecosystem services. This award will also connect US-based research with researchers and institutions in Brazil, in the process helping to train a diverse group of US students. Finally, the award represents important benchmarks for land surface models and remote sensing techniques that have been widely used to understand potential trajectories of tropical forests This award tests the hypothesis that forests subjected to novel compounding disturbances use different pathways to recover climate services. Disturbed forests that experience minor, short-term reductions in climate functions such as ET and net carbon uptake, have high forest resilience and low probability of large-scale forest replacement by scrubland. However, repeated disturbances triggering long-term losses of forest climate functions would point to low forest resilience. This award will add a decade of ecological data to a long-term, large-scale experimental site in southeast Amazonia that has been degraded by edge effects, recurrent fires, two windthrow events, and multiple droughts. These extended data measurements will permit a comprehensive assessment of how potential future pathways of the experimentally disturbed forests affect ecosystem-level climatic functions across different successional forest pathways and as plant traits change. The experimental site is located in one of the most threatened regions of the Amazon, on the boundary between a dense evergreen rainforest and seasonally dry forests and where native vegetation has been fragmented and subjected to anthropogenic (fire, edge effects) and natural disturbances (droughts and windthrow events). How forests��� long-term climate functions change as a function of novel disturbances and climate change has direct implications for the future of the world���s largest tropical forest. This award will rely on long-term ecological measurements to build a clearer understanding of Amazon forest resilience to multiple disturbances. It will evaluate how interactions between fire legacies to trees (e.g., wounds to tree trunks) and extreme weather events (droughts, windstorms) affect forest climatic functions. In the next ten years, this award will lead to a new understanding of how forest successional pathways and plant traits influence ecosystem-level ET and carbon stocks following compounding disturbances. This award will provide new insights into the (as yet unquantified) thresholds that may lead to large-scale ecosystem change under future climate and land use changes.This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
Macrofauna and soil properties in agroforestry system and secondary forest			Atlantic Forest devastation has resulted in the search and introduction of management capable of promoting and reestablishing the quality and sustainability of the ecosystem. Agroforestry systems (AS) are recognized for many benefits due to their management. This study compares an agroforestry system macrofauna and physical and chemical soil properties to those of a secondary forest area in the Atlantic Forest biome in southeast Brazil. Agroforestry system with 8 years of establishment and the regenerating subcaducifolious tropical forest fragment with 28 years were examined. Samplings were conducted in two periods of the year (rainy and dry seasons) to evaluate physical and chemical soil fertility-associated properties, as well as soil organic matter (SOM) fractions and biological aspects (macrofauna). Higher clay content, moisture levels, basic cations, and greater values of the sorption complex, diversity indices, and uniformity in macrofauna were observed in the agroforestry plots. Agroforestry systems increased the levels of the most labile fraction of soil organic matter (SOM) compared to the forest fragment. Higher abundance, diversity indices, and evenness of fauna were observed in the agroforestry plots during both seasons. In terms of multivariate analyses, a higher correlation was observed among fauna, carbon fractions, P, K+, pH, clay, potential acidity, moisture, and temperature in the Agroforestry plots. In general, AS promoted a positive relationship between physical and chemical properties and the macrofauna community of soil invertebrates, in a similar way and sometimes superior to the forest, confirming the study hypothesis and demonstrating the efficiency of management in maintaining soil properties and, consequently, ecosystem services.
Magnitude and biophysical regulators of methane emission and consumption in the Australian agricultural, forest, and submerged landscapes: a review			Increases in the concentrations of atmospheric greenhouse gases, carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O) due to human activities are associated with global climate change. CO2 concentration in the atmosphere has increased by 33% (to 380 ppm) since 1750 AD, whilst CH4 concentration has increased by 75% (to 1,750 ppb), and as the global warming potential (GWP) of CH4 is 25 fold greater than CO2 it represents about 20% of the global warming effect. The purpose of this review is to: (a) address recent findings regarding biophysical factors governing production and consumption of CH4, (b) identify the current level of knowledge regarding the main sources and sinks of CH4 in Australia, and (c) identify CH4 mitigation options and their potential application in Australian ecosystems. Almost one-third of CH4 emissions are from natural sources such as wetlands and lake sediments, which is poorly documented in Australia. For Australia, the major anthropogenic sources of CH4 emissions include energy production from fossil fuels (similar to 24%), enteric fermentation in the guts of ruminant animals (similar to 59%), landfills, animal wastes and domestic sewage (similar to 15%), and biomass burning (similar to 5%), with minor contributions from manure management (1.7%), land use, land-use change and forestry (1.6%), and rice cultivation (0.2%). A significant sink exists for CH4 (similar to 6%) in aerobic soils, including agricultural and forestry soils, and potentially large areas of arid soils, however, due to limited information available in Australia, it is not accounted for in the Australian National Greenhouse Gas Inventory. CH4 emission rates from submerged soils vary greatly, but mean values <= 10 mg m(-2) h(-1) are common. Landfill sites may emit CH4 at one to three orders of magnitude greater than submerged soils. CH4 consumption rates in non-flooded, aerobic agricultural, pastoral and forest soils also vary greatly, but mean values are restricted to <= 100 mu g m(-2) h(-1), and generally greatest in forest soils and least in agricultural soils, and decrease from temperate to tropical regions. Mitigation options for soil CH4 production primarily relate to enhancing soil oxygen diffusion through water management, land use change, minimised compaction and soil fertility management. Improved management of animal manure could include biogas capture for energy production or arable composting as opposed to open stockpiling or pond storage. Balanced fertiliser use may increase soil CH4 uptake, reduce soil N2O emissions whilst improving nutrient and water use efficiency, with a positive net greenhouse gas (CO2-e) effect. Similarly, the conversion of agricultural land to pasture, and pastoral land to forestry should increase soil CH4 sink. Conservation of native forests and afforestation of degraded agricultural land would effectively mitigate CH4 emissions by maintaining and enhancing CH4 consumption in these soils, but also by reducing N2O emissions and increasing C sequestration. The overall impact of climate change on methanogenesis and methanotrophy is poorly understood in Australia, with a lack of data highlighting the need for long-term research and process understanding in this area.For policy addressing land-based greenhouse gas mitigation, all three majr greenhouse gases (CO2, CH4 and N2O) should be monitored simultaneously, combined with improved understanding at process-level.
Mainstreaming Ecosystem Services from Indonesia's Remaining Forests			With 120 million hectares of forest area, Indonesia has the third largest area of biodiversity-rich tropical forests in the world, and it is well-known as a mega-biodiversity country. However, in 2020, only 70 percent of this area remained forested. The government has consistently undertaken corrective actions to achieve Sustainable Development Goal targets, with a special focus on Goals #1 (no poverty), #2 (zero hunger), #3 (good health and well-being), #7 (affordable and clean energy), #8 (decent work and economic growth), #13 (climate action), and #15 (life on land). Good environmental governance is a core concept in Indonesia's forest management and includes mainstreaming ecosystem services as a framework for sustainable forest management. This paper analyzes efforts to mainstream Indonesia's remaining forest ecosystem services. We review the state of Indonesia's forests in relation to deforestation dynamics, climate change, and ecosystem service potential and options and provide recommendations for mainstreaming strategies regarding aspects of policy, planning, and implementation, as well as the process of the articulation of ecosystem services and their alternative funding.
Mainstreaming Smart Agroforestry for Social Forestry Implementation to Support Sustainable Development Goals in Indonesia: A Review			The increasing need for forest resources and cultivated land requires a solution in forest management to realize sustainable land use. Smart agroforestry (SAF) is a set of agriculture and silviculture knowledge and practices that is aimed at not only increasing profits and resilience for farmers but also improving environmental parameters, including climate change mitigation and adaptation, biodiversity enhancement, and soil and water conservation, while assuring sustainable landscape management. SAF, a solution for land management systems to reduce the rate of deforestation, is a smart effort to overcome the food crisis and mitigate climate change that is prospectively applied mainly in the social forestry area. Optimized forest land utilization could be achieved by implementing SAF and applying silvicultural and crop cultivation techniques to optimize productivity and meet sustainability and adaptability goals. This paper reviews the existing conditions, opportunities, and challenges in the mainstreaming of SAF in social forestry implementation to support the Sustainable Development Goals in Indonesia. Mainstreaming SAF should include policy innovation and regulation implementation, the use of appropriate technology, and compromises or trade-offs among benefits, risks, and resources. SAF is a strategy to revive the rural economy and community prosperity through the optimal use of local resources as well as a form of smart landscape and land-use management that has significant roles in soil and water conservation, bioenergy, climate change responses, and enhanced biodiversity conservation.
Maintaining ecosystem function and services in logged tropical forests			Vast expanses of tropical forests worldwide are being impacted by selective logging. We evaluate the environmental impacts of such logging and conclude that natural timber-production forests typically retain most of their biodiversity and associated ecosystem functions, as well as their carbon, climatic, and soil-hydrological ecosystem services. Unfortunately, the value of production forests is often overlooked, leaving them vulnerable to further degradation including post-logging clearing, fires, and hunting. Because logged tropical forests are extensive, functionally diverse, and provide many ecosystem services, efforts to expand their role in conservation strategies are urgently needed. Key priorities include improving harvest practices to reduce negative impacts on ecosystem functions and services, and preventing the rapid conversion and loss of logged forests.
Major forest increase on the Loess Plateau, China (2001-2016)			The Loess Plateau in China is prone to widespread land degradation (soil erosion, deforestation, and water loss), and therefore, ecological restoration programmes aiming to re-establish the ecosystem by revegetation have been implemented during recent decades. Consequently, a widespread increase in vegetation cover has been reported, but the state and dynamics of forests remain largely unknown. Here, we used field and satellite data to produce annual forest probability scores at 250 x 250 m between 2001 and 2016. We classified the forest dynamics into three types: net gain, net loss, and fluctuation. Assuming that an increasing probability score reflects forest growth, we categorised the annual forest areas into different growing stages indicating the transition between planting and mature forest. In total, the area of forest increase was 48,786 km(2), and the percentage of forested areas of the region changed from 8.19% to 15.82% within 16 years. In areas of forest net gain, there was a clear transition from low- to high-probability forest areas, providing evidence that a general forest transition is occurring on the Loess Plateau. The method developed for continuous monitoring of forest probability scores offers a benchmarking for further decision making on ecological restoration of the region and for mapping of afforestation projects elsewhere. The findings on major forest increases demonstrate that land degradation is in fact reversible, with implications for many ecosystem services (e.g., carbon storage and provisioning of forest products).
Malaysian Mangrove Forests and their Significance to the Coastal Marine Environment			Mangrove forests are one of the most productive and bio-diverse wetland environments on earth. Yet these unique coastal tropical forest environments are among the most threatened habitats in the world. Some key progress points in mangrove conservation, restoration, and research in Malaysia are highlighted. Based on an intensive literature review, the ecology and ecological management, distribution and areas of existing mangroves in the world and Malaysia, issues associated with mangrove conservation and restoration are discussed. Growing in the intertidal areas and estuary mouths between land and sea, mangroves provide critical habitat for diverse marine and terrestrial flora and fauna. Important for the flora and fauna is the opportunity to continue living in a sustainable environment and in suitable conditions. A potential stand is the place that obtains the possibility of germination and establishment of a plant species according to their physical, chemical, and biological demands. In many cases it is seen that because of unsuitable selection of site and species, afforestation and reforestation projects are forced to fail after spending time, cost, and labor. The population boom and rapid economic developments have greatly reduced mangrove areas in Malaysia despite the Malaysian government launching a series of programs to protect mangroves in the 1980s and establishing mangrove ecosystems as high-priority areas for improving environmental and living resource management. The issues, threats, and significant values of mangroves also were highlighted. A more systematic protection strategy using ecological engineering management-based, active restoration and rehabilitation measurements still are urgently needed in order to preserve these valuable resources in Malaysia.
Management effects on carbon stocks and fluxes across the Orinoco Savannas			Across the physiognomic types of the Orinoco llanos, periodic inventories and changes in land-use between 1982-1992 are estimated. Results indicate that the area under pastures and forest plantations is increased by 0.005337 x 10(6) km(2), whilts reducing the area of croplands by 0.000119 x 10(6) km(2). This is a net increase of 0.005218 x 10(6) km(2). The gross carbon release is 174.66 Tg C per year to the atmosphere and transferring from cultivated and native vegetation to wood products (1.62 Tg C per year) and slash (1.18 Tg C per year). The processes of land preparation contribute 1.40 Tg C per year to the atmosphere. From the tree savannas, woodlands and forests 0.73 Tg C per year are estimated to have been transferred to the soil following clearance and burning over this period, and 1.05 Tg C per year from herbaceous savannas when were buried and decomposed at 0.84 Tg C per year. The estimate of carbon balance here by inventories and changes in land-use approach indicates that the Orinoco llanos is a sink of -17.53 Tg C per year. The carbon turnover time in the Orinoco system is 68 years, which provides a limited route for carbon sequestration. The calculated potential of the Orinoco Ilanos for storing carbon is 8300 Tg C. Ecological options to achieve this potential value are addressed. However, nutrient deficiency and seasonal water supply are serious drawbacks to take into account for increasing carbon accretion. These results are particular for the Orinoco llanos, even though described processes could be similar to world-wide savannas, where a gradient of carbon heterogeneity exists. (C) 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Management strategies for maximizing carbon storage and tree species diversity in cocoa-growing landscapes			How do we manage the trade-offs between agricultural yields, biodiversity and ecosystem services? One option is to adopt high yield, intensive farming that allows land to be spared elsewhere for conservation (land sparing); another is to adopt low yield, extensive farming over a greater area that retains more biodiversity and protects ecosystem services (wildlife-friendly farming). We examine which is likely to be the best option to achieve high carbon storage and tree species richness in tropical cocoa-growing landscapes. Increased management intensity explained higher yield and in turn this explained a reduction in carbon storage and species richness. Substantial differences in species richness between forest and cocoa farms suggested that land sparing would conserve more tree species than wildlife-friendly farming. The optimal strategy for carbon storage depends on the cocoa yield in the wildlife-friendly farming system. At low cocoa yields, wildlife-friendly farming is the best option; whereas at higher yields land sparing is best. Our results suggest that the best land management strategy for biodiversity and ecosystem services might differ depending on details of the farming systems involved. Management of the trade-offs between agriculture, biodiversity and ecosystem services in tropical forest landscapes needs to consider current and expected future yields. (C) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Managing and Reforesting Degraded Post-Mining Landscape in Indonesia: A Review			Tropical forests are among the most diverse ecosystems in the world, completed by huge biodiversity. An expansion in natural resource extraction through open-pit mining activities leads to increasing land and tropical forest degradation. Proper science-based practices are needed as an effort to reclaim their function. This paper summarizes the existing practice of coal mining, covering the regulatory aspects and their reclamation obligations, the practices of coal mining from various sites with different land characteristics, and the reclamation efforts of the post-mining landscapes in Indonesia. The regulations issued accommodate the difference between mining land inside the forest area and outside the forest area, especially in the aspect of the permit authority and in evaluating the success rate of reclamation. In coal-mining practices, this paper describes starting from land clearing activities and followed by storing soil layers and overburden materials. In this step, proper handling of potentially acid-forming materials is crucial to prevent acid mine drainage. At the reclamation stage, this paper sequentially presents research results and the field applications in rearranging the overburden and soil materials, controlling acid mine drainage and erosion, and managing the drainage system, settling ponds, and pit lakes. Many efforts to reclaim post-coal-mining lands and their success rate have been reported and highlighted. Several success stories describe that post-coal-mining lands can be returned to forests that provide ecosystem services and goods. A set of science-based best management practices for post-coal-mine reforestation is needed to develop to promote the success of forest reclamation and restoration in post-coal-mining lands through the planting of high-value hardwood trees, increasing trees' survival rates and growth, and accelerating the establishment of forest habitat through the application of proper tree planting technique. The monitoring and evaluation aspect is also crucial, as corrective action may be taken considering the different success rates for different site characteristics.
Managing forests for climate change mitigation			Forests currently absorb billions of tons of CO2 globally every year, an economic subsidy worth hundreds of billions of dollars if an equivalent sink had to be created in other ways. Concerns about the permanency of forest carbon stocks, difficulties in quantifying stock changes, and the threat of environmental and socioeconomic impacts of large-scale reforestation programs have limited the uptake of forestry activities in climate policies. With political will and the involvement of tropical regions, forests can contribute to climate change protection through carbon sequestration as well as offering economic, environmental, and sociocultural benefits. A key opportunity in tropical regions is the reduction of carbon emissions from deforestation and degradation.
Managing land for carbon in southern Africa: relationships between carbon, livelihoods and ecosystem services			Deforestation and land degradation contribute significantly to human-induced greenhouse gas emissions. How land is used and managed is therefore vital in determining how much carbon is stored or released into the atmosphere. Payment systems encouraging particular land uses and land management practices that help to store organic carbon in soils and vegetation are becoming increasingly popular. However, little is known about the risks and gains this produces for the environment, particularly in terms of its ability to support food production, nor how it could affect the livelihoods of the poor. This lack of knowledge is especially apparent in dryland and sub-humid systems, as much more attention has focused on tropical forests, even though poverty problems are often less acute than in sub-Saharan Africa where this project focuses. Assessing the risks and gains of managing land for carbon is an urgent challenge that requires the cooperation of a large team, working across traditional disciplinary and sectoral boundaries. As such, this proposal has been developed by a multidisciplinary group of natural and social scientists with expertise from across 4 southern African countries, supported with inputs from international, policy, private sector and Non-Governmental Organisation partners. The aim of the project is to hold a planning and capacity building workshop in Namibia in September 2010, which will refine and develop research ideas on the topic of 'managing land for carbon'. We will focus on study areas in Namibia, Botswana, Zambia and Malawi. These countries include a range of different land use systems, and encompass parts of sub-Saharan Africa in which poverty remains an important challenge. Workshop activities will: a) review current understanding of carbon stores and losses and the ways in which they are measured for both soil and vegetation; b) identify the livelihood activities that the poor pursue in the study areas and the groups of people that could benefit from payments associated with managing the land for carbon; c) identify the current environmental status of land in relation to nutrient cycling, water, and food production, with a view to assessing how managing the land for carbon could alter these wider services; and d) evaluate existing best practices in research for the development of community-based payments for carbon storage projects. The novelty of our project lies in its drawing together of different disciplines and groups in a truly integrated and international approach to build on the current research base yet, we extend it by assessing organic carbon in both soil and vegetation and link this with social and economic analyses to enable more complete assessment of different land use options. Activities during the workshop will include a 'stakeholder analysis' to identify which groups of people and organisations need to be involved in the larger proposal. This will ensure it has a significant lasting impact in improving the lives of the poor across southern Africa while also increasing the carbon stored in the environment. In pursuing these activities, the project addresses the ESPA programme objectives by: 1) contributing towards an improved research and evidence base on ecosystem services, their dynamics and management and the ways they can help to reduce poverty; 2) developing innovative, multidisciplinary research methodologies; 3) engaging key research users (policymakers, the private sector, NGOs and the poor) in the entire process, thus enhancing the uptake and utility of research outputs; and 4) building multidisciplinary south-south and south-north partnerships that help enhance the capacity of southern researchers.
Managing reforestation to sequester carbon, increase biodiversity potential and minimize loss of agricultural land			Reforestation will have important consequences for the global challenges of mitigating climate change, arresting habitat decline and ensuring food security. We examined field-scale trade-offs between carbon sequestration of tree plantings and biodiversity potential and loss of agricultural land. Extensive surveys of reforestation across temperate and tropical Australia (N = 1491 plantings) were usedto determine how planting width and species mix affect carbon sequestration during early development (< 15 year). Carbon accumulation per area increased significantly with decreasing planting width and with increasing proportion of eucalypts (the predominant over-storey genus). Highest biodiversity potential was achieved through block plantings (width > 40 m) with about 25% of planted individuals being eucalypts. Carbon and biodiversity goals were balanced in mixed-species plantings by establishing narrow belts (width <20 m) with a high proportion (>75%) of eucalypts, and in monocultures of mallee eucalypt plantings by using the widest belts (ca. 6-20 m). Impacts on agriculture were minimized by planting narrow belts (ca. 4m) of mallee eucalypt monocultures, which had the highest carbon sequestering efficiency. A plausible scenario where only 5% of highly-cleared areas (<30% native vegetation cover remaining) of temperate Australia are reforested showed substantial mitigation potential. Total carbon sequestration after 15 years was up to 25 Mt CO2-e year(-1) when carbon and biodiversity goals were balanced and 13 Mt CO2-e year(-1) if block plantings of highest biodiversity potential were established. Even when reforestation was restricted to marginal agricultural land (<$2000 ha(-1) land value, 28% of the land under agriculture in Australia), total mitigation potential after 15 years was 17-26 Mt CO2-e year(-1) using narrow belts of mallee plantings. This work provides guidance on land use to governments and planners. We show that the multiple benefits of young tree plantings can be balanced by manipulating planting width and species choice at establishment. in highly-cleared areas, such plantings can sequester substantial biomass carbon while improving biodiversity and causing negligible loss of agricultural land. (C) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Managing watershed services of tropical forests and plantations: Can meta-analyses help?			The watershed services provided by tropical natural and planted forests are critical to human well-being. An increasing number of valuation studies and experiences with payment for ecosystem services have dealt with the role of ecosystems in regulating the flow of water. However, several studies and experiences have been based on misconceptions about the role of forests and plantations in the hydrological cycle, despite the publication of many reviews by hydrologists. The objective of this paper is to evaluate whether meta-analyses applied to studies comparing water flows in tropical watersheds under natural or planted forests and non-forest lands can provide useful results for valuing watershed ecosystem services and making decisions. The meta-analyses show significantly lower total flows or base flows under planted forests than non-forest land uses. Meta-analyses conducted with subsamples of the data also show lower total flow and higher base flow under natural forests than non-forest land uses. However, the available studies were restricted to humid climates and particular forest types (Pinus and Eucalyptus planted forests and lowland natural forests). The small number of available Studies with sufficient original data is a major constraint in the application of meta-analyses. This represents a major technical challenge for valuation studies or payment for ecosystem services, especially in countries where financial resources for implementing field research are scarce. (C) 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
Mangrove deforestation and degradation areas in Indonesia 2009-2019			Mangrove forests are important carbon sinks and this is especially true for Indonesia where about 24% of the worlds mangroves exist. Unfortunately, vast expanses of these mangroves have been deforested, degraded or converted to other uses resulting in significant greenhouse gas emissions. The objective of this study was to quantify the climate change mitigation potential of mangrove conservation and restoration in Indonesia. We calculated the emission factors from the dominant land uses in mangroves, determined mangrove deforestation rates and quantified the total emissions and the potential emission reductions that could be achieved from mangrove conservation and restoration. Based upon our analysis of the carbon stocks and emissions from land use in mangroves we found: (1) Indonesias mangrove ecosystem carbon stocks are amongst the highest of any tropical forest type; (2) mangrove deforestation results in greenhouse gas emissions that far exceed that of upland tropical deforestation; (3) in the last decade the rates of deforestation in Indonesian mangroves have remained high; and (4) conservation and restoration of mangroves promise to sequester significant quantities of carbon. While mangroves comprise only 2.6% of Indonesias total forest area, their degradation and deforestation accounted for 10% of total greenhouse gas emissions arising from the forestry sector. The large source of greenhouse gas emissions from a relatively small proportion of the forest area underscores the value for inclusion of mangroves as a natural climate solution (NCS). Mangrove conservation is far more effective than mangrove restoration in carbon emissions reductions and an efficient pathway to achieve Indonesias nationally determined contribution (NDC) targets. The potential emission reduction from halting deforestation of primary and secondary mangroves coupled with restoration activities could result in an emission reductionequivalent to 8% of Indonesias 2030 NDC emission reduction targets from the forestry sector. Copyright: CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication
Mangrove forests store high densities of carbon across the tropical urban landscape of Singapore			Tropical forested ecosystems provide multiple ecosystem services to rural and urban landscapes, with carbon storage gaining particular attention. Deforestation due to rural-urban transitions may lead to a reduction in carbon storage ability. Coastal mangrove forests are particularly at risk from deforestation due to their location in the rapidly urbanizing coastal zone, and the city state of Singapore is an extreme example, losing as much as 90 % of its original mangrove cover due to land reclamation and reservoir construction. Knowledge of mangrove ecosystem services may allow better conservation, restoration and incorporation of remaining mangrove patches into the urban landscape. Focusing on the regulating ecosystem service of carbon storage, mangrove carbon stocks have been estimated for Singapore using a combination of field and remote sensing techniques. Biomass carbon showed substantial spatial variation, with old, contiguous mangrove patches containing a higher density of biomass carbon than fragmented, river-fringing or restored mangroves. In total, national biomass carbon equated to 116,117.1 megagrams of carbon (Mg C), and a coarse estimate of the total carbon stock (including soil carbon) suggests that Singapore's mangroves may store 450,571.7 Mg C. While lower than other regional estimates focused on natural, oceanic mangroves, this is a significant carbon stock for a disturbed, urban mangrove system, and may be equivalent to the average annual carbon emissions of 621,000 residents. This analysis, alongside a review of other urban forest studies, highlights the importance of forested ecosystems such as mangroves in providing a carbon storage ecosystem service to urban areas.
Mangrove Mapping and Above-Ground Biomass Change Detection using Satellite Images in Coastal Areas of Thai Binh Province, Vietnam			Mangroves are recognized as a highly valuable resource due to their provision of multiple ecosystem services. Therefore, mangrove ecosystems mapping and monitoring is a crucial objective, especially for tropical regions. Thai Binh province is one of the most important mangrove ecosystems in Vietnam. The mangrove ecosystem in this province has faced threats of deforestation from urban development, land reclamation, tourism activities, and natural disasters. Recently, to maintain the fundamental functions of the ecosystems, a large mangrove area was planted in Thai Binh. The aim of this research is to detect the change in the mangrove areas and to create an aboveground biomass map for mangrove forests in Thai Binh province. Landsat and Sentinel-2 satellite images from 1998 to 2018 were analysed using the supervised classification method to detect mangrove area change. Mangrove Aboveground Biomass (AGB) was estimated using linear regression between vegetation indices and field AGB survey. The accuracy assessment for the classified images of 1998, 2003 and 2007, 2013 and 2018 are 93%, 86%, 96%, 94% and 91% respectively with kappa of 0.8881, 0.7953, 0.9357, 0.9114 and 0.8761. The mangrove cover in the study area was estimated at 5874.93 ha in 1998. This figure decreased significantly to 4433.85 ha in 2007, before recovery began to take place in the study area, which was estimated at 6587.88 ha in 2018. In 1998, the average AGB in this study area was 22.57 ton/ha, and in 2018 it was 37.74 ton/ha with a standard error of 12.41 ton/ha and the root mean square error (RMSE) was +/- 12.08 ton/ha.
Mangrove plantation over a limestone reef - Good for the ecology?			There have been efforts to restore degraded tropical and subtropical mangrove forests. While there have been many failures, there have been some successes but these were seldom evaluated to test to what level the created mangrove wetlands reproduce the characteristics of the natural ecosystem and thus what ecosystem services they can deliver. We provide such a detailed assessment for the case of Olango and Banacon Islands in the Philippines where the forest was created over a limestone reef where mangroves did not exist in one island but they covered most of the other island before deforestation in the 1940s and 1950s. The created forest appears to have reached a steady state after 60 years. As is typical of mangrove rehabilitation efforts worldwide, planting was limited to a single Rhizophora species. While a forest has been created, it does not mimic a natural forest. There is a large difference between the natural and planted forests in terms of forest structure and species diversity, and tree density. The high density of planted trees excludes importing other species from nearby natural forests; therefore the planted forest remains mono-specific even after several decades and shows no sign of mimicking the characteristics of a natural forest. The planted forests provided mangrove propagules that invaded nearby natural forests. The planted forest has also changed the substratum from sandy to muddy. The outline of the crown of the planted forest has become smooth and horizontal, contrary to that of a natural forest, and this changes the local landscape. Thus we recommend that future mangrove restoration schemes should modify their methodology in order to plant several species, maintain sufficient space between trees for growth, include the naturally dominant species, and create tidal creeks, in order to reproduce in the rehabilitated areas some of the key ecosystem characteristics of natural mangrove forests. © 2016 Elsevier Ltd.
Mangroves among the most carbon-rich forests in the tropics			Mangrove forests occur along ocean coastlines throughout the tropics, and support numerous ecosystem services, including fisheries production and nutrient cycling. However, the areal extent of mangrove forests has declined by 30-50% over the past half century as a result of coastal development, aquaculture expansion and over-harvesting(1-4). Carbon emissions resulting from mangrove loss are uncertain, owing in part to a lack of broad-scale data on the amount of carbon stored in these ecosystems, particularly below ground(5). Here, we quantified whole-ecosystem carbon storage by measuring tree and dead wood biomass, soil carbon content, and soil depth in 25 mangrove forests across a broad area of the Indo-Pacific region-spanning 30 degrees of latitude and 73 degrees of longitude-where mangrove area and diversity are greatest(4,6). These data indicate that mangroves are among the most carbon-rich forests in the tropics, containing on average 1,023Mg carbon per hectare. Organic-rich soils ranged from 0.5m to more than 3m in depth and accounted for 49-98% of carbon storage in these systems. Combining our data with other published information, we estimate that mangrove deforestation generates emissions of 0.02-0.12 Pg carbon per year-as much as around 10% of emissions from deforestation globally, despite accounting for just 0.7% of tropical forest area(6,7).
Mangroves and Sustainable Development of the Coastal Region			Mangrove ecosystem represents one of the most productive natural capitals occurring in tropical regions capable of producing a wide range of goods and services for coastal communities and environment. Analysis of compiled data on mangrove area shows that more than 60% of the total mangrove area is found in just ten countries. The largest areas of mangroves are found in Asia and Africa, followed by North and Central America. Due to various reasons, loss of mangroves continues at alarming rates, but in the last two decades, the rate of net loss is showing signs of slowing down. Diversion of mangrove wetlands for aquaculture, agriculture, infrastructure, and tourism activities is among the major causes of the reported decrease in mangrove areas over time. Mangrove species involving agroforestry systems, agro-aqua farming, and providing alternate livelihood and community-based management of mangroves are indispensable component of mangrove management. Such efforts help in restoration and regeneration of mangrove, address the coastal land degradation, and provide livelihood support to the coastal population.
Mangroves as bioshield: An undisputable fact			Mangroves are extraordinary ecosystems, providing many goods and services to human beings. These particularly include fisheries, forest products, pollution abatement, carbon sequestration and coastal protection against natural calamities such as tsunami and cyclones. However, a recent article by Satheeshkumar et al. (2012) questioned the role of mangroves as barriers against cyclones. These authors further claimed that the cost of mangrove restoration was higher than the value of the coastal protection service provided by them. The role of mangroves in coastal protection against cyclones, typhoons and tidal waves has been scientifically proved in several parts of the tropical region beyond all doubts. High priority should be given to conserve the remaining mangroves in order to minimize the impacts of natural disasters both in coastal and inland areas. (C) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Mapped aboveground carbon stocks to advance forest conservation and recovery in Malaysian Borneo			Forest carbon stocks in rapidly developing tropical regions are highly heterogeneous, which challenges efforts to develop spatially-explicit conservation actions. In addition to field-based biodiversity information, mapping of carbon stocks can greatly accelerate the identification, protection and recovery of forests deemed to be of high conservation value (HCV). We combined airborne Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) with satellite imaging and other geospatial data to map forest aboveground carbon density at 30 m (0.09 ha) resolution throughout the Malaysian state of Sabah on the island of Borneo. We used the mapping results to assess how carbon stocks vary spatially based on forest use, deforestation, regrowth, and current forest protections. We found that unlogged, intact forests contain aboveground carbon densities averaging over 200 Mg C ha(-1), with peaks of 500 Mg C ha(-1). Critically, more than 40% of the highest carbon stock forests were discovered outside of areas designated for maximum protection. Previously logged forests have suppressed, but still high, carbon densities of 60-140 Mg C ha(-1). Our mapped distributions of forest carbon stock suggest that the state of Sabah could double its total aboveground carbon storage if previously logged forests are allowed to recover in the future. Our results guide ongoing efforts to identify HCV forests and to determine new areas for forest protection in Borneo.
Mapping data gaps to estimate biomass across Brazilian Amazon forests			Background Tropical forests play a fundamental role in the provision of diverse ecosystem services, such as biodiversity, climate and air quality regulation, freshwater provision, carbon cycling, agricultural support and culture. To understand the role of forests in the carbon balance, aboveground biomass (AGB) estimates are needed. Given the importance of Brazilian tropical forests, there is an urgent need to improve AGB estimates to support the Brazilian commitments under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Many AGB maps and datasets exist, varying in availability, scale and coverage. Thus, stakeholders, policy makers and scientists must decide which AGB product, dataset or combination of data to use for their particular goals. In this study, we assessed the gaps in the spatial AGB data across the Brazilian Amazon forests not only to orient the decision makers about the data that are currently available but also to provide a guide for future initiatives. Results We obtained a map of the gaps in the forest AGB spatial data for the Brazilian Amazon using statistics and differences between AGB maps and a spatial multicriteria evaluation that considered the current AGB datasets. The AGB spatial data gap map represents areas with good coverage of AGB data and, consequently, the main gaps or priority areas where further biomass assessments should focus, including the northeast of Amazon State, Amapa and northeast of Para. Additionally, by quantifying the variability in both the AGB maps and field data on multiple environmental factors, we provide valuable elements for understanding the current AGB data as a function of climate, soil, vegetation and geomorphology. Conclusions The map of AGB data gaps could become a useful tool for policy makers and different stakeholders working on National Communications, Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+), or carbon emissions modeling to prioritize places to implement further AGB assessments. Only 0.2% of the Amazon biome forest is sampled, and extensive effort is necessary to improve what we know about the tropical forest.
Mapping of understorey invasive plant species clusters of Lantana camara and Chromolaena odorata using airborne hyperspectral remote sensing			The present study highlights delineation of the distribution of understorey invasive plant species (IPS) in Mudumalai Tiger Reserve (MTR), Western Ghats, India using very high resolution airborne imaging spectroscopy images by evaluating the performance of a Multiple Endmember Spectral Mixture Analysis (MESMA). Lantana camara L. and Chromolaena odorata (L.) R.M.King & H.Rob. have imposed a serious threat to natural ecosystems in MTR by altering the ecosystem processes. The Airborne Visible-Infrared Imaging Spectrometer-Next Generation (AVIRIS-NG) based analysis delineated the distribution of understorey IPS, viz., L. camara and C. odorata in MTR, with an overall accuracy of 87 % (k = 0.84) and 84 % (k = 0.8), respectively, with minimal root-mean-square error (RMSE) of MESMA classification (0.001 to 0.0025). In MTR, both the IPS were distributed in large parts and in association with all dominant canopy tree species barring Eucalyptus species. L. camara was majorly found in the southern parts of central MTR with ‘high’ to ‘very high’ presence covering 23.09 % and 11.51 % of the total area of central MTR, respectively, in association with Terminalia anogeissiana Gere & Boatwr. and Tectona grandis L.f. Whereas, C. odorata was dominantly found with high (18.11 % area of central MTR) to very high (11.85 % area of central MTR) intensity in the south and southeastern parts within the vicinity of T. anogeissiana and Terminalia elliptica Willd. The study highlights the utilization of high spectral agility in mapping of understorey IPS through spectral differentiation of the patchy distribution of IPS and its intermixing with other local species may be helpful in ecological restoration, conservation of biodiversity, and provisioning long-term management of ecosystem services in highly invaded tropical forests. © 2022 COSPAR
Mapping the economic costs and benefits of conservation			Resources for biodiversity conservation are severely limited, requiring strategic investment. Understanding both the economic benefits and costs of conserving ecosystems will help to allocate scarce dollars most efficiently. However, although cost-benefit analyses are common in many areas of policy, they are not typically used in conservation planning. We conducted a spatial evaluation of the costs and benefits of conservation for a landscape in the Atlantic forests of Paraguay. We considered five ecosystem services ( i.e., sustainable bushmeat harvest, sustainable timber harvest, bioprospecting for pharmaceutical products, existence value, and carbon storage in aboveground biomass) and compared them to estimates of the opportunity costs of conservation. We found a high degree of spatial variability in both costs and benefits over this relatively small (similar to 3,000 km(2)) landscape. Benefits exceeded costs in some areas, with carbon storage dominating the ecosystem service values and swamping opportunity costs. Other benefits associated with conservation were more modest and exceeded costs only in protected areas and indigenous reserves. We used this cost-benefit information to show that one potential corridor between two large forest patches had net benefits that were three times greater than two otherwise similar alternatives. Spatial cost-benefit analysis can powerfully inform conservation planning, even though the availability of relevant data may be limited, as was the case in our study area. It can help us understand the synergies between biodiversity conservation and economic development when the two are indeed aligned and to clearly understand the trade-offs when they are not.
Mapping the margin: comparing marginal values of tropical forest remnants for pollination services			Natural ecosystems benefit human communities by providing ecosystem services such as water purification and crop pollination. Mapping ecosystem service values has become popular, but most are static snapshots of average value. Estimating instead the economic impacts of specific ecosystem changes can better inform typical resource decisions. Here we develop an approach to mapping marginal values, those resulting from the next unit of ecosystem change, across landscapes. We demonstrate the approach with a recent model of crop pollination services in Costa Rica, simulating deforestation events to predict resulting marginal changes in pollination services to coffee farms. We find that marginal losses from deforestation vary from zero to US$700/ha across the landscape. Financial risks for farmers from these losses and marginal benefits of forest restoration show similar spatial variation. Marginal values are concentrated in relatively few forest parcels not identified using average value. These parcels lack substitutes: nearby forest parcels that can supply services in the event of loss. Indeed, the marginal value of forest parcels declines exponentially with the density of surrounding forest cover. The approach we develop is applicable to any ecosystem service. Combined with information on costs, it can help target conservation or restoration efforts to optimize benefits to people and biodiversity.
Mapping the structure of Borneo's tropical forests across a degradation gradient			South East Asia has the highest rate of lowland forest loss of any tropical region, with logging and deforestation for conversion to plantation agriculture being flagged as the most urgent threats. Detecting and mapping logging impacts on forest structure is a primary conservation concern, as these impacts feed through to changes in biodiversity and ecosystem functions. Here, we test whether high-spatial resolution satellite remote sensing can be used to map the responses of aboveground live tree biomass (AGB), canopy leaf area index (LAI) and fractional vegetation cover (FCover) to selective logging and deforestation in Malaysian Borneo. We measured these attributes in permanent vegetation plots in rainforest and oil palm plantations across the degradation landscape of the Stability of Altered Forest Ecosystems project. We found significant mathematical relationships between field-measured structure and satellite-derived spectral and texture information, explaining up to 62% of variation in biophysical structure across forest and oil palm plots. These relationships held at different aggregation levels from plots to forest disturbance types and oil palms allowing us to map aboveground biomass and canopy structure across the degradation landscape. The maps reveal considerable spatial variation in the impacts of previous logging, a pattern that was less clear when considering field data alone. Up-scaled maps revealed a pronounced decline in aboveground live tree biomass with increasing disturbance, impacts which are also clearly visible in the field data even a decade after logging. Field data demonstrate a rapid recovery in forest canopy structure with the canopy recovering to pre-disturbance levels a decade after logging. Yet, up-scaled maps show that both LAI and FCover are still reduced in logged compared to primary forest stands and markedly lower in oil palm stands. While uncertainties remain, these maps can now be utilised to identify conservation win-wins, especially when combining them with ongoing biodiversity surveys and measurements of carbon sequestration, hydrological cycles and microclimate. © 2015.
Mapping tropical dry forest succession with chris - Proba hyperspectral images using non-parametric decissional trees			Information on the distribution, level of fragmentation, extent and ecosystem health of tropical forests is key for sustainable landscape management. Therefore, information generated from different types of multispectral and hyperspectral sensors is key to monitoring programs that aimed to link ecosystems dynamics to ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration. This is especially significant for emerging tropical secondary forests which may play key roles on programs aimed to mitigate the effects of climate change. In this context, the aim of this presentation is to evaluate the accuracy of Chris/Proba and non - parametric classification as tools to monitor the ecological succession processes in tropical dry forests in Brazil (Parque Estadual da Mata Seca, Minas Gerais). Our results from the non - parametric approach were separated into an age class map indicating the probably that a given pixel belongs to a forest succession class.
Marginal effects on biodiversity, carbon sequestration and nutrient cycling of transitions from tropical forests to cacao farming systems			Cacao (Theobroma cacao), a perennial crop predominantly cultivated as a multi-product and multi-strata agroforestry system, has been identified as one of an array of factors behind land use changes in the tropics. Concerns have also been raised about the gradual shift from traditional cacao growing systems under diverse and dense tree canopy to lower or no-shade cover, leading to further loss of direct and functional forest ecosystem values such as protective and regulatory environmental services. This paper surveys existing literature and focuses on changes to biodiversity, carbon sequestration and nutrient cycling conditions due to a transition from natural forests to traditional lower-density agroforestry and high-density hybrid monoculture cacao systems. We derive marginal effects on selected ecosystem functions expressed as a percentage unit change in corresponding ecosystem values from a natural forest baseline scenario. Data from 16 studies conducted in Africa and the Americas show a negative trend in marginal changes in above-and below-ground carbon sequestration potential for the two cacao farming systems. The extent of marginal losses in carbon storage was comparatively higher for the monoculture than cacao agroforestry system. A general trend denoting positive marginal changes has been reported for mean species richness in soil and litter and some essential chemical and physical soil properties (Calcium, Magnesium, sand and silt) of cacao agroforestry systems compared with a natural forest baseline. The balance between negative and positive changes show that traditional cacao agroforestry systems have greater potential for conservation of ecosystem services closer to a natural forest state than monocultures.
Markedly divergent estimates of Amazon forest carbon density from ground plots and satellites			Aim The accurate mapping of forest carbon stocks is essential for understanding the global carbon cycle, for assessing emissions from deforestation, and for rational land-use planning. Remote sensing (RS) is currently the key tool for this purpose, but RS does not estimate vegetation biomass directly, and thus may miss significant spatial variations in forest structure. We test the stated accuracy of pantropical carbon maps using a large independent field dataset.Location Tropical forests of the Amazon basin. The permanent archive of the field plot data can be accessed at: http://dx.doi.org/10.5521/FORESTPLOTS.NET/2014_1Methods Two recent pantropical RS maps of vegetation carbon are compared to a unique ground-plot dataset, involving tree measurements in 413 large inventory plots located in nine countries. The RS maps were compared directly to field plots, and kriging of the field data was used to allow area-based comparisons.Results The two RS carbon maps fail to capture the main gradient in Amazon forest carbon detected using 413 ground plots, from the densely wooded tall forests of the north-east, to the light-wooded, shorter forests of the south-west. The differences between plots and RS maps far exceed the uncertainties given in these studies, with whole regions over-or under-estimated by > 25%, whereas regional uncertainties for the maps were reported to be < 5%.Main conclusions Pantropical biomass maps are widely used by governments and by projects aiming to reduce deforestation using carbon offsets, but may have significant regional biases. Carbon-mapping techniques must be revised to account for the known ecological variation in tree wood density and allometry to create maps suitable for carbon accounting. The use of single relationships between tree canopy height and above-ground biomass inevitably yields large, spatially correlated errors. This presents a significant challenge to both the forest conservation and remote sensing communities, because neither wood density nor species assemblages can be reliably mapped from space.
Markets and payments for ecosystem services: engaging redd+ on peru's amazonian frontier			0
Matrix dominance and landscape resistance affect genetic variability and differentiation of an Atlantic Forest pioneer tree			Context Despite the importance of secondary forests for the maintenance of biodiversity, the impact of pioneer trees on habitat loss and fragmentation is poorly understood. Objectives We analyzed the effects of landscape structure on genetic variability (node level analyses) and genetic differentiation (link level analyses) of the pioneer tree Cecropia hololeuca in the Atlantic Forest of southeastern Brazil. At the node level, we analyzed the effects of landscape structure (forest and pasture amount, compositional heterogeneity, number and shape of patches, and matrix dominance), topography (slope and elevation), and effective population size (Ne) on allelic richness (AR), genetic diversity (He) and inbreeding coefficient (f). At the link level, we analyzed the effect of four resistance surfaces (isolation by geographic distance, land cover, elevation, and slope) on genetic differentiation between populations (F-ST, G'(ST), Jost's D). Methods We genotyped 257 individuals of C. hololeuca using eight microsatellite loci. At the node level, we calculated landscape and topographic variables at six spatial scales. At the link level, we optimized the resistance surfaces using ResistanceGA. We used a model selection approach to select the most parsimonious models. Results At the node level, matrices dominated by pastures had higher AR than landscapes dominated by Eucalyptus at the 1500 m spatial scale. At the link level, F-ST was best explained by slope, with lower values imposing more resistance. All resistance surfaces explained G'(ST). Conclusions In addition to conserving and restoring habitats, management practices that improve matrix permeability should be adopted to favor the movement of dispersers, consequently improving natural regeneration, increasing allelic richness, and decreasing genetic differentiation of natural populations.
Maximizing biodiversity conservation and carbon stocking in restored tropical forests			Assessing the conservation value of restoration plantings is critical to support the global forest landscape restoration movement. We assessed the implications of tree species selection in the restoration of Brazil's Atlantic Forest regarding carbon stocking and species conservation. This assessment was based on a comprehensive dataset of seedling acquisition records from 961 restoration projects, more than14 million seedlings, 192 forest remnants, and functional data from 1,223 tree species. We found that animal-dispersed trees with larger seeds tend to have higher seed prices, yet are underrepresented in the seedlings acquired for restoration plantations. Compared to forest remnants, fruit supply potentially offered by the species acquired for restoration plantings is lower for birds, but higher for bats. Reduced abundance of medium- and/or large-seeded, animal-dispersed trees lead to declines of 2.8-10.6% in simulated potential carbon stocking. Given the uncertainty in these estimates, policy interventions may be needed to encourage greater representation of large-seeded, animal-dispersed tree species in Atlantic Forest restorations. These findings provide critical guidance for recovering tree functional diversity, plant-frugivore mutualistic interactions, and carbon stocking in multi-species tropical forest restoration plantings.
May the forest be with you: leveraging GEDIs spaceborne lidar data for tropical ecosystem applications			Here, we provide an overview of the use of light detection and ranging (lidar) for tropical ecosystem applications, with a particular focus on the Global Ecosystem Dynamics Investigation (GEDI). We summarize how data from GEDI measures vegetation vertical structure and give a step-by-step description of how to obtain spatially-subset GEDI Level 2A data from the NASA EarthData Search web portal. We then provide an example of how to characterize the structure of various vegetation classes in Ucayali, Peru. These vegetation classes include: (1) old-growth lowland forest, (2) young lowland vegetation regrowth (Purma), (3) secondary lowland forest, (4) mature oil palm plantations, and (5) cacao plantations (monocrop and agroforestry). We interpret the structural height metrics from GEDI among each of these vegetation classes, identifying edge effects as a possible influence on our results. To address this issue, we conducted a final analysis of the data with an area of 35m diameter footprint (25m of the original diameter area of the beam, and 10m as a conservative additional buffer) and excluded any observations that did not completely overlap with each land cover polygon. When we removed edge effects, no observations remained in the cacao data set and fewer observations remained in the forest stage data set. Nonetheless, the overall structural patterns shown in the relative heights of each forest stage remained very similar. We recommend that future projects utilizing spaceborne lidar for tropical ecosystems consider adopting the techniques and best practices we describe here, including refined noise filtering and explicit consideration of edge effects.
Measurement and monitoring needs, capabilities and potential for addressing reduced emissions from deforestation and forest degradation under REDD			This paper presents an overview of the state of measurement and monitoring capabilities for forests in the context of REDD+ needs, with a focus on what is currently possible, where improvements are needed, and what capabilities will be advanced in the near-term with new technologies already under development. We summarize the role of remote sensing (both satellite and aircraft) for observational monitoring of forests, including measuring changes in their current and past extent for setting baselines, their carbon stock density for estimating emissions in areas that are deforested or degraded, and their regrowth dynamics following disturbance. We emphasize the synergistic role of integrating field inventory measurements with remote sensing for best practices in monitoring, reporting and verification. We also address the potential of remote sensing for enforcing safeguards on conservation of natural forests and biodiversity. We argue that capabilities exist now to meet operational needs for REDD+ measurement, reporting, and verification and reference levels. For some other areas of importance for REDD+, such as safeguards for natural forests and biodiversity, monitoring capabilities are approaching operational in the near term. For all REDD+ needs, measurement capabilities will rapidly advance in the next few years as a result of new technology as well as advances in capacity building both within and outside of the tropical forest nations on which REDD+ is primarily focused.
Measuring forest ecosystem services in Aceh Province for inclusion to local forest resource management plans			The project trained forest managers from Kesatuan Pengelo-laan Hutan (KPH) and Social Forestry units in Aceh Province in forest resource data collection and the use of three tools that report important forest ecosystem services. Data were collected in systematic forest plots by local KPH staff and social forestry community members for measuring forest carbon, tree biodiversity and forest ecosystem health. Teams represented nine different forest ecosystems in Aceh Province, Indonesia. Average forest carbon estimates range from a low of 27.14 Mg C ha−1 in a coffee agroforestry system to a high of 446.93 Mg C ha−1 in a tropical forest area managed under social forestry. Tree biodiversity ranged from a low of one species as expected in a coastal mangrove forest to a high of 35 species in the tropical forest area managed under social forestry. Forest health conditions on average for the nine areas were mostly healthy, with a few noted in fair condition and one considered to be in poor condition. Resources provided at the local level would enable mainstreaming of field data collection for measuring these forest ecosystem services, and continued and expanded training should be considered to meet national demand. © The authors.
Measuring the net benefits of payments for hydrological services programs in Mexico			A number of studies show that payments for ecosystem services (PES) programs contribute to reducing deforestation, but few have measured the impact on ecosystem service provision or compared economic benefits and costs of these programs. We integrate impact evaluation and ecosystem service measurement to examine the effects of PES programs in Veracruz, Mexico. We use quasi-experimental methods to measure the effect of enrolling in PES on forest cover. We link these changes in forest cover to field-calibrated measures of water regulation and carbon storage. After converting these changes in ecosystem services to monetary values we calculate the net benefits of the programs. We find that PES reduces losses of forest cover but that the additional gains in forest cover are small. However, these gains in forest lead to positive water regulation and carbon storage services. The net benefits of the PES programs over a 10-year period are as large as USD 3.2 million for watershed services and USD 4.9 million for water plus carbon storage. However, when there is no additionality in forest cover due to PES, the programs result in economic losses. Adopting this type of integrated modeling of PES impacts sheds light on the economic efficiency of these approaches.
Medium and large-sized mammals in a premontane moist forest fragment, Atenas, Costa Rica			Introduction: Medium and large-sized mammals are threatened globally due to habitat loss and fragmentation. In Costa Rica, forest fragments that remain outside protected areas may serve as a refuge or corridor for these animals. Mammal presence in fragmented landscapes may be influenced by resource availability, which varies greatly in seasonal regions. Objective: To determine the species richness of medium and large-sized mammals in a forest fragment, and to examine if species diversity and detectability varied between the wet and dry season. Methods: We established 26 camera trap stations throughout the Municipal Forest of Atenas (Alajuela, Costa Rica), a 26.4 ha forest fragment that provides water to about 1 800 people. From August 2021 to April 2022, one camera trap was active at each station for 12-21 days throughout each season (dry and wet), for a total of 810 camera trap days. We applied rarefaction and extrapolation curves to characterize mammal's species diversity and compare it between seasons. Results: We detected 19 species of mammals. The most frequently detected species were the White-nosed Coati (Nasua narica; 0.254 detections/camera trap day), and the Central American Agouti (Dasyprocta punctata; 0.163 detections/camera trap day). We also registered four species considered as endangered in Costa Rica, three felines: Puma concolor, Herpailurus yagouaroundi, Leopardus pardalis, and the Neotropical River Otter, Lontra longicaudis. Seasonality did not affect species diversity, but it influenced dominant species and detectability, which was greater during the wet season. Conclusions: Our study demonstrates how protecting small forest fragments, can help conserve endangered medium and large-sized mammals in human-dominated landscapes.
Mega-development trends in the Amazon: Implications for global change			This paper describes four global-change phenomena that are having major impacts on Amazonian forests. The first is accelerating deforestation and logging. Despite recent government initiatives to slow forest loss, deforestation rates in Brazilian Amazonia have increased from 1.1 million ha yr(-1) in the early 1990s, to nearly 1.5 million ha yr(-1) from 1992-1994, and to more than 1.9 million ha yr(-1) from 1995-1998. Deforestation is also occurring rapidly in some other parts of the Amazon Basin, such as in Bolivia and Ecuador, while industrialized logging is increasing dramatically in the Guianas and central Amazonia.The second phenomenon is that patterns of forest loss and fragmentation are rapidly changing. In recent decades, large-scale deforestation has mainly occurred in the southern and eastern portions of the Amazon - in the Brazilian states of Para, Maranhao, Rondonia, Acre, and Mate Grosso, and in northern Bolivia. While rates of forest loss remain very high in these areas, the development of major new highways is providing direct conduits into the heart of the Amazon. If future trends follow past patterns, land-hungry settlers and loggers may largely bisect the forests of the Amazon Basin.The third phenomenon is that climatic variability is interacting with human land uses, creating additional impacts on forest ecosystems. The 1997/98 Fl Nino drought, for example, led to a major increase in forest burning, with wildfires raging out of control in the northern Amazonian state of Roraima and other locations. Logging operations, which create labyrinths of roads and tracks in forests, are increasing fuel loads, desiccation and ignition sources in forest interiors. Forest fragmentation also increases fire susceptibility by creating dry, fire-prone forest edges.Finally, recent evidence suggests that intact Amazonian forests are a globally significant carbon sink, quite possibly caused by higher forest growth rates in response to increasing atmospheric CO2 fertilization. Evidence for a carbon sink comes from long-term forest mensuration plots, from whole-forest studies of carbon flux and from investigations of atmospheric CO2 and oxygen isotopes. Unfortunately, intact Amazonian forests are rapidly diminishing. Hence, not only is the destruction of these forests a major source of greenhouse gases, but it is reducing their intrinsic capacity to help buffer the rapid anthropogenic rise in CO2.
Mega-fires, tipping points and ecosystem services: Managing forests and woodlands in an uncertain future			Global evidence posits that we are on the cusp of fire-driven 'tipping points' in some of the world's most important woody biomes including savannah woodlands, temperate forests, and boreal forests, with consequences of major changes in species dominance and vegetation type. The evidence also suggests that mega-fires are positive feedbacks to changing climates via carbon emissions, and will be responsible for large swings in water yield and quality from temperate forests at the regional scale.Two factors widely considered to have contributed to our current proximity to tipping points are changing climates and human management - the latter most obviously taking the form of allowing fuels to build up, either through policies of fire suppression or failure to implement sufficient fuel reduction fires - to the point where wildfire intensity increases dramatically. Much of the evidence comes from Australia and the USA, but domains such as Africa and the boreal north provide additional insights.Forests adapted to regimes of low-moderate intensity fires may not face the same challenges as the iconic ash forests of Australia and the coniferous forests of Yellowstone or the west coast of the USA that are adapted to high intensity fire. However the often modest physical barriers (including distance, topography and climate) between forests adapted to more frequent, low-moderate intensity fires on the one hand, and less frequent, high intensity fires on the other, are easily overcome by confluences of continually increasing fuel loads and changing climates that serve to increase both fire frequency and intensity.For temperate forests, we can mitigate the extent of large-scale, high intensity fires and their consequences if we carefully use fuel reduction fires and other standard forest management practises such as thinning. Mitigation will require assessing impacts on biodiversity of smaller, low-intensity fires at intervals of 5-10 years (to reduce fuels and mitigate fire size and intensity), against those of large-scale, high intensity wildfires at increasing (but unknown) frequency. Mitigation will require that forests be managed contiguously, not via different agencies with different objectives according to land tenure. Managing requires that governments and the communities they serve acknowledge the limitations of fire-suppression. Mitigating the incidence and effects of large-scale, high intensity fires through embracing the use of managed fire in conjunction with judicious use of fire suppression offers opportunity to avoid potentially large changes in vegetation and biomass (e.g. abundance of dominant species, biodiversity, fuel structure and loads), as well as in water yield and quality and carbon carrying capacity. (C) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Methane and Carbon Dioxide Production and Emission Pathways in the Belowground and Draining Water Bodies of a Tropical Peatland Plantation Forest			Peatlands are crucial yet vulnerable carbon stores. Here, we investigated carbon biogeochemical processes in tropical peatlands converted to plantations. We measured carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) concentrations, stable isotope ratios and radiocarbon content in an experimental Acacia crassicarpa plantation in Sumatra, Indonesia. We found exceptionally high levels of dissolved organic carbon (DOC), CO2, and CH4 in porewater and drainage networks, indicating that Acacia plantations are carbon hotspots due to their high productivity and exposed carbon-dense substrates. Stable isotope models revealed that while CO2 and CH4 are produced belowground, CH4 contribution was lower than in natural undrained peatlands. Radiocarbon analysis suggested that remobilized carbon contributed to the carbon pool, with a median age of ∼470 years before present. These findings constrain the links between land-use, water table levels, and carbon dynamics, with implications for carbon management in plantation peatlands. © 2025. The Author(s).
Metropolitan land-change science: A framework for research on tropical and subtropical forest recovery in city-regions			In efforts to promote transitions to sustainability in city-regions, government and nongovernment actors throughout the world are devising comprehensive sustainability strategies and implementing a variety of environmental policies. Social actors in many city-regions view forest stewardship as an important element of this integrated approach. Generally, urban sustainability goals are guided by the principles of ecological integrity, environmental quality, social equity, social inclusion, and social justice. In other words, sustainable urban development should foster a good quality of life for all by providing equitable access to adequate economic opportunity, housing. education, public services, ecosystem services, and environmental amenities. Governance structures should pursue these goals democratically with legitimacy, transparency, anti accountability. Effective sustainability planning and management depend on the reliability of land-use monitoring and modeling approaches. They also require field-based, qualitative empirical research to understand the complex social dynamics that are invisible from space. The aim of this paper is to encourage international, cross-disciplinary dialogue on the conceptual, theoretical, methodological, and practical groundwork necessary to effectively carry out metropolitan land-change science, particularly for rapidly expanding small-and medium-sized cities in developing countries. I begin by presenting the paper's central conceptual and theoretical framework. Next, I explore existing analytical and methodological approaches to the study of land-use dynamics in metropolitan regions. After a brief discussion of specific opportunities and challenges for collaborative, interdisciplinary research in support of metropolitan land-change science, I conclude by proposing a four-part agenda for coordinated investigation of tropical and subtropical forest recovery in city-regions worldwide. (C) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Mexico-Addressing Challenges to Reforestation			Mexico's incredibly diverse forests are designated by federal regulations as "multipurpose" and managed for the benefit and economic welfare of the local communities. In addition to traditional wood products, the forests provide grazing lands, nonwood forest products, fuelwood, and ecosystem services. Unfortunately, growing populations and the structure of the community forest enterprises are placing increasing stress on forest resources. Furthermore, illegal harvesting, selective logging, routine burning for forage production, and unsuccessful reforestation efforts have depleted forest resources in many regions. Few local communities possess adequate forest nurseries to properly reforest degraded areas. The recent recommitment to nursery production and reforestation by Comision Nacional Forestal (CONAFOR) should lead to improved stand establishment and growth, especially as forest communities understand the critical link between reforestation and sustained forest productivity. CONAFOR, a federal agency responsible for reforestation programs, has restructured nursery production, reduced the total number of nurseries, and contracted with newly established, private nurseries that now produce 38 million seedlings/year (about 20% of all seedlings produced). The number of community nurseries has shrunk with this greater reliance on private and military (SEDENA) nurseries, which tend to be larger and more sophisticated and use containerized seedlings rather than polybag systems. The objective of this article is to discuss factors leading to these changes and the challenges facing the reforestation program.
Microbial community structure varies across soil organic matter aggregate pools during tropical land cover change			Soil microorganisms regulate multiple input and loss pathways of soil carbon (C); hence, changes in microbial communities are expected to affect soil organic matter (SOM) cycling and storage. Despite this, very little is known about how microbes respond to changes in soil structure and vegetation with land use and land cover change. This study aimed to identify relationships between microbial community composition and the distribution of SOM among soil aggregate fractions to answer the following research questions: (1) Are different microbial groups associated with different SOM pools? and (2) How do these relationships differ with changes in vegetation during tropical forest succession? We measured microbial composition via phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) analysis and C and nitrogen (N) concentrations on physically separated aggregate fractions of soils from pastures, secondary forests (40 and 90 years old) naturally regrowing on abandoned pastures, and reference or primary forests in Puerto Rico. We found different microbial communities associated with different soil aggregate fractions. Fungal to bacterial ratios decreased and gram-positive to gram-negative bacterial ratios increased with decreasing physical fraction size (from the macroaggregates to the silt and clay fractions). Microbial composition also varied with land cover type and forest successional stage, with consistent trends among soil fractions. These results show that the soil matrix and soil microsite properties play an important role in the spatial distribution of fungal and bacterial-dominated communities. The similarities in land cover effects on microbial communities at different spatial scales suggest similar controls may be influencing microbial composition with potential implications for SOM storage and turnover. In addition, the majority of C and N (relative to total soil C and fraction mass) was isolated in the macroaggregate-occluded silt and clay-sized fractions, suggesting that association with mineral surfaces, and not occlusion of particulate organic matter within aggregates, is the dominant stabilization mechanism for SOM in these highly-weathered, fine-textured soils. These results highlight the importance of soil aggregation in C storage but through mechanisms different than those reported for temperate grassland soils. (C) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Microclimate in the tropics			Microclimatic differences between site conditions of forest ecosystems and farmlands are accented to clarify the significant importance of tree canopies for ecosystem services and agroforestry. An analyis of the climate within a tropical rainforest and its impact on epiphytic structure is given by Fig. 2. After forest conversion into farmland, radiation turnovers and energy flows as well as precipitation rates change dramatically (Figs. 3 and 4). Furthermore, clear-cuts of tropical forests enhance in destructive erosion processes during tropical downpours (Figs. 5, 6, and 8), which can reach impressive amounts during hurricane events (Fig. 7). © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016.
Micrometeorological measurement of methane flux above a tropical peat swamp forest			Tropical peat swamp forest is a unique ecosystem, in which both swamp forest and peat soil have coexisted over millennia and accumulated a significant amount of soil carbon as peat. Owing to the huge soil carbon stock and high groundwater level (GWL), tropical peatlands potentially represent a significant source of methane (CH4) to the atmosphere. However, a few studies of CH4 flux by the soil chamber technique have reported that annual CH4 emissions from tropical peat swamp forest were very low as compared to mid- and high-latitude peatlands. Recently, it has been reported that some tree species growing in peat swamp forest emit CH4 from their stems. It is impossible to continuously measure ecosystem-scale CH4 flux including both soil and plant-mediated CH4 emissions by the chamber technique. Thus, we have measured net ecosystem CH4 exchange (FCH4) above a tropical peat swamp forest in Sarawak, Malaysia using the eddy covariance technique from February 2014 to July 2015 (18 months). The mean (±1 standard deviation) of half-hourly measured FCH4 was 24.0 ± 42.2 nmol m–2 s–1. Monthly mean FCH4 was always positive during the 18 months, even in the driest month with mean GWL of –30 cm. FCH4 was positively associated with GWL or soil moisture in a quadratic form. Annual FCH4 from March 2014 through February 2015 was 7.5–10.8 g C m–2 yr–1. The annual FCH4 was much higher than annual soil CH4 emissions from tropical peatlands, because the FCH4 included aboveground CH4 emissions mainly from tree stems. However, the annual FCH4 was relatively low in comparison with those measured by the eddy covariance technique in mid- and high-latitude peatlands. © 2018 Elsevier B.V.
Millennial-scale hydroclimate control of tropical soil carbon storage			Over the past 18,000 years, the residence time and amount of soil carbon stored in the Ganges-Brahmaputra basin have been controlled by the intensity of Indian Summer Monsoon rainfall, with greater carbon destabilization during wetter, warmer conditions.The storage of organic carbon in the terrestrial biosphere directly affects atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide over a wide range of timescales. Within the terrestrial biosphere, the magnitude of carbon storage can vary in response to environmental perturbations such as changing temperature or hydroclimate(1), potentially generating feedback on the atmospheric inventory of carbon dioxide. Although temperature controls the storage of soil organic carbon at mid and high latitudes(2,3), hydroclimate may be the dominant driver of soil carbon persistence in the tropics(4,5); however, the sensitivity of tropical soil carbon turnover to large-scale hydroclimate variability remains poorly understood. Here we show that changes in Indian Summer Monsoon rainfall have controlled the residence time of soil carbon in the Ganges-Brahmaputra basin over the past 18,000 years. Comparison of radiocarbon ages of bulk organic carbon and terrestrial higher-plant biomarkers with co-located palaeohydrological records(6) reveals a negative relationship between monsoon rainfall and soil organic carbon stocks on a millennial timescale. Across the deglaciation period, a depletion of basin-wide soil carbon stocks was triggered by increasing rainfall and associated enhanced soil respiration rates. Our results suggest that future hydroclimate changes in tropical regions are likely to accelerate soil carbon destabilization, further increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations.
Mineralization ratios of nitrogen and phosphorus from decomposing litter in temperate versus tropical forests			AimTerrestrial ecosystems sequester about 25% of anthropogenic CO2 emissions annually; however, nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) limitation of plant productivity and microbial functioning could curtail this key ecosystem service in the future. Our aim is to address variations in nutrient resupply during decomposition - especially whether the N:P ratio of nutrient recycling via mineralization varies within and across diverse forest biomes.LocationGlobal forest ecosystems.MethodsWe compiled data on in situ litter decomposition experiments (leaf, wood and root) from the primary literature to examine the relationships between net N and P mineralization across temperate versus tropical forests world-wide. We define net nutrient mineralization ratios as the average N:P released from decomposing substrates at a given ecosystem site.ResultsWe show that net N and P mineralization are strongly correlated within biomes, suggesting strong coupling between N and P recycling in forest ecosystems. The net N:P of leaf-litter mineralization is higher in tropical forests than in temperate forests, consistent with latitudinal patterns in foliar and leaf-litter N:P. At the global scale, the N:P of net mineralization tracks, but tends to be lower than that of litter N:P, pointing to preferential P (versus N) mineralization in forest ecosystems.Main conclusionsOur results do not support the view that there is a single, globally consistent mineralization N:P ratio. Instead, our results show that the N:P of net mineralization can be predicted by the N:P of litter, offering a method for incorporating P into global-scale models of carbon-nutrient-climate interactions. In addition, these results imply that P is scarce relative to microbial decomposer demands in tropical forests, whereas N and P may be more co-limiting when compared with microbial biomass in the temperate zone.
Mitigation potential of carbon dioxide emissions by management of forests in Asia			Substantial areas of available forest lands in Asia could be managed for conservation and sequestration of carbon (C). These include 133 Mha for establishment of plantations and agroforests, 33.5 Mha for slowed tropical deforestation, and 48 Mha for natural and assisted regeneration of tropical forests. The potential quantity of C conserved and sequestered on these lands was conservatively estimated to be 24 Pg C (1 Pg = 10(15) g) by 2050. Establishment of plantations and agroforests could account for 58% of the total mitigation potential on Asian forest lands. The amount of C that could be conserved and sequestered by all forest sector practices by 2050 under baseline conditions is equivalent to about 4% of the global fossil fuel emissions over the same time period. The uncertainties in estimates of mitigation potential presented in this paper are likely to be high, particularly with respect to the land area available for forestation projects and the rate at which deforestation could be slowed. The uncertainty terms are compounded in making global estimates of the mitigation potential, perhaps to large proportions, but to what extent is presently unknown. An example of a forestry project in China whose main goal was to rehabilitate degraded lands and at the same time provide biomass fuel for the local rural inhabitants is presented to demonstrate that C sequestration, and thus mitigation, is an added benefit to more traditional uses of forests. This forestry project is currently mitigating CO2 emissions (up to about 1.4 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1)) and, with a change in management, an almost two-fold increase in the current reduction of net C emissions would occur.
Mixed impacts of protected areas and a cash crop boom on human well-being in North-Eastern Madagascar			Tropical forest frontier areas support the well-being of local populations in myriad ways. Not only do they provide the material basis for people's livelihoods, they also sustain socio-cultural foundations through relational values. They host some of the most biodiverse ecosystems and largest carbon stocks on the planet, and are thus a focus of global conservation efforts. They are also a prime location for the production of many global agricultural commodities. These dynamics-often intertwined-may trap local populations between powerful interests, with the potential to affect their well-being. We conducted 100 structured interviews in four biodiversity-rich landscapes of north-eastern Madagascar to investigate how multi-dimensional human well-being is affected by the recent establishment of protected areas and surge in cash crop prices. We asked households about their satisfaction-and changes in satisfaction-with locally relevant well-being components, mapping their answers through Nussbaum's Central Capabilities approach. We also investigated the cultural significance of key natural resources beyond the material benefits they provide. All issues were explored along four variables: site, main source of rice, gender and household land use portfolio. Our findings are as follows: first, human capabilities are interconnected and mutually interdependent, with relational values linking many of them. Second, subjective accounts of well-being are influenced by cognitive biases, such as treadmill effects, adaptive preferences and recency bias. Third, while households perceived a positive influence of protected areas, those most reliant on forest land and products held a more negative view of conservation interventions. And fourth, while households more engaged in commercial agriculture may be benefitting economically from the recent increase in cash crop prices, these very dynamics might be leading to trade-offs between capabilities. This is most notably so for the Bodily Health capability (e.g. greater spending on housing) and Affiliation and Bodily Integrity (i.e. worsening social relations and security). These insights highlight the importance of addressing the multiple dimensions of well-being when assessing the impacts of conservation and economic dynamics in forest frontier populations. Particular attention should be paid to the relational values ascribed to the natural resources the communities rely on. Read the free Plain Language Summary for this article on the Journal blog.
Mixed policies give more options in multifunctional tropical forest landscapes			Tropical forest landscapes face competing demands for conserving biodiversity, sustaining ecosystem services and accommodating production systems such as forestry and agriculture. Land-sparing and land-sharing have emerged as contrasting strategies to manage trade-offs between production and biodiversity conservation. Both strategies are evident in land-management policies at local-to-international scales. However, studies rarely report the impacts of these strategies, assessed for multiple stakeholders and multiple ecosystem services, particularly in real landscapes. Using a case study from a high-priority region for forest protection, restoration and rural development in Central Kalimantan, Indonesia, we analysed the potential outcomes under 10 alternative policy scenarios, including land-sharing, land-sparing and mixed strategies. We used a novel optimization process integrating integer programming with conservation-planning software (Marxan with Zones) to identify production possibility frontiers (PPFs), highlighting the trade-off between smallholder agriculture and oil palm, subject to achievement of a set of carbon, timber and biodiversity conservation targets. All policy scenarios modelled proved to be capable of achieving all targets simultaneously. Most strategies resulted in an expansion of the PPF from the baseline, increasing the flexibility of land allocation to achieve all targets. Mixed strategies gave the greatest flexibility to achieve targets, followed closely by land-sparing. Land-sharing only performed better than the baseline when no yield penalties were incurred, and resulted in PPF contraction otherwise. Strategies assessed required a minimum of 29-37% to be placed in conservation zones, notably protecting the majority of remaining forest, but requiring little reforestation.Policy implications. Production possibility frontiers (PPFs) can evaluate a broad spectrum of land-use policy options. When using targets sought by multiple stakeholders within an ecosystem services framework, PPFs can characterize biophysical, socio-economic and institutional dimensions of policy trade-offs in heterogeneous landscapes. All 10 policy strategies assessed in our case study are biophysically capable of achieving all stakeholder objectives, provided at least 29-37% of the landscape is conserved for biodiversity. This novel methodological approach provides practical options for systematic analysis in complex, multifunctional landscapes, and could, when integrated within a larger planning and implementation process, inform the design of land-use policies that maximize stakeholder satisfaction and minimize conflict.
Modeling aboveground biomass in tropical forests using multi-frequency SAR data-A comparison of methods			In the context of climate change mitigation mechanisms for avoiding deforestation, i.e., reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+), comprehensive forest monitoring, especially in tropical regions, is of high relevance. A precise determination of forest carbon stocks or aboveground biomass (AGB) for large areas is of special importance. This study analyzes and compares three different methods for retrieving AGB in Indonesia's peat swamp forests from multi-frequency SAR backscatter data. Field inventory AGB data were related to LiDAR measurements allowing plentiful accurate AGB estimations. These estimatedAGB data provided a powerful basis for SAR based AGB model calibration and validation. Multivariate linear regression (MLR), artificial neural network (ANN) and support vector regression (SVR) were examined for their performance to retrieve AGB on the basis of multi-temporal TerraSAR-X and ALOS PALSAR imagery. The MLR model resulted in lower coefficients of determination and higher error measures than the other two approaches and showed significant overestimations in the high biomass range. The SVR modeled AGB was more accurate than ANN modeled AGB in terms of independent validation, but showed less variation in the spatial distribution of AGB and saturated at approximately 260 t/ha. The ANN model showed a superior performance for modeling AGB up to 650 t/ha without a saturation in the lower biomass ranges. For the needs of REDD+, it is very important to know the possibilities, constraints and uncertainties of AGB retrieval based on satellite imagery. © 2011 IEEE.
Modeling and Mapping Agroforestry Aboveground Biomass in the Brazilian Amazon Using Airborne Lidar Data			Agroforestry has large potential for carbon (C) sequestration while providing many economical, social, and ecological benefits via its diversified products. Airborne lidar is considered as the most accurate technology for mapping aboveground biomass (AGB) over landscape levels. However, little research in the past has been done to study AGB of agroforestry systems using airborne lidar data. Focusing on an agroforestry system in the Brazilian Amazon, this study first predicted plot-level AGB using fixed-effects regression models that assumed the regression coefficients to be constants. The model prediction errors were then analyzed from the perspectives of tree DBH (diameter at breast height)height relationships and plot-level wood density, which suggested the need for stratifying agroforestry fields to improve plot-level AGB modeling. We separated teak plantations from other agroforestry types and predicted AGB using mixed-effects models that can incorporate the variation of AGB-height relationship across agroforestry types. We found that, at the plot scale, mixed-effects models led to better model prediction performance (based on leave-one-out cross-validation) than the fixed-effects models, with the coefficient of determination (R-2) increasing from 0.38 to 0.64. At the landscape level, the difference between AGB densities from the two types of models was similar to 10% on average and up to similar to 30% at the pixel level. This study suggested the importance of stratification based on tree AGB allometry and the utility of mixed-effects models in modeling and mapping AGB of agroforestry systems.
Modeling carbon sequestration in afforestation, agroforestry and forest management projects: the CO2FIX V.2 approach			The paper describes the Version 2 of the CO2FIX (CO2FIX V.2) model, a user-friendly tool for dynamically estimating the carbon sequestration potential of forest management, agroforesty and afforestation projects. CO2FIX V.2 is a multi-cohort ecosystem-level model based on carbon accounting of forest stands, including forest biomass, soils and products. Carbon stored in living biomass is estimated with a forest cohort model that allows for competition, natural mortality, logging, and mortality due to logging damage. Soil carbon is modeled using five stock pools, three for litter and two for humus. The dynamics of carbon stored in wood products is simulated with a set of pools for short-, medium- and long-lived products, and includes processing efficiency, re-use of by-products, recycling, and disposal forms. The CO2FIX V.2 model estimates total carbon balance of alternative management regimes in both even and uneven-aged forests, and thus has a wide applicability for both temperate and tropical conditions. Results for the model testing and validation in selected temperate and tropical forest management systems are presented and discussed. (C) 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Modeling changes in soil organic matter in Amazon forest to pasture conversion with the Century model			Land use and land cover changes in the Brazilian Amazon region have major implications for regional and even global carbon cycling. We analyzed the effects of the predominant land use change, conversion of tropical forest to pasture, on total soil C and N, using the Century ecosystem model and data collected from the Nova Vida ranch, Western Brazilian Amazon. We estimated equilibrium organic matter levels, plant productivity and residue carbon inputs under native forest conditions, then simulated deforestation following the slash and burn procedure. Soil organic matter dynamics were simulated for pastures established in 1989, 1987, 1983, 1979, 1972, 1951, and 1911. Using input data from the Nova Vida ranch, the Century model predicted that forest clearance and conversion to pasture would cause an initial decline in soil C and N stocks, followed by a slow rise to levels exceeding those under native forest. Simulated soil total C and N levels (2500 g C m(-2) and 245 g N m(-2) in the 0-20 cm layer) prior to conversion to pasture were close to those measured in the native forest. Simulated above- and below-ground biomass for the forest and pasture were comparable with literature values from this region. The model predicted the long-term changes in soil C and N under pasture inferred from the pasture chronosequence, but there was considerable variation in soil C stocks for pastures <20 years in age. Differences in soil texture between pastures were relatively small and could not account for much of the variability between different pastures of similar ages, in either the measured or simulated data. It is likely that much of the variability in C stocks between pastures of similar ages is related to initial C stocks immediately following deforestation and that this was the largest source of variability in the chronosequence. Internal C cycling processes in Century were evaluated using measurements of microbial biomass and soil delta(13)C. The relative magnitude and long-term trend in microbial biomass simulated by the model were consistent with measurements. The close fit of simulated to measured values of delta(13)C over time suggests that the relative loss of forest-derived C and its replacement by pasture-derived C was accurately predicted by the model. After 80 years, almost 90% of the organic matter in the top 20 cm was pasture derived. While our analysis represents a single 'case study' of pasture conversion, our results suggest that modeling studies in these pasture systems can help to evaluate the magnitude of impacts on C and N cycling, and determine the effect of management strategies on pasture sustainability.
Modeling multiple ecosystem services and beneficiaries of riparian reforestation in Costa Rica			Riparian buffers-forests along rivers-generate many essential ecosystem services, and their protection and restoration are the focus of many policy efforts. Costa Rica is a global leader in this regard, where legislative and executive frameworks work in concert to conserve forests that deliver public benefits such as water quality and carbon storage both locally and globally. Yet implementation and enforcement is an urgent challenge, and could benefit from high-resolution targeting with a quantitative understanding of expected benefits. Here, we under-take such an analysis, focusing on the benefits of implementing Forest Law 7575, which specifies the amount of forest to be preserved along rivers. We model changes in sediment retention, nutrient retention, and carbon sequestration from a baseline scenario based on current land use that is in partial compliance with the law. We contrast this with a simulated reforestation scenario, where riparian forest cover is increased to at least a minimum level of compliance (10 m buffers) everywhere. We find that targeted riparian refor-estation-increasing national forest cover by 1.9 %-would substantially increase ecosystem services. Water quality regulation would be improved via an increase of 3.9 % in sediment retention (1.4 Mt/year), 81.4 % in nitrogen retention (0.012 Mt/year), and 85.9 % in phosphorus retention (0.0022 Mt/year). Moreover, riparian reforestation would increase the national carbon stock 1.4 % above current levels (7.0 Mt). Our analysis shows where riparian buffers are most beneficial-generally in steep, erosion-prone, and intensively fertilized land-scapes. Through a canton-level analysis comparing potential increases in sediment and nutrient retention with demographic information, we find that these benefits would flow to communities that depend on rivers for drinking water and that are otherwise vulnerable. Small increases in riparian reforestation in Costa Rica, implemented via an existing law, could confer large benefits to rivers and all who depend on them.
Modeling seasonal surface temperature variations in secondary tropical dry forests			Secondary tropical dry forests (TDFs) provide important ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration, biodiversity conservation, and nutrient cycle regulation. However, their biogeophysical processes at the canopy atmosphere interface remain unknown, limiting our understanding of how this endangered ecosystem influences, and responds to the ongoing global warming. To facilitate future development of conservation policies, this study characterized the seasonal land surface temperature (LST) behavior of three successional stages (early, intermediate, and late) of a TDF, at the Santa Rosa National Park (SRNP), Costa Rica. A total of 38 Landsat-8 Thermal Infrared Sensor (TIRS) data and the Surface Reflectance (SR) product were utilized to model LST time series from July 2013 to July 2016 using a radiative transfer equation (RTE) algorithm. We further related the LST time series to seven vegetation indices which reflect different properties of TDFs, and soil moisture data obtained from a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN). Results showed that the LST in the dry season was 15-20 K higher than in the wet season at SRNP. We found that the early successional stages were about 6-8 K warmer than the intermediate successional stages and were 9-10 K warmer than the late successional stages in the middle of the dry season; meanwhile, a minimum LST difference (0-1 K) was observed at the end of the wet season. Leaf phenology and canopy architecture explained most LST variations in both dry and wet seasons. However, our analysis revealed that it is precipitation that ultimately determines the LST variations through both biogeochemical (leaf phenology) and biogeophysical processes (evapotranspiration) of the plants. Results of this study could help physiological modeling studies in secondary TDFs.
Modeling successional pathways of secondary Atlantic forests in the face of climate change using taxonomic, functional, phylogenetic and landscape information			Secondary forests are expanding worldwide as land use changes, farms are abandoned, and legal and market pressures increase for land holders to reforest or set aside land for forest regeneration. The application of models to envision the development and dynamics of forests are becoming very important especially under different scenarios of climate change. However, forest models have seldom been employed for tropical forests and they are even more rarely applied to secondary forests. The present proposal aims at applying a landscape forest gap model (LandClim) to data we collected on the species taxonomic, functional and phylogenetic composition, diameter, and height of trees and shrubs occurring in semideciduous Atlantic forest patches that differ in age, land use history and current surrounding land uses in the Corumbataí Basin, São Paulo. We aim to collaborate with the Forest Ecology Group of the ETH, lead by Dr. Harald Bugmann, to learn how to apply the landscape forest gap model LandCLim, developed by Dr. Bugmann, to our dataset. It will be the first time that this forest model is applied to secondary tropical forest ecosystems. Results from the model will help increase our understanding of the successional pathways the forest patches will follow thru time and according to different climate scenarios. Secondary forests in fragmented landscapes play an important role in water and biodiversity conservation, carbon sequestration and erosion control, thus modeling their dynamics becomes really important to adequately manage and conserve these forest patches and the ecosystem services they provide in the long term. (AU)
Modeling the forest transition: Forest scarcity and ecosystem service hypotheses			An historical generalization about forest cover change in which rapid deforestation gives way over time to forest restoration is called "the forest transition." Prior research on the forest transition leaves three important questions unanswered: (1) How does forest loss influence an individual landowner's incentives to reforest? (2) How does the forest recovery rate affect the likelihood of forest transition? (3) What happens after the forest transition occurs? The purpose of this paper is to develop a minimum model of the forest transition to answer these questions. We assume that deforestation caused by landowners' decisions and forest regeneration initiated by agricultural abandonment have aggregated effects that characterize entire landscapes. These effects include feedback mechanisms called the "forest scarcity" and "ecosystem service" hypotheses. In the forest scarcity hypothesis, forest losses make forest products scarcer, which increases the economic value of forests. In the ecosystem service hypothesis, the environmental degradation that accompanies the loss of forests causes the value of ecosystem services provided by forests to decline. We examined the impact of each mechanism on the likelihood of forest transition through an investigation of the equilibrium and stability of landscape dynamics. We found that the forest transition occurs only when landowners employ a low rate of future discounting. After the forest transition, regenerated forests are protected in a sustainable way if forests regenerate slowly. When forests regenerate rapidly, the forest scarcity hypothesis expects instability in which cycles of large-scale deforestation followed by forest regeneration repeatedly characterize the landscape. In contrast, the ecosystem service hypothesis predicts a catastrophic shift from a forested to an abandoned landscape when the amount of deforestation exceeds the critical level, which can lead to a resource degrading poverty trap. These findings imply that incentives for forest conservation seem stronger in settings where forests regenerate slowly as well as when decision makers value the future.
Modelling alternatives in agroforestry to slash-and-burn agriculture in Yucátan, Mexico: enhancing diversity, production, ecosystem health and resilience			0
Modelling the growth of young rainforest trees for biomass estimates and carbon sequestration accounting			Few measurements for carbon sequestration, ratio of above-ground to below-ground biomass and wood density exist for young trees. Current allometric models are mostly for mature trees, and few consider trees at the sapling stage. Over four years we monitored the growth rates, from seedling to the sapling stage, of 490 trees (five native species) in environmental plantings, in the Wet Tropics of north-eastern Australia. Our biomass estimates were greater by several orders of magnitude in the first year (6× 10-3Mgha-1 cf. 4× 10-6Mgha-1), and two orders of magnitude less at four years than those derived from the national carbon accounting model (5× 10-1Mgha-1 cf. 13Mgha-1). We destructively sampled 37 young trees to accurately estimate the variation in below-ground and above-ground biomass (AGB) with stem size, and to derive a best fit model for predicting sapling biomass: lnAGB=-5.092+0.786 ln(Diam.base)2Height. Biomass expansion factors for young tree species ranged from 1.71 to 2.44, higher than average for tropical forests. Root:shoot ratios are consistent with mean estimates for mature rainforest. Stem wood densities ranged from 0.444 to 0.683Mgm-3 for the five species measured, which was 6.5% lower than published estimates for three of the species, and 12% and 27% higher for two species. Relative growth rates were faster for species with lower wood density in the first four years, but these species also had the lowest survival over the same period. The findings are significant for a number of reasons. Ecologically, they indicate that young rainforest trees invest more in leaves and branches than in stem growth. From a survival perspective, in the context of rainforest restoration, it is best to invest in species with higher wood densities. From a carbon accounting point of view, refinements to the models used for national carbon accounting are required that include the contribution of the sapling stage. Sapling growth rates were significantly different from those assumed in the national model, requiring growth rates to be increased after four years (as opposed to after 2years in the national model) before reaching an asymptote at some time in the future. This adjustment is essential to enable carbon farmers to judge the time it takes to receive returns from investment. Policies that encourage carbon plantings should take into account that young plantings grow slower than predicted by current national carbon accounting models. © 2015 Elsevier B.V.
Modelling the impact of climate change on Tanzanian forests			Aim Climate change is pressing extra strain on the already degraded forest ecosystem in Tanzania. However, it is mostly unknown how climate change will affect the distribution of forests in the future. We aimed to model the impacts of climate change on natural forests to help inform national-level conservation and mitigation strategies. Location Tanzania. Methods We conducted maximum entropy (MaxEnt) modelling to simulate forest habitat suitability using the Tanzanian national forest inventory survey (1,307 occurrences) and environmental data. Changes in forest habitats were simulated under two Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) emission scenarios RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 for 2055 and 2085. Results The results indicate that climate change will threaten forest communities, especially fragmented strips of montane forests. Even under optimistic emission scenario, the extent of montane forest is projected to almost halve by 2085, intersecting many biodiversity hotspots across the Eastern Arc Mountains. Similarly, climate change is predicted to threaten microhabitat forests (i.e. thickets), with losses exceeding 70% by 2085 (RCP8.5). Other forest habitats are predicted to decrease (lowland forest and woodland) representing essential ecological networks, whereas suitable habitats for carbon-rich mangroves are predicted to expand by more than 40% at both scenarios. Conclusions Climate change will impact forests by accelerating habitat loss, and fragmentation and the remaining land suitable for forests will also be subject to pressures associated with rising demand for food and biofuels. These changes are likely to increase the probability of adverse impacts to the country's indigenous flora and fauna. Our findings, therefore, call for a shift in conservation efforts, focusing on (i) the enhanced management of existing protected areas that can absorb the impacts of future climate change, and (ii) expanding conservation efforts into newly suitable regions through effective land use planning and land reclamation, helping to preserve and enhance forest connectivity between fragmented patches.
Molecular-level insight into the effect of fertilization regimes on the chemodiversity of dissolved organic matter in tropical cropland			Fertilization is a critical agronomic measure for croplands in tropical regions, owing to their low fertility. However, the effects of fertilization on the quantity and chemodiversity of latosolic dissolved organic matter (DOM) in tropical regions remain largely unknown. Therefore, in this study, the variations in latosol DOM concentrations and chemodiversity induced by inorganic fertilization and the co-application of inorganic fertilization with straw return, sheep manure, biochar, and vermicompost fertilizers at a molecular level were systematically investigated using multispectral techniques and ultrahigh-resolution mass spectrometry. In line with our expectations, the results showed that combined inorganic-organic fertilization improved soil quality by increasing soil organic carbon content compared to that under inorganic fertilization. However, as the most active and bioavailable organic carbon pool, dissolved organic carbonconcentrations between the fertilization treatments were not significantly different (p = 0.07). However, the dissolved organic carbon concentrations under combined inorganic-organic fertilization treatment (NPK plus straw return, 263.45 +/- 37.51 mg/kg) were lower than those under inorganic fertilization treatment (282.10 +/- 18.57 mg/kg). Spectral analysis showed that the DOM in the combined inorganic-organic fertilization treatments had a higher degree of humification and lower autogenetic contributions. Furthermore, Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry analysis indicated that the combined inorganic-organic fertilization increased the chemodiversity of latosolic DOM and promoted the production of large, oxidized, and stable molecules, including lignin, aromatic, and tannin compounds, which potentially benefits soil carbon sequestration in tropical regions. This study could provide a theoretical basis for elucidating on the potentially relevant ecological functions and environmental effects of DOM under fertilization regimes.
Monitoring carbon stocks in the tropics and the remote sensing operational limitations: from local to regional projects			Current remote sensing technologies are effective tools for contributing to the estimation of terrestrial carbon stocks and carbon stock changes. This paper provides an overview of information requirements, sensor capabilities and limitations, and analysis approaches for the use of remotely sensed data in the generation of tropical carbon sequestration monitoring systems. While it is evident that remotely sensed data have tremendous utility for monitoring carbon stock changes, it is important to be aware of their limitations. Three critical limitations are: (1) the definition of methods and algorithms to accurately estimate forest age, (2) the provision of techniques that can yield accurate estimation of deforestation rates in both tropical dry and wet forest environments, and (3) the strong need to develop new approaches to link biophysical variables (e. g., leaf area index) to spectral reflectance to support spatially distributed carbon sequestration models. The validity of final estimates of carbon and carbon stock changes rests on complex issues at several levels, from the data themselves, to the analysis, interpretation, and validation of the data. Consideration of these issues, as well as the need for sound project planning and development within budget constraints, will be important in the development of carbon stock monitoring programs in the tropics.
Monitoring the effects of urbanization and flood hazards on sandy ecosystem services			Urbanization, storms, and floods have compromised the benefits derived from various types of sand dune landscapes, particularly in developing countries located in humid monsoon tropical regions. One pertinent question is which driving forces have had a dominant impact on the contributions of sand dune ecosystems to human well-being. Has the decline in sand dune ecosystem services (ES) been primarily due to urbanization or flooding hazards? This study aims to address these issues by developing a Bayesian Belief Network (BBN) to analyze six different sand dune landscapes worldwide. The study uses various data types, including multi-temporal and -sensor remote sensing (SAR and optical data), expert knowledge, statistics, and GIS to analyze the trends in sand dune ecosystems. A support tool based on probabilistic approaches was developed to assess changes in ES over time due to the effects of urbanization and flooding. The developed BBN has the potential to assess the ES values of sand dunes during both rainy and dry seasons. The study calculated and tested the ES values in detail over six years (from 2016 to 2021) in Quang Nam province, Vietnam. The results showed that urbanization has led to an increase in the total ES values since 2016, while floods only had a minimal impact on dune ES values during the rainy season. The fluctuations of ES values were found to be more significant due to urbanization than floods. The study's approach can be useful in future research on coastal ecosystems. © 2023 Elsevier B.V.
Monitoring the passive and active ecological restoration of areas impacted by the Fundão tailings dam disruption in Mariana, Minas Gerais, Brazil			Ecological restoration of degraded lands is a global priority. In order to improve the monitoring criteria of ecosystems affected by the Fundão tailings dam disruption in Mariana, Minas Gerais state, southeastern Brazil, it is necessary to elucidate resilience patterns and processes. Thus, proven mechanisms of resilient mitigation should be the way to improve our understanding of restoration strategies being implemented and monitored. Thus, passive and active restoration were adopted, as important and complementary methods within an integral management plan for areas directly affected by the tailings dam disruption. In this context, active restoration (i.e., planting of nursery-grown seedlings) is being implemented at 20% level of the total area affected. However, the passive restoration (natural regeneration of biodiversity and ecosystem functions) is predominating and rapidly extending up to 80% of the total area affected by the mud. The efficiency of these ecological restoration strategies in the region is being monitored according to different applied methods and using different indicators such as natural regeneration, soil seed bank, seedling mortality, species richness, soil cover (substrate formed by the tailings deposition), among others. Recently, it has been demonstrated that the success of ecological restoration is greater for passive regeneration than for active restoration in tropical forests. In this sense, we find that passive restoration is becoming increasingly important for the resilient mitigation of impacted areas. However, this technique is conditioned by drivers at landscape-scale, such as the proximity of remnant forest fragments. Likewise, due to the environmental heterogeneity conditions, active restoration measures are fundamental in degraded areas where natural regeneration is limited, mainly due to the absence of fragments in the landscape. Finally, we emphasize that passive restoration is playing an important role in the ecosystem services recovery at local-scale; which represents a major advantage to achieving the proposed resilient mitigation goals. © 2020 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. All rights reserved.
Monitoring vegetation dynamics with open earth observation tools: the case of fire-modulated savanna to forest transitions in Central Africa			Woody encroachment and forest progression are widespread in forest-savanna transitional areas in Central Africa. Quantifying these dynamics and understanding their drivers at relevant spatial scales has long been a challenge. Recent progress in open access imagery sources with improved spatial, spectral and temporal resolution combined with cloud computing resources, and the advent of relatively cheap solutions to deploy laser sensors in the field, have transformed this domain of study. We present a study case in the Mpem & Djim National Park (MDNP), a 1,000 km(2) protected area in the Centre region of Cameroon. Using open source algorithms in Google Earth Engine (GEE), we characterized vegetation dynamics and the fire regime based on Landsat multispectral imagery archive (1975-2020). Current species assemblages were estimated from Sentinel 2 imagery and the open source biodivMapR package, using spectral dissimilarity. Vegetation structure (aboveground biomass; AGB) was characterized using Unmanned Aerial vehicle (UAV) LiDAR scanning data sampled over the study area. Savanna vegetation, which was initially dominant in the MDNP, lost about 50% of its initial cover in <50 years in favor of forest at an average rate of ca. 0.63%.year(-1) (6 km(2).year(-1)). Species assemblage computed from spectral dissimilarity in forest vegetation followed a successional gradient consistent with forest age. AGB accumulation rate was 3.2 Mg.ha(-1).year(-1) after 42 years of forest encroachment. In savannas, two modes could be identified along the gradient of spectral species assemblage, corresponding to distinct AGB levels, where woody savannas with low fire frequency store 40% more AGB than open grassy savannas with high fire frequency. A fire occurrence every five year was found to be the fire regime threshold below which woody savannas start to dominate over grassy ones. A fire frequency below that threshold opens the way to young forest transitions. These results have implications for carbon sequestration and biodiversity conservation policies. Maintaining savanna ecosystems in the region would require active management actions to limit woody encroachment and forest progression, in contradiction with global reforestation goals.
Monitoring Young Tropical Forest Restoration Sites: How Much to Measure?			Monitoring is a key step for achieving restoration success. Despite increasing advances for selecting ecological indicators, monitoring sampling designs are not always available. We investigated how tree richness and the most used forest structure indicators vary spatially in restoration sites, aiming to provide evidence-based guidance for future monitoring protocols. We collected data from eight forest restoration sites covering overall 1,000 ha in four Brazilian Atlantic Forest regions. Canopy cover, tree density, vegetation height, and species richness were assessed in 18.2 ha of plots ranging from 60 to 300 m(2) in size, in restoration sites aged 1 to 5 years old. Using resampling techniques, we calculated the sampling error for the indicators and compared them with original sampling results, and then estimated the number of plots needed to reach a 20% sampling error. The ecological indicators assessed showed high variability among restoration sites. Canopy cover and height required less plots to reach the targeted sampling error than density of trees. The number of species does not stabilize even when more than 90% of the total number of plots was resampled, indicating high spatial variation. The use of the sampling error approach for defining how much to monitor, associated to appropriate sampling methods, could increase the reliability of monitoring. In addition, they will reduce operational costs, thus providing a key contribution to the effectiveness of large-scale restoration programs expected to be implemented globally in the coming years. Thus, we recommend the incorporation of this in the forest restoration monitoring protocols being discussed worldwide.
More food, more forests, fewer emissions, better livelihoods: Linking REDD+, sustainable supply chains and domestic policy in Brazil, Indonesia and Colombia			The triple, intertwined challenges of climate change, the conversion of tropical forests to crop lands and grazing pastures, and the shortage of new arable land demand urgent solutions. The main approaches for increasing food production while sparing forests and lowering carbon emissions include sustainable supply chain initiatives, domestic policies and finance, and REDD+. These approaches are advancing largely in isolation, separated by different scales of intervention, performance metrics and levers for shaping land user behavior. As a result of this disconnect, farmers are receiving few, if any, positive incentives to forgo legal forest clearing and to invest in more sustainable production systems. These three approaches could become mutually reinforcing through integrated, performance-based incentive systems operating across regions and scales, linked through a shared metric of jurisdiction-wide performance introduced here as the Jurisdictional Performance System. © 2013 Future Science Ltd.
Moringa oleifera: A miracle multipurpose tree for agroforestry and climate change mitigation from the Himalayas - A review			Drumstick(Moringa oleiferaL.) is native to tropical and sub-tropical regions of South Asia. It is also growing in Nepal; however, underutilized crop species. The excellent benefits of moringa offer global cultivation in recent years; however, it is still categorized under-utilized species in Nepal. Recently, efforts are being carried out by researchers, policymakers and nutritionists on its prospects for future-smart food in Nepal.Moringa oleiferais a highly nutritious food crop along with promising characters like rapid growing and drought resistance. We reviewed the prospect ofMoringa oleiferaas an agroforestry tree in Nepal. Here we briefly discussed its distributions, cultivation and production status in Nepal, and its multipurpose uses. Data and information were collected from newspapers, journals and the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development website. Available literature suggested that it is considered as an "ideal tree" for agroforestry. A review of the literature indicates thatMoringa oleiferaunder the multistoried cropping pattern under the shade of this tree is highly effective for crops. The tree is less sensitive for price change, hence, it can overrides mono-cropping. Also, the agroforestry withMoringa oliferiaplays a vital role in soil and water conservation. Further, we recommended a research study on the most suitable crops under agroforestry with this tree, the economic analysis of the moringa-based agroforestry system and the effect of shade due to moringa tree on soil quality.
Motivations and incentives for pro-environmental behaviour: the case of silvopasture adoption in the tropical forest frontier			0
Moving to healthier landscapes: Forest restoration decreases the abundance of Hantavirus reservoir rodents in tropical forests			Hantavirus Cardiopulmonary Syndrome (HCPS) is a disease with high human lethality rates, whose transmission risk is directly related to the abundance of reservoir rodents. In the Brazilian Atlantic forest, the main reservoirs species, Oligoryzomys nigripes and Necromys lasiurus, are thought to increase in abundance with deforestation. Therefore, forest restoration may contribute to decrease HCPS transmission risk, a topic still unexplored, especially in tropical regions. Aiming at filling this research gap, we quantified the potential of forest restoration, as required by the current environmental legislation, to reduce the abundance of Hantavirus reservoir rodents in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. Using a dataset on small mammal communities sampled at 104 sites, we modeled how the abundance of these two rodent species change with the percentage of forest cover and forest edge density. From the best model, we extrapolated rodent abundance to the entire Atlantic Forest, considering two scenarios: current and restored forest cover. Comparing the estimated abundance between these two scenarios, we show that forest restoration can reduce the abundance of O. nigripes up to 89.29% in 43.43% of Atlantic forest territory. For N. lasiurus, abundance decreased up to 46% in 44% of the Atlantic forest. To our knowledge, this is the first study linking forest restoration and zoonotic diseases. Our results indicate that forest restoration would decrease the chance of HCPS transmission in similar to 45% of the Atlantic forest, making the landscape healthier to similar to 2,8 million people livingwithin this area. This positive effect of restoration on disease regulation should be considered as an additional argument to encourage and promote forest restoration in tropical areas around the world. (C) 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Multicriteria spatial model to prioritize degraded areas for landscape restoration through agroforestry			Reconciling the restoration of ecosystem services within agricultural landscapes is an effort that has been advancing within degraded areas restoration through agroforestry systems. However, to contribute to the effectiveness of these initiatives, it is essential to integrate landscape vulner-ability and local demands to better highlight in which areas the implementation of agroforestry systems should be prioritized. Thus, we developed a spatial hierarchization methodology as a de-cision support tool as an active strategy for agroecosystem restoration. The proposed method con-stitutes a spatial indicator of priority areas to guide agroforestry interventions, including resource allocation and public policies for payment for environmental services. The methodology consists of Multicriteria Decision Analysis implemented in GIS software by combining input datasets based on biophysical conditions, environmental and socioeconomic aspects, that integrated promotes an assessment of the environment fragility, the pressures and responses to land use dynamic; a strategy for landscape restoration and conservation of the natural habitats, and multiple specific scenarios for decision making regarding the agricultural and the local actors demands. The output of the model provides the spatial distribution of areas suitable for the implementation of agro-forestry systems, sorted into four priority levels (Low, Medium, High, and Extreme priority). The method is a promising tool proposal for territorial management and governance and subsidizes future research on the flows of ecosystem services.
Multi-date sentinel1 SAR image textures discriminate perennial agroforests in a tropical forest-savannah transition landscape			Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) provides consistent information on target land features; especially in tropical conditions that restrain penetration of optical imaging sensors. Because radar response signal is influenced by geometric and di-electrical properties of surface features', the different land cover may appear similar in radar images. For discriminating perennial cocoa agroforestry land cover, we compare a multi-spectral optical image from RapidEye, acquired in the dry season, and multi-seasonal C-band SAR of Sentinel 1: A final set of 10 (out of 50) images that represent six dry and four wet seasons from 2015 to 2017. We ran eight RF models for different input band combinations; multi-spectral reflectance, vegetation indices, co-(VV) and cross-(VH) polarised SAR intensity and Grey Level Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM) texture measures. Following a pixel-based image analysis, we evaluated accuracy metrics and uncertainty Shannon entropy. The model comprising co- and cross-polarised texture bands had the highest accuracy of 88.07% (95% CI: 85.52 - 90.31) and kappa of 85.37; and the low class uncertainty for perennial agroforests and transition forests. The optical image had low classification uncertainty for the entire image; but, it performed better in discriminating non-vegetated areas. The measured uncertainty provides reliable validation for comparing class discrimination from different image resolution. The GLCM texture measures that are crucial in delineating vegetation cover differed for the season and polarization of SAR image. Given the high accuracies of mapping, our approach has value for landscape monitoring; and, an improved valuation of agroforestry contribution to REDD+ strategies in the Congo basin sub-region. © Authors 2018. CC BY 4.0 License.
Multi-Decadal Forest-Cover Dynamics in the Tropical Realm: Past Trends and Policy Insights for Forest Conservation in Dry Zone of Sri Lanka			Forest-cover change has become an important topic in global biodiversity conservation in recent decades because of the high rates of forest loss in different parts of the world, especially in the tropical region. While human interventions are the major cause, natural disasters also contribute to forest cover changes. During the past decades, several studies have been conducted to address different aspects of forest cover changes (e.g., drivers of deforestation, degradation, interventions) in different parts of the world. In Sri Lanka, increasing rates of forest loss have been recorded during the last 100 years on a regional basis, especially in the dry zone. However, Sri Lanka needs detailed studies that employ contemporary data and robust analytical tools to understand the patterns of forest cover changes and their drivers. The dry zone of Sri Lanka encompasses 59% of the total land area of the country, ergo, the most extensive forest cover. Our study analyzed forest cover dynamics and its drivers between 1992 and 2019. Our specific objectives included (i) producing a forest cover map for 2019, (ii) analyzing the spatiotemporal patterns of forest cover changes from 1992 to 2019, and (iii) determining the main driving forces. Landsat 8 images were used to develop forest-cover maps for 2019, and the rest of the forest cover maps (1992, 1999, and 2010) were obtained from the Forest Department of Sri Lanka. In this study, we found that the dry zone had undergone rapid forest loss (246,958.4 ha) during the past 27 years, which accounts for 8.0% of the net forest cover changes. From 2010 to 2019, the rates of forest loss were high, and this can be associated with the rapid infrastructure development of the country. The findings of this study can be used as a proxy to reform current forest policies and enhance the forest sustainability of the study area.
Multi-ecosystem services differently affected by over-canopy and understory nitrogen additions in a typical subtropical forest			Obtaining a holistic understanding of the impacts of atmospheric nitrogen deposition on multiple ecosystem services of forest is essential for developing comprehensive and sustainable strategies, particularly in heavy N deposition regions such as subtropical China. However, such impacts remain incompletely understood, with most previous studies focus on individual ecosystem function or service via understory N addition experiments. To address this knowledge gap, we quantified the effects of over-canopy and understory N additions on multiple ecosystem services based on a 7-year large-scale field experiment in a typical subtropical forest. Our results showed continued over-canopy N addition with 50 kg ha-1 year-1 over a period of 4-7 years significantly increased plant nutrient retention, but did not affect the services of soil nutrient accumulation, water yield, C sequestration (in plants and soil), or oxygen release. There were trade-offs between the soil and plant on providing the services of nutrient accumulation/retention and C sequestration under over-canopy N addition. However, without uptake and retention of tree canopy, the trade-off between soil and plant were more weaken under the understory N addition with 50 kg ha-1 year-1, and their relationships were even synergetic under the understory N addition with 25 kg ha-1 year-1. The results suggest that understory N addition cannot accurately simulate the effects of atmospheric N deposition on multiple services, along with mutual relationships. Interestingly, the services of plant N, P retention, and C sequestration exhibited a synergetic increase under the over-canopy N addition but a decrease under the understory N addition. Our results also found tree layer plays a primary role in providing plant nutrient retention service and is sensitive to atmospheric N deposition. Further studies are needed to investigate the generalized effects of forest canopy processes on alleviating the threaten of global change factors in different forest ecosystems.Due to neglecting the N absorption/buffer function of tree canopy, understory N addition cannot accurately simulate the effects of atmospheric N deposition on multiple services, along with mutual relationships. The services of plant N, P retention, and C sequestration exhibited a synergetic increase under the over-canopy N addition but a decrease under the understory N addition. Tree layer plays a primary role in providing plant nutrient retention service and is sensitive to atmospheric N deposition. Further studies are needed to investigate the generalized effects of forest canopy processes on alleviating the threaten of global change factors in different forest ecosystems.image
Multifunctional agroforestry systems in tropics region			Agroforestry is emerging as a major land use activity in the country after agriculture and forestry. Traditional resource management adaptations such as agroforestry systems may potentially provide options for improvement in livelihoods through simultaneous production of food, fodder and firewood as well as mitigation of the impact of climate change. The multifunctional agroforestry systems in tropical region offer innumerable ecological benefits such as carbon sequestration, mitigation of climate change, enhancing soil fertility and water use efficiency, biodiversity conservation, biological pest control, sustainable land use, shelterbelt and windbreaks, microclimate amelioration, breaking the poverty and food insecurity circle, caveats and clarifications. Agroforestry, if established on degraded lands will not only reduce the anthropogenic pressure on existing forest resources but also will enhance the sink potential of CO2.
Multifunctional Forest Restoration in Brazil: A Critical Analysis of the Trends and Knowledge Gaps in the Scientific Literature			The global demand for forest products will increase in the coming decades due to population growth and increasing environmental awareness. Therefore, the production of forest products through multifunctional forest restoration could be a meaningful opportunity for large-scale restoration while promoting sustainability and vegetation recovery. We conducted a comprehensive literature review to explore how forest restoration in Brazil can meet the growing global demand for forest products, thereby promoting the widespread adoption of restoration practices. The number of forest restoration publications addressing forest product supply has increased, but remains limited. Notably, only studies on payments for environmental services have increased significantly over the years, while studies on non-timber forest products and timber have not increased significantly. Similar patterns and trends were found in earlier studies. Many studies do not provide insights into the socioeconomic outcomes of multifunctional forest restoration, which is consistent with other research findings. The studies cited 108 native species of commercial value. According to the literature, these species can provide multiple forest products, making their management economically attractive. Multifunctional restoration in Brazil has the potential for meeting global demand for forest products and supporting large-scale restoration. However, advancing scientific and technological knowledge in this area is needed to make this feasible.
Multi-objective forest restoration planning in Costa Rica: Balancing landscape connectivity and ecosystem service provisioning with sustainable development			Degradation, fragmentation, and loss of tropical forests has exponentially increased in the last decades leading to unprecedented rates of species extinctions and loss of ecosystems functions and services. Forest restoration is key to recover ecosystems health and achieve the UN Sustainable Development Goals. However, restoring forests at the landscape scale presents many challenges, since it requires balancing conservation goals and economic development. In this study, we used a spatial planning tool (Marxan) to identify priority areas for restoration satisfying multiple objectives across a biological corridor in Costa Rica. Biological corridors are critical conservation instruments promoting forest connectivity while acknowledging human presence. Increasing forest connectivity requires restoration initiatives that will likely conflict with other land uses, some of them of high national economic importance. Our restoration plan sought to maximize the provision of forest-related services (i.e., seed dispersal, tourism and carbon storage) while minimizing the impact on current land uses and thus avoiding potential conflicts. We quantified seed dispersal and tourism services (birdwatching potential) using species distribution models. We used the carbon sequestration model of InVEST to quantify carbon storage potential. We tested different restoration scenarios that differed in whether land opportunity costs of current uses were considered or not when identifying potential restoration areas, or how these costs were estimated. We showed how a landscape-scale forest restoration plan accounting for only forest connectivity and ecosystem service provision capacity can greatly differ from a plan that considers the potential impacts on local livelihoods. Spatial planning tools can assist at designing cost-effective landscape-scale forest restoration plans, identifying priority areas where forest restoration can maximize ecosystem provision and increase forest connectivity. Special care must be paid to the use of adequate estimates of opportunity cost, to avoid potential conflicts between restoration goals and other legitimate land uses.
Multiple dimensions of resource limitation in tropical forests			0
Multiple successional pathways in human-modified tropical landscapes: new insights from forest succession, forest fragmentation and landscape ecology research			Old-growth tropical forests are being extensively deforested and fragmented worldwide. Yet forest recovery through succession has led to an expansion of secondary forests in human-modified tropical landscapes (HMTLs). Secondary forests thus emerge as a potential repository for tropical biodiversity, and also as a source of essential ecosystem functions and services in HMTLs. Such critical roles are controversial, however, as they depend on successional, landscape and socio-economic dynamics, which can vary widely within and across landscapes and regions. Understanding the main drivers of successional pathways of disturbed tropical forests is critically needed for improving management, conservation, and restoration strategies. Here, we combine emerging knowledge from tropical forest succession, forest fragmentation and landscape ecology research to identify the main driving forces shaping successional pathways at different spatial scales. We also explore causal connections between land-use dynamics and the level of predictability of successional pathways, and examine potential implications of such connections to determine the importance of secondary forests for biodiversity conservation in HMTLs. We show that secondary succession (SS) in tropical landscapes is a multifactorial phenomenon affected by a myriad of forces operating at multiple spatio-temporal scales. SS is relatively fast and more predictable in recently modified landscapes and where well-preserved biodiversity-rich native forests are still present in the landscape. Yet the increasing variation in landscape spatial configuration and matrix heterogeneity in landscapes with intermediate levels of disturbance increases the uncertainty of successional pathways. In landscapes that have suffered extensive and intensive human disturbances, however, succession can be slow or arrested, with impoverished assemblages and reduced potential to deliver ecosystem functions and services. We conclude that: (i) succession must be examined using more comprehensive explanatory models, providing information about the forces affecting not only the presence but also the persistence of species and ecological groups, particularly of those taxa expected to be extirpated from HMTLs; (ii) SS research should integrate new aspects from forest fragmentation and landscape ecology research to address accurately the potential of secondary forests to serve as biodiversity repositories; and (iii) secondary forest stands, as a dynamic component of HMTLs, must be incorporated as key elements of conservation planning; i.e. secondary forest stands must be actively managed (e.g. using assisted forest restoration) according to conservation goals at broad spatial scales.
Multi-purpose forest management in the tropics: Incorporating values of carbon, biodiversity and timber in managing Tectona grandis (teak) plantations in Costa Rica			Plantation forestry is the ultimate alternative in reforesting degraded tropical ecosystems and in provisioning multiple ecosystem services beyond timber production. Therefore, we studied the management of Tectona grandis L.f. (teak) plantations in Costa Rica and simulated alternative management strategies incorporating simultaneously the values of carbon storage, biodiversity and timber production. Alternative management strategies included (1) extension of rotations, (2) reduced thinning and (3) conversion of even-aged to uneven-aged systems. Evaluation criteria were carbon storage in biomass, stand structural diversity as a proxy of biodiversity, and economic return from timber harvests. For growth predictions under future climatic conditions, we calibrated the hybrid forest growth model 3PG. We found that carbon storage could be increased by increasing rotation periods (e.g. + 29.7% of carbon for a 50% increase in rotation length) and a no thinning management (+ 9.5% of carbon). For rotation extension associated economic losses were high (e.g. at 5% discount rate, the Land Expectation Value (LEV) decreased by 25.1% for a 50% extension of rotations). For thinning LEV increased with a low-thinning regime, but decreased with a no-thinning management (+ 9.5% and 23.6%, respectively). Payments for ecosystem services (PES) increased economic return by about 3-4%. Structural diversity increased by conversion to uneven-aged forest stands (Gini coefficients for basal area increased from 0.21 to 0.52). Economic returns from timber harvests were almost equal for even-aged and uneven-aged systems at 1% discount rate (max. -2% of LEV). At 5% discount rate, we observed economic losses of 11.1-20.1% compared to the even-aged scenario. At 10% discount rate, economic losses ranged between 43.6 and 104%. We concluded that extension of rotations and reduction of thinning intensity can be used as management strategies to increase the carbon storage of teak plantations. However, to compensate the associated economic losses through a PES scheme, payments for carbon sequestration need to be increased and special incentives for longer rotation periods and low thinning management need to be developed. The transformation into uneven-aged forest stands requires active investment at discount rates higher than 1%. Whether this investment can be offset by benefits from biodiversity and increased forest resilience is unknown and requires further investigations. Other measures of biodiversity conservation, such as the use of native and mixed tree species and the retention of old trees and deadwood are moreover necessary.
Multitemporal analysis of burned areas in tropical ecosystems of Campeche, Mexico: meteorological and anthropogenic causes			Every day, 20,000 hectares of forests are lost worldwide due to fires in the intertropical zone. The sensitivity of forests to fire is a consequence of their high mortality rate, which threatens these ecosystems. This research analyzed the distribution of burned areas in the tropical forests covering the eastern region of the Escárcega municipality, Campeche, between 2013 and 2020, and explored the relationship of these areas with meteorological conditions and agricultural use of fire. Burned areas were detected using Landsat 8 OLI satellite imagery and the NBR and BAI spectral indices. An area of 29,151.82 hectares was burned, corresponding to 12.06 % of the tropical forest in the study area. The year 2019, a year of high temperatures and low precipitation, recorded the largest fire and burned area, confirming the relationship between drought and increased fires. Twenty-six interviews were held in nine ejidos that allowed us to investigate the causes of the fires, including poaching, agricultural burning, and changes in land use. Proper fire management is essential to preserve biodiversity and ecosystem services. The interplay between anthropogenic and meteorological variables influences the frequency of fires. Inappropriate fire management can lead to uncontrolled burns, and weather conditions can favor the spread of fire. © 2024 Instituto de Geografia. All rights reserved.
N2-fixing trees and the transfer of fixed-N for sustainable agroforestry: A review			Many tropical areas lack soil nitrogen (N), an essential nutrient for plant growth and the production of food. Commercial N fertilisers are expensive, with only a fraction of this nutrient reaching the plant, which limits efficiency and potentially increases water contamination. Dinitrogen (N2)-fixing trees are a promising alternative to sustainably fertilise crops. The use of N2-fixing trees in tropical agriculture has garnered attention from researchers, development organisations, governments, and farmers in recent years as a revival of pro-environmental practices. Dinitrogen (N2)-fixing trees can establish in N-deficient soils, replace N lost in harvest and provide an as-of-yet not fully realised benefit to ecosystem services. High N 2-fixation rates, upwards of 92 %, have been measured in some N 2-fixing trees, using the 15N natural abundance method. The recovery of this fixed-N by associated perennial crops is of particular interest in tropical agroforestry systems. Here, we review N transfer pathways from trees to perennial crops in agroforestry. We focus on Theobroma cacao and Coffea arabica. We also draw on agroforestry systems with herbaceous alleys. We identify three pathways of N transfer from N2-fixers to non-N 2-fixing crops: (1) decomposition and mineralisation of organic compounds, e.g., litter, prunings, roots, and nodules, (2) root-to-root direct transfer via exudation, and (3) common mycorrhizal networks. Both 15N natural abundance and 15N enrichment techniques have been used to study N transfer. However, various factors limit the accuracy of estimates within agroforestry systems. Under field conditions, the major limits are (1) improper reference selection and (2) unrepresentative sampling of the receiver plant and/or donor N source. We highlight key findings and provide recommendations to tackle these obstacles. © 2013 INRA and Springer-Verlag France.
N2O and CH4 emissions from soils under conventional and no-till management practices in Goiania (Cerrados, Brazil)			Nitrous oxide (N2O) and methane (CH4) are important greenhouse gases (GHG) produced respectively by the naturally occurring microbial processes of incomplete denitrification or nitrification and methanogenesis. Tillage practices and climate affect the release of GHGs. No tillage (DMC) systems may increase CO2-C fixation in soil but also N2O and CH4 emissions. The aim of this article is to question whether the positive effect of a DMC system observed on carbon storage for the topsoil layer in Cerrado soils is offset or not by the N2O and/or CH4 emissions. Two 5-year-old systems, tillage (disc on the first 15 cm called offset: OFF) and a direct-sowing mulch-based crop system (DMC) with an additional cover crop were studied during a cropping cycle. N2O and CH4 fluxes are determined using a closed-chamber, N2O and CO2 concentrations are measured at 3 depths (10-, 20- and 30 cm). No significant difference between treatments was observed for both gases (for emissions and concentrations). Soil NO contents increase from surface to depth (30 cm) and range from 300 ppbv to 3 ppm for both treatments. Total annual estimated emissions of N2O range from 31 to 35 g N2O-N ha(-1) year(-1) for DMC and OFF respectively which is low and corresponds only to 0.03% of he total N-fertilizer applied. Monthly means N2O emissions were strongly correlated to monthly means of N2O content at 10 cm depth (R-2 = -0.66) and seem to increase exponentially with monthly mean Water Filled Pore Space WFPS (0-10 cm layer) (R-2 = 0.33). CH4 fluxes were very low as well: both treatment act as source of CH4 (245 and 403 g CH4-C ha(-1) year(-1) for DMC and OFF respectively. On a CO-C equivalent basis these results correspond to 4.1 and 4.7 kg CO2-C ha(-1) year(-1) for NO and to 1.9 and 3.1 kg CO2-C ha(-1) year(-1) for CH4 for DMC and OFF respectively. As a result, the carbon sequestration balance taking into account the CO2, CH4 and N2O on a CO2-C equivalent basis is in favour of DMC treatment considering that this treatment increases carbon storage originated from CO-C for the topsoil (0-10 cm) layer (350 kg C ha(-1) year(-1)) in comparison with OFF treatment. (C) 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
National forest cover change in Congo Basin: Deforestation, reforestation, degradation and regeneration for the years 1990, 2000 and 2005			This research refers to an object-based automatic method combined with a national expert validation to produce regional and national forest cover change statistics over Congo Basin. A total of 547 sampling sites systematically distributed over the whole humid forest domain are required to cover the six Central African countries containing tropical moist forest. High resolution imagery is used to accurately estimate not only deforestation and reforestation but also degradation and regeneration. The overall method consists of four steps: (i) image automatic preprocessing and preinterpretation, (ii) interpretation by national expert, (iii) statistic computation and (iv) accuracy assessment. The annual rate of net deforestation in Congo Basin is estimated to 0.09% between 1990 and 2000 and of net degradation to 0.05%. Between 2000 and 2005, this unique exercise estimates annual net deforestation to 0.17% and annual net degradation to 0.09%. An accuracy assessment reveals that 92.7% of tree cover (TC) classes agree with independent expert interpretation. In the discussion, we underline the direct causes and the drivers of deforestation. Population density, small-scale agriculture, fuelwood collection and forest's accessibility are closely linked to deforestation, whereas timber extraction has no major impact on the reduction in the canopy cover. The analysis also shows the efficiency of protected areas to reduce deforestation. These results are expected to contribute to the discussion on the reduction in CO2 emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) and serve as reference for the period. © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Native forest cover safeguards stream water quality under a changing climate			Ensuring a sufficient and adequate supply of water for humans and ecosystems is a pressing environmental challenge. The expansion of agricultural and urban lands has jeopardized watershed ecosystem services and a changing climate poses additional risks for regional water supply. We used stream water quality data collected between 2000 and 2014, coupled with detailed precipitation and land cover information, to investigate the effects of landscape composition and short-term precipitation variability on the quality of water resources in the state of Sao Paulo, Brazil. The state is home to over 45 million people and has a long history of human landscape modification. A severe drought in 2014-2015 led to a major water crisis and highlighted the fragility of the regional water supply system. We found that human-dominated watersheds had lower overall water quality when compared to forested watersheds, with urban cover showing the most detrimental impacts on water quality. Forest cover was associated with a better overall water quality across the studied watersheds, with forested watersheds having low turbidity and high dissolved oxygen. High precipitation led to increased turbidity and fecal coliforms levels and lower dissolved oxygen in streams but these effects depended on watershed land cover. High precipitation diluted concentrations of nitrogen and dissolved solids in highly urbanized watersheds but exacerbated turbidity in pasture-dominated watersheds. Given the high costs of water treatment in densely populated regions, there is a pressing need to plan and manage landscapes in order to ensure adequate water resources. In tropical regions, maintaining or restoring native vegetation cover is a promising intervention to sustain adequate water quality.
Natural Capital-Based Societies in the Tropics			As the tropics are exposed to large amounts of solar radiation, solar energy amelioration is highly important in tropical ecosystems. Among mechanisms of high solar energy amelioration, the water cycle is the first function that removes solar radiation energy in the form of latent heat through evaporation at the sea surface and evapotranspiration from forests. The carbon cycle is the second function as it fixes solar radiation energy into carbohydrates in plants (and forests) through photosynthesis. In addition, forests have a function in the water–carbon linkage, and it is assumed that the water–TREE–carbon linkage is a key function in the tropics, where a TREE (a simplified forest function) is a bioapparatus that serves as natural capital. The TREE model includes functions such as solar panels (leaves), batteries (stems), air conditioning (evapotranspiration), carbon sequestration (biochar), fertilizer production (N2 fixation), water dams (water reserves in the soil), and soil conservation (through the application of organic matter). As the water–plant–carbon linkage depends on solar energy input, the natural ecosystems in which this system occurs are defined as “Sun Harvesting Ecosystems,” and the human societies that depend on these ecosystems are defined as “Harvesting Sun Societies.” Ideal Harvesting Sun Societies depend on natural capital and target the development of “carbon-neutral societies.” Harvesting Sun Societies should use small amounts of energy from hydropower and biomass. Here, we propose to call this new earth management system, which depends on natural capital, “Envelopment Mechanisms.” “Harvested Sun Societies” depend on natural resources and target carbon-negative economies. Harvested Sun Societies rely on fossil fuels and industrial renewable energy (mainly solar panels and wind power). Here, we propose to call these destructive earth management systems, which depend on natural resources, “Development Mechanisms.” © The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021.
Natural forest at landscape scale is most important for bird conservation in rubber plantation			Rubber is one of the most rapidly expanding monocultures in the tropics, and has precipitated biodiversity and ecosystem function loss. Identifying measures to improve biodiversity outcomes in rubber-forest mosaics is critical for tropical fauna. We evaluated how avian diversity responded to plantation- and landscape-level environmental variables. The most parsimonious model at the plot scale contained inter-tree planting distance for rubber, plantation age, and inverse distance weight of forest as predictors. The most supported model at the landscape scale contained both distance to forest patches larger than 100 ha and natural forest area as predictors. Model predictions indicated that natural forest area had the largest contribution to bird richness at landscape levels; avian diversity was projected to more than double when natural forest area increased from 25% to 755%. Frugivores and insectivores exhibited the strongest response to gains in natural forest area. Our results indicated that plantation smallholders could achieve biodiversity gains by retaining older trees and planting rubber trees with larger gaps, but that the most critical intervention is retaining large natural forest patches.
Natural forest regeneration is projected to reduce local temperatures			Forest regeneration is a crucial strategy for mitigating and adapting to global warming. Yet its precise impact on local climate remains uncertain, a factor that complicates decision-making when it comes to prioritizing investments. Here, we developed global maps illustrating how natural forest regeneration influences key local climate drivers-land surface temperature (LST), albedo, and evapotranspiration-using models fitted at a 1-km spatial resolution with a random forest classifier. We found that natural forest regeneration can alter annual mean LST by 0.01 degrees C, -0.59 degrees C, -0.50 degrees C, and -2.03 degrees C in Boreal, Mediterranean, Temperate, and Tropical regions, respectively. These variations underscore the region-specific effects of forest regeneration. Importantly, natural forest regeneration reduces LST across 64% of 1 billion hectares and 75% of 148 million hectares of potentially restorable land under different scenarios. These findings improve understanding of how forest regeneration can help regulate local climate, supporting climate adaptation efforts.Natural forest regeneration can enhance local climate adaptation by reducing land surface temperature.Natural forest regenerations reduce mean land surface temperature across potentially restorable areas in the Boreal, Mediterranean, Temperate, and Tropical regions according to an analysis that combines climate data, machine learning, and scenario analysis.
Natural forest regrowth under different land use intensities and landscape configurations in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest			Natural forest regrowth is considered the most cost-effective strategy to promote large-scale forest restoration, but regrowth trajectories and their consequences for nature and people can be highly variable. This uncertainty may obstruct devoting land, time and resources in promoting this restoration approach. Process-based models allow to simulate forest regrowth under different scenarios and may thus support decision making to manage areas in ways that maximize forest restoration based on natural forest regrowth. In the present study, we used the process-based model LandClim to assess the following questions:1) How does land use intensity affect forest growth, aboveground biomass (AGB) and tree species diversity in agricultural landscapes in the long term? 2) How do different land use configurations affect the structure and expansion of second-growth forests? We based our study on six 4 x 4 km agricultural landscapes, dominated by pastures and sugarcane, in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest region. We parameterized and validated LandClim for the study region by comparing model outputs with published estimates and information from field data collected across the six landscapes. We then simulated natural forest regrowth under different land use intensities in the six landscapes and analyzed how land use intensity and landscape configuration affect AGB, tree species diversity and the spatial dynamics of second growth forests. Our results showed negative effects of increased land use intensity on landscape biomass accumulation due to limited forest cover expansion. Landscapes dominated by sugarcane had lower forest regrowth potential than pasture-dominated landscapes due to lower likelihood of abandonment, and limited rates of seed availability and seedling growth. Land use intensity and landscape configuration were also important factors for tree diversity changes. However, temporal patterns differed, and while AGB reached a plateau after 100-150 years, tree diversity peaked between 30 and 70 years. Thus, the effects of land use intensity and landscape configuration on forest AGB and tree diversity take decades to be fully expressed, highlighting the importance of a long-term commitment in restoration projects.
Natural Regeneration After Gold Mining in the Peruvian Amazon: Implications for Restoration of Tropical Forests			Context: Gold mining is the most destructive activity in the natural forests of the Madre de Dios region in the southeastern Peruvian Amazon. Understanding the natural regeneration process of these degraded areas is necessary to develop forest restoration projects in such conditions.Aims: We aimed to evaluate forest recovery and identify the successional and structure patterns of vegetation governing natural regeneration over time.Methods: Structure, composition, richness, diversity, and successional status were evaluated in abandoned artisanal gold mine areas in Madre de Dios, southeastern Peru. Vegetation data were recorded in 61 plots of 250 m(2) established in five sites varying from 1 to 19 years of abandonment. Vegetation in abandoned areas was compared with six undisturbed forests evaluated in previous inventories.Results: In the mining lands, tree density and basal area recovered quickly, while species richness and composition were slow. Forest recovery is an initial stage of transition from pioneer to early secondary species until at least 19 years after abandonment. The most abundant and frequent species were the fast-growing species Ochroma pyramidale and Cecropia engleriana. These species could be considered potential candidates to promote restoration plans. Pioneer species represented 63% of the number of species in plots of 1-4 years, 57% in plots of 5-7 years, and 50% in plots of 8-19 years. Early and late secondary species represented 34 and 16%, respectively, of the number of species in plots of 8-19 years. Abandoned mining and reference plots present less than 5% of species in common.Conclusion: Our results highlight a slow natural regeneration process in areas for up to 19 years after gold mining. Species from different successional statuses were identified as potential candidates for recovering vegetation in such areas. Our findings may have important implications for further research focusing on the ecological restoration in tropical forests severely degraded by gold mining.
Natural Regeneration and Secondary Forests			0
Natural regeneration as a tool for large-scale forest restoration in the tropics: prospects and challenges			A major global effort to enable cost-effective natural regeneration is needed to achieve ambitious forest and landscape restoration goals. Natural forest regeneration can potentially play a major role in large-scale landscape restoration in tropical regions. Here, we focus on the conditions that favor natural regeneration within tropical forest landscapes. We illustrate cases where large-scale natural regeneration followed forest clearing and non-forest land use, and describe the social and ecological factors that drove these local forest transitions. The self-organizing processes that create naturally regenerating forests and natural regeneration in planted forests promote local genetic adaptation, foster native species with known traditional uses, create spatial and temporal heterogeneity, and sustain local biodiversity and biotic interactions. These features confer greater ecosystem resilience in the face of future shocks and disturbances. We discuss economic, social, and legal issues that challenge natural regeneration in tropical landscapes. We conclude by suggesting ways to enable natural regeneration to become an effective tool for implementing large-scale forest and landscape restoration. Major research and policy priorities include: identifying and modeling the ecological and economic conditions where natural regeneration is a viable and favorable land-use option, developing monitoring protocols for natural regeneration that can be carried out by local communities, and developing enabling incentives, governance structures, and regulatory conditions that promote the stewardship of naturally regenerating forests. Aligning restoration goals and practices with natural regeneration can achieve the best possible outcome for achieving multiple social and environmental benefits at minimal cost.Abstract in Portuguese is available with online material.Abstract in Spanish is available with online material.
Navigating the Path to Sustainable Oil Palm Cultivation: Addressing Nexus Challenges and Solutions			Global palm oil demand for energy, food, and chemical uses has led to a rapid expansion of tree plantations in Southeast Asia, Central Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean. This oil tree is the world's most productive, highly profitable and traded vegetable oil crop, and the demand is expected to increase further in the near future. Nevertheless, oil palm expansion involves risks and nexus challenges. This work supports the idea that disruptive farming intensification, instead of land expansion, could scale up productivity, reducing the anthropogenic pressure on tropical forests and biodiversity losses. Findings from recent studies suggest that there is considerable scope for further yield improvements per hectare of palm oil with sustainable agronomic practices and farming intensification. Smallholder producers, agribusiness investors, civil society actors, NGOs, governments, researchers, and industry should make coordinated efforts with regulatory and support schemes and landscape design to increase yield and productivity with sustainable management practices and to achieve zero deforestation by protecting ecosystems.
Near surface air humidity in a megadiverse Andean mountain ecosystem of southern Ecuador and its regionalization			The near surface humidity in a megadiverse mountain ecosystem in southern Ecuador is examined on the basis of Relative Humidity (RH) measurements inside the natural mountain forest and at open sites along an altitudinal gradient from 1700 to 3200 m. The main methodological aim of the current study is to generate a humidity regionalization tool to provide spatial datasets on average monthly mean, minimum and maximum RH, Specific Humidity (q) and Specific Saturation Deficit (D-S) by using observation data of RH. The maps based on data of the period 1999-2009 are needed by ecological projects working on various plots where no climate station data are available. The humidity maps are generated by combining a straightforward detrending technique with a Digital Elevation Model and a satellite-based land cover classification which also provides the relative forest cover per pixel. The topical aim of the study is to investigate the humidity distribution and structure of both manifestations of our ecosystem (pastures and natural vegetation) with special considerations to the ecosystem regulation service by converting natural forest into pasture. The results reveal a clear differentiation over the year. partly triggered by the change of synoptic weather situation but also by land cover effects. Humidity amplitudes are particularly low during the main rainy season when cloudiness and rainfall are high, but markedly pronounced in the relative dry season when daily irradiance and outgoing nocturnal radiation causes distinct differences between the land cover units. Particularly the upper pasture areas gained by slash and burn of the natural forest exhibit the lowest humidity values while the humidity inside the mountain forest is significantly higher due to the regulating effects of the dense vegetation. Thus, clearing the forest clearly reduces the regulation function (regulating ecosystem services) of the ecosystem which might become problematic for reforestation under future global warming. (C) 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
NEECF: a project of nutrient enrichment experiments in Chinas forests			Anthropogenic nitrogen (N) emissions to atmosphere have increased dramatically in China since 1980s, and this increase has aroused great concerns on its ecological impacts on terrestrial ecosystems. Previous studies have showed that terrestrial ecosystems in China are acting as a large carbon (C) sink, but its potential in the future remains largely uncertain. So far little work on the impacts of the N deposition on C sequestration in Chinas terrestrial ecosystems has been assessed at a national scale. Aiming to assess and predict how ecological processes especially the C cycling respond to the increasing N deposition in Chinas forests, recently researchers from Peking University and their partners have established a manipulation experimental network on the ecological effects of the N deposition: Nutrient Enrichment Experiments in Chinas Forests Project (NEECF). The NEECF comprises 10 experiments at 7 sites located from north to south China, covering major zonal forest vegetation in eastern China from boreal forest in Greater Khingan Mountains to tropical forests in Hainan Island. This paper introduces the framework of the NEECF project and its potential policy implications.
Negative effects of human disturbance and increased aridity on root biomass and nutrients along the regeneration of a tropical dry forest in the context of slash-and-burn agriculture			Biomass is an important indicator of the ability of tropical forests to deliver ecosystem services, but little attention has been given to belowground biomass and its drivers in human-modified landscapes. Here, we investigated the belowground biomass and nutrient concentration/stocks (C, P, and N) across regenerating forest stands with varying ages (10 -76 years old) and old-growth forests in the Caatinga dry forest (northeastern Brazil) in the context of slash-and-burn agriculture. Belowground biomass ranged from 1.89 +/- 0.33 Mg ha -1 to 17.53 +/- 2.28 Mg ha -1 (mean +/- SE) across regenerating forest stands and averaged 8.33 +/- 1.59 Mg ha -1 , with no differences compared to old-growth stands. However, regenerating stands exhibited a higher root/shoot ratio with biomass concentrated in the superficial soil layer and in large-sized roots, regardless of the successional stage. Root nutrient concentration and stocks were highly variable across forest stands with fine roots supporting a higher concentration of N and P, while regenerating stands supported lower nutrient stocks as compared to oldgrowth forests. Finally, precipitation and chronic disturbance emerged as the most important drivers of belowground biomass and nutrient concentrations/stocks, while aboveground biomass played a negligible role. Our results indicate that, in human-modified landscapes of tropical dry forests, belowground biomass and nutrients play important roles in ecosystem functions in regenerated forests after slash -and -burn agriculture. Forest resilience and provision of ecosystem services (e.g., nutrient cycling) appear to be very sensitive to increased aridity and exploitation of forest resources.
Negative emissions technologies: A complementary solution for climate change mitigation			Carbon dioxide (CO2) is the main greenhouse gas (GHG) and its atmospheric concentration is currently 50% higher than pre-industrial levels. The continuous GHGs emissions may lead to severe and irreversible consequences in the climate system. The reduction of GHG emissions may be not enough to mitigate climate change. Consequently, besides carbon capture from large emission sources, atmospheric CO2 capture may be also required. To meet the target defined for climate change mitigation, the removal of 10 Gt.yr(-1) of CO2 globally by mid-century and 20 Gt.yr(-1) of CO2 globally by the end of century. The technologies applied with this aim are known as negative emission technologies (NETs), as they lead to achieve a negative balance of carbon in atmosphere. This paper aims to present the recent research works regarding NETs, focusing the research findings achieved by academic groups and projects. Besides several advantages, NETs present high operational cost and its scale-up should be tested to know the real effect on climate change mitigation. With current knowledge, no single process should be seen as a solution. Research efforts should be performed to evaluate and reduce NETs costs and environmental impact. (C) 2019 Published by Elsevier B.V.
Neglected but Potent Dry Forest Players: Ecological Role and Ecosystem Service Provision of Biological Soil Crusts in the Human-Modified Caatinga			Biological soil crusts (biocrusts) have been recognized as key ecological players in arid and semiarid regions at both local and global scales. They are important biodiversity components, provide critical ecosystem services, and strongly influence soil-plant relationships, and successional trajectories via facilitative, competitive, and edaphic engineering effects. Despite these important ecological roles, very little is known about biocrusts in seasonally dry tropical forests. Here we present a first baseline study on biocrust cover and ecosystem service provision in a human-modified landscape of the Brazilian Caatinga, South America's largest tropical dry forest. More specifically, we explored (1) across a network of 34 0.1 ha permanent plots the impact of disturbance, soil, precipitation, and vegetation-related parameters on biocrust cover in different stages of forest regeneration, and (2) the effect of disturbance on species composition, growth and soil organic carbon sequestration comparing early and late successional communities in two case study sites at opposite ends of the disturbance gradient. Our findings revealed that biocrusts are a conspicuous component of the Caatinga ecosystem with at least 50 different taxa of cyanobacteria, algae, lichens and bryophytes (cyanobacteria and bryophytes dominating) covering nearly 10% of the total land surface and doubling soil organic carbon content relative to bare topsoil. High litter cover, high disturbance by goats, and low soil compaction were the leading drivers for reduced biocrust cover, while precipitation was not associated Second-growth forests supported anequally spaced biocrust cover, while in old-growth-forests biocrust cover was patchy. Disturbance reduced biocrust growth by two thirds and carbon sequestration by half. In synthesis, biocrusts increase soil organic carbon (SOC) in dry forests and as they double the SOC content in disturbed areas, may be capable of counterbalancing disturbance-induced soil degradation in this ecosystem. As they fix and fertilize depauperated soils, they may play a substantial role in vegetation regeneration in the human-modified Caatinga, and may have an extended ecological role due to the ever-increasing human encroachment on natural landscapes. Even though biocrusts benefit from human presence in dry forests, high levels of anthropogenic disturbance could threaten biocrust-provided ecosystem services, and call for further, in-depth studies to elucidate the underlying mechanisms.
Neotropical human-landscape interactions, fire, and atmospheric CO2 during European conquest			Neotropical biomass burning reconstructions synthesized from soil and sedimentary charcoal records indicate a period of reduced biomass burning sustained for several centuries after similar to 500 cal. yr BP. Proxy records of solar irradiance, El Nino events, temperature, and precipitation document regionally variable climate-related trends that do not account for the uniform reduction in burning across the Neotropics. Decreased human ignition resulting from pandemic-induced mortality offers an alternative, geographically comprehensive explanation. In addition, natural (solar-volcanic) factors can explain only similar to 1.3 ppm out of the rapid 6-10 ppm CO2 decrease between ad 1525 and the early 1600s. Reforestation following land abandonment due to population collapse has the potential to account for the rest of this CO2 decline, and variations in the C-13/C-12 of atmospheric CO2 and CH4 are consistent with both a major reduction in Neotropical landscape management by fire and massive reforestation. Our findings are demonstrative of the scale at which pre-industrial human activities influenced Earth's atmospheric greenhouse gas budget.
Nesting local forestry initiatives: Revisiting community forest management in a REDD+ world			Understanding the relationship between components of varied decentralized governance models for community or collaborative management and forest conservation outcomes has taken on renewed importance in the context of community engagement in forest conservation efforts through policies to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+). In this paper, we synthesize lessons from two comparative case studies of decentralized forest management in Mesoamerica and East Africa in order to examine the institutional factors that contribute to successful tropical forest management in developing countries and, draw insights for policymakers regarding how national policy initiatives, including REDD+, might better embed local level institutions for forest management within broader state institutions and promote more positive local livelihoods and forest conservation outcomes. The case studies presented in this synthesis used a consistent research framework to gather data on forestry reforms, governance processes, local forest institutions, household forest uses and forest conservation outcomes. Our synthesis suggests that successful sustained forest management depends on institutional arrangements that (1) establish local resident rulemaking autonomy, (2) facilitate the flow of external financial and institutional assistance for monitoring and enforcement of local rules, and (3) buffer residents and their respective local institutions from more powerful, and at times corrupt, actors and agencies involved in forest exploitation. The results particularly suggest a role for external, independent non-governmental organizations to help mediate demands on local forest governance systems in nested contexts. © 2010 Elsevier B.V.
New allometric equations for quantifying tree biomass and carbon sequestration in seasonally dry secondary forest in northern Thailand			As tropical deforestation and forest degradation accelerate, carbon-credit trading could provide a financial incentive to preserve and regenerate forests. Since carbon trading relies on the accurate quantification of carbon stocks, allometric equations are urgently needed to derive above-ground dry biomass (AGB) from easily measured variables. Few allometric equations have been published for regenerating secondary forests in Southeast Asia. This study established new allometric equations, to determine AGB and carbon in regenerating secondary forests on shifting cultivation fallows in northern Thailand. To develop the equations, data were collected from 78 trees (136 felled individual stems, including coppices) ranging in size from 1 to 32.9 cm diameter at breast height (D). The dependent variable was AGB. The independent variables were D, tree height (H) and wood density (WD). Wood density varied significantly among species (p < 0.05). Consequently, including WD in the function D2H × WD predicted AGB most accurately, compared with other functions that excluded it. Mean carbon concentration in stems, branches, and leaves was 44.84% ± 1.63 of dry mass, but it varied significantly among tree species (p < 0.05). The new allometric equation revealed that tree ABG was highest in secondary forest, followed by the 7-year-fallow and the 4-year-fallow: 105.3, 38.3 and 10.3 Mg ha−1, respectively, while above-ground carbon was 47.7, 17.4, and 4.6 Mg C ha−1, respectively. Natural regeneration accumulated carbon slower than reported for active restoration, suggesting that managed restoration is preferable to passive regeneration on fallows in northern Thailand. The allometric equations, derived from this study, can be used to accurately determine tree ABG and carbon storage in regenerating secondary forest, with higher precision than has hitherto been possible, thus satisfying the monitoring requirements of REDD+ and other carbon-trading schemes. © 2021, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.
New business models for biodiversity conservation			New financing mechanisms for tropical forest conservation, based on payments for ecosystem services, often involve the development of new business models. Suppliers of ecosystem services may include existing land users (e.g., farmers, foresters, tourism operators) or new business ventures (e.g., carbon accountants and traders, conservation bankers). Developing viable business models for biodiversity conservation is a major challenge, due to: the complexity of biodiversity itself (i.e., genes, species, and ecosystems, many still undocumented); the various linkages between business and biodiversity (which may be an economic input, output, competing resource use, or victim of pollution); insufficient consensus on biodiversity conservation priorities and performance indicators applicable at the enterprise level; weak or missing property rights, liability regimes, and/or incentive measures to penalize biodiversity loss and reward conservation effort; and concerns about potential adverse social impacts. This study presents a synthesis of experience across a range of sectors to develop more sustainable business models for biodiversity conservation, identifies key success factors, and outlines a new approach to building a biodiversity business that combines policy innovation, business development assistance, and financial support. © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
New criteria for sustainable land use planning of metropolitan green infrastructures in the tropical Andes			Context: Urbanization is rapidly increasing worldwide, with about 60% of the global population currently residing in cities and expected to reach 68% by 2050. In Latin America's tropical Andes region, managing these changes poses challenges, including biodiversity loss and vulnerability to climate change. Objectives: This study assesses urban growth and agricultural intensification impacts on the ecological functionality of metropolitan green infrastructures and their capacity to provide ecosystem services using a landscape sustainability and sociometabolic approach. Specifically, it aims to identify landscape configurations promoting socio-ecological sustainability amidst rapid urbanization. Methods: A landscape-metabolic model (IDC) was applied to evaluate the interactions between land use changes and ecosystem functions in the metropolitan region of Cali. Results: Agricultural intensification and industrialization, coupled with uncontrolled urban growth, have significantly transformed the landscape, posing threats to its sustainability. The prevailing biocultural landscapes hold a substantial potential to provide essential ecosystem services to the metropolis. The IDC offers an approach that utilizes a land cover map and agricultural production/metabolism data to calculate an indicator closely related to ecosystem services and multifunctionality. Conclusions: The IDC model stands out for efficiently capturing landscape dynamics, providing insights into landscape configuration and social metabolism without extensive resource requirements. This research highlights the importance of adopting a landscape-metabolic and green infrastructure framework to guide territorial policies in the tropical Andes and similar regions. It stresses the need for informed land use planning to address challenges and leverage opportunities presented by biocultural landscapes for regional sustainability amidst rapid urbanization and agricultural expansion. © The Author(s) 2024.
New estimates of carbon storage and sequestration in China's forests: Effects of age-class and method on inventory-based carbon estimation			We developed a volume-to-biomass method based on age groups representative of forest development stages to estimate live tree biomass, C, and biomass and C accumulation rates of China's forests between 1973 and 1993. The data were from plot-level forest inventory, national-level inventory statistics, and ecological site studies specified to estimate biomass in different tree components. Our results indicate that carbon storage in China's forests was 4.34 Pg C in the early 1990s, an increase of 13% since the early 1970s. The annual forest C sequestration rate front the late 1980s to early 1990s was 0.068 Pg C/yr and approximately four- to five-times higher than in the 1970s and 1980s. The large C sink in China's forests in the early 1990s was likely related to age structure changes that had developed to more productive stages, a consequence of reforestation and afforestation programs front the 1960s. The results were compared with other C store estimates, which were based on the same inventory data. Various methods can produce estimates that differ in the direction of C flux as well as its magnitude. Separating age groups with the volume-biomass method could cause a 27% difference in estimated carbon pools but an 89% difference in C sequestration rates whereas the biomass density method would provide an estimate that differs by 65% in the C pools.
New forest biomass carbon stock estimates in Northeast Asia based on multisource data			Forests play an important role in both regional and global C cycles. However, the spatial patterns of biomass C density and underlying factors in Northeast Asia remain unclear. Here, we characterized spatial patterns and important drivers of biomass C density for Northeast Asia, based on multisource data from in situ forest inventories, as well as remote sensing, bioclimatic, topographic, and human footprint data. We derived, for the first time, high-resolution (1 km x 1 km) maps of the current and future forest biomass C density for this region. Based on these maps, we estimated that current biomass C stock in northeastern China, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and Republic of Korea to be 2.53, 0.40, and 0.35 Pg C, respectively. Biomass C stock in Northeast Asia has increased by 20%-46% over the past 20 years, of which 40%-76% was contributed by planted forests. We estimated the biomass C stock in 2080 to be 6.13 and 6.50 Pg C under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 scenarios, respectively, which exceeded the present region-wide C stock value by 2.85-3.22 Pg C, and were 8%-14% higher than the baseline C stock value (5.70 Pg C). The spatial patterns of biomass C densities were found to vary greatly across the Northeast Asia, and largely decided by mean diameter at breast height, dominant height, elevation, and human footprint. Our results suggest that reforestation and forest conservation in Northeast Asia have effectively expanded the size of the carbon sink in the region, and sustainable forest management practices such as precision forestry and close forest monitoring for fire and insect outbreaks would be important to maintain and improve this critical carbon sink for Northeast Asia.
Newton Fund: Novel strategies for the recovery of deforested and degraded landscapes in the Amazon region: sustainable energy-food-water services			Enhancing food, fibre and fuel production to meet growing demand while preserving the integrity of natural ecosystems and their capacity to deliver key services, requires the widespread adoption of sustainable land use practices. The Brazilian Amazon comprises one third of the world's tropical forests and sustains 13% of the world's biota but is experiencing extensive deforestation. Around 8% of forests have been converted to other land uses with an unknown area modified by selective logging, edge effects, surface fires, and hunting. Traditional farming involves 'slash-and-burn' cultivation (for rice, cassava, maize and beans) a practice which depletes soils of nutrients so land is abandoned and new areas exploited. Population growth has placed greater demands on soil (via shorter fallow periods) and forest resources encouraging the growth of environmentally unsustainable meat and milk production practices. Planted and abandoned pastures account for 80% of all cleared lands thus there is urgent need to establish sustainable management strategies to protect ecosystem services and arrest the increase in degraded and exploited environments. Issues faced by Amazonian communities are not solely agricultural; water and energy services are virtually non-existent. Although the Amazon region is rich in natural resources, local populations are economically poor. Water is available throughout the year; however, the quantity and quality varies considerably depending on river water levels and in the dry season, family members, primarily women and children, have to walk for hours to fetch water. Communities are typically isolated from the electric grid with a lack of energy services. Bioenergy technologies such as biomass gasification are attractive in this context since they can provide energy services (via syngas for heat, power and electricity) and biochar which is nutrient-rich and can be used to improve soils, enhance crop growth and nurture sustainable agriculture. Biochar improves soil water use efficiency (retaining soil moisture for crop growth) and can be used as a filter to remove pollutants from drinking water. Biochar may also induce systemic defence against crop pathogens and may be of fundamental importance in terms of food production.    The focus of this international research partnership is to develop innovative, appropriate, sustainable waste and residue-fuelled energy systems which enhance delivery of food, water and energy services. The environmental benefits of these 'waste to energy' systems (diminished atmospheric pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, nutrient recovery, wastewater cleanup) will be examined to provide coupled energy-environment services which benefit all end-users. If residues can efficiently be converted into syngas this will provide an alternative resource for the replacement of unsustainable fossil fuels. Using our multidisciplinary expertise we will investigate the potential of wastes and residues to develop affordable and sustainable energy-water-soil-crop systems. Recent interest in the potential of regional biomass such as waste timber and acai seeds (Euterpe oleracea) for energy services shows potential but little research has been undertaken to assess the added-value benefits of these energy services within a food-water-energy nexus approach.
NI: FOR-RESTOR - A network for evidence-based tropical FORest RESTORation			Regenerating degraded tropical forests is a key approach for mitigating future climate change and restoring essential ecosystem services, including water cycling and biodiversity conservation. The Bonn Challenge sets two key targets: to restore 150 million hectares of degraded lands by 2020 and 350 million hectares by 2030, with the aim of re-instating ecological integrity alongside human well-being into degraded areas based on the forest and landscape restoration approach. Currently, the policy environment is conducive to restoration as countries have made significant commitments to restoring their forests in order to help meet their obligations under the Paris climate change agreement and the Bonn Challenge directly.   There is significant opportunity for restoring natural forests in tropical Southeast Asia; whilst they have been extensively degraded by logging, fragmentation and industrial Oil Palm cultivation, mature natural forests in SEA have a capacity to store and cycle the largest quantities of above-ground carbon per unit area in the world (Banin et al. 2014; Sullivan et al. 2016), and therefore reinstating natural forests offers substantial ecosystem service benefits if long-term restoration can be achieved (Lewis et al. 2019). However, devising successful forest restoration strategies for tropical forests involves careful, evidence-based decision-making, at various spatial scales and working with multiple stake-holders. To ensure the long-term success of restoration efforts, our project initiates a new multidisciplinary network focussing on regeneration of Southeast Asian (SEA) logged and degraded forests.   Our research will be delivered through two work packages. In work package 1, project partners will provide standardised data unavailable in the literature to deliver a new published synthesis of site-level evidence providing insights into post-restoration ecological processes (carbon accumulation and community dynamics). This work will provide a basis for a sustained long-term restoration experiment network. In work package 2, we host an interdisciplinary workshop which will use the Heart of Borneo project area as a transboundary case study to (i) identify the barriers, constraints and opportunities for forest landscape restoration and (ii) develop an agenda of research and data needs for spatial prioritization for landscape-level restoration These activities will be delivered through interactive engagement between academic and practitioner stakeholders, including key policy-makers, at a workshop in Malaysia, which will contribute to our broader, long-term goal of linking ecological and social science research to policy and practice in restoration decision-making.  The proposed FOR-RESTOR project will be a new collaboration between the NERC Centre for Ecology and Hydrology (CEH), Universities of Aberdeen, Exeter, Oxford and RSPB in the UK and international partners from Australia, Italy, Sweden, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia & Singapore. The team uniquely brings together expertise in carbon cycling, functional ecology, biodiversity-ecosystem function relationships, conservation genetics, genetic resources and seed systems, ecological restoration, forest landscape restoration and forest science-policy and science-practice interfaces.
Nitrogen aboveground turnover and soil stocks to 8 m depth in primary and selectively logged forest in southern Amazonia			Extensive areas of Amazonia undergo selective logging, modifying forest structure and nutrient cycles. Anthropogenic-accelerated rates of nitrogen (N) turnover could increase N loss and affect regeneration, carbon sequestration and timber production. We quantified leaf area reduction, canopy opening and downed biomass and resultant N flux from reduced impact logging (RIL) activities. We compared canopy reduction, surface soil moisture and nitrate to 8 m depth between logged gaps and intact primary forest to determine if logging activities increase subsoil nitrate. To test long-term logging effects, we evaluated surface N stocks along a 12-year postlogging chronosequence. At the harvest rate of 2.6 trees ha-1, total N additions in logging gaps, including leaves and wood from felled crowns (24.8 kg N ha-1) and other killed trees (41.9 kg N ha-1), accounted for over 80% of the total N addition to aboveground necromass from all logging activities (81.9 kg N ha-1). Despite this N turnover by logging, belowground nitrate storage to 8 m depth did not differ between logging gaps and primary forest at the low harvest rate and disturbance intensity of this study. Soil water depletion also did not differ between gaps and primary forest over 1 year, indicating the impact on belowground inorganic N was low. Compared with primary forest, nitrate concentrations to 8 m depth in logging gaps were only significantly higher at 60-100 cm, suggesting some N redistribution beyond the bulk of the fine roots in logging gaps. Extrapolated to the Amazon Basin scale, we provide a conservative estimate that logging damage and bole export under RIL would turn over 0.14 +/- 0.07 to 0.23 +/- 0.12 Tg N yr-1 based on 1999-2002 selective logging rates. Greater damage during conventional selective logging would cause higher N turnover throughout the Amazon Basin than our results based on RIL.
Nitrogen and phosphorous limitation reduces the effects of land use change on land carbon uptake or emission			We used an Earth System Model that includes both nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) cycling to simulate the impacts of land-use and land-cover change (LULCC) for two representative concentration pathways (RCPs): a reforestation scenario (RCP4.5) and a deforestation scenario (RCP8.5). For each RCP, we performed simulations with and without LULCC using the carbon (C only) mode or including the full C, Nand P cycles (CNP). We show, for the first time, that inclusion of N and P cycling reduces both the carbon uptake from reforestation in RCP4.5 and the carbon emission from deforestation in RCP8.5. Specifically, carbon-nutrient interaction reduces carbon uptake in RCP4.5 from 55 PgC(Conly) to 21 PgC(CNP), or the emissions in RCP8.5 from 72 PgC(Conly) to 56 PgC (CNP). Most of those reductions result from much weaker responses of net primary production to CO2 fertilization and climate change when carbon-nutrient interaction is taken into account, as compared to C only simulations. Our results highlight the importance of including nutrient-carbon interaction in estimating the carbon benefit from reforestation and carbon loss from deforestation in a future world with higher CO2 and a warmer climate. Because of the stronger nutrient limitation, carbon gain from reforestation in the temperate and boreal regions is much less than the carbon loss from deforestation in the subtropical and tropical regions from 2006 to 2100 for the two RCPs. Therefore protecting the existing subtropical and tropical forests is about twice as effective as planting new forests in the temperate and boreal regions for climate mitigation.
Nitrogen and Phosphorus Allocation Strategies in a Chronosequence of Tropical Dry Forests: Plant Coordination and Environmental Drivers			Identifying how limited resources, such as nutrients, are allocated across plant organs can provide new insights into ecophysiological strategies, as well as ecosystem nutrient cycles. Plants may allocate different nutrients within a specific organ or the same nutrient among different organs. In this study, we explored the allocation strategies of nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) in the leaves, stems, and roots of nine dominant tree species in secondary tropical dry forests using scaling analysis. The results showing that N and P have different scaling relationships within and among plant organs. The scaling relationships of P versus N concentrations in non-leaf organs were isometric across secondary succession and shifted in leaves from allometric (P concentration increased faster than N concentration) to isometric. The scaling relationships of N or P concentrations between metabolic (leaves vs. fine roots) or between structural (stems vs. coarse roots) plant organs tended to be isometric along succession. Whilst the scaling relationships of the same nutrient between metabolic versus structural plant organs tended to be allometric (N and P concentrations increased faster in woody organs than in metabolic organs) across succession. A principal component analysis suggests associations of nutrient allocation to woody organs with soil pH over the chronosequence and with vegetation structure and soil nutrient availability in the case of metabolic organs. These findings on the sensitivity in plant nutrient allocation to changes in soil and vegetation properties during secondary succession may have practical implications for carbon sequestration management and models and restoration of this threatened ecosystem. © 2025 The Author(s). Biotropica published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation.
Nitrogen and phosphorus enrichment accelerates soil organic carbon loss in alpine grassland on the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau			Anthropogenic activities have substantially increased soil nutrient availability, which in turn affects ecosystem processes and functions, especially in nutrient-limited ecosystems such as alpine grasslands. Although considerable efforts have been devoted to understanding the responses of plant productivity and community composition to nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) enrichment, the nutrient enrichment effects on soil organic carbon (SOC) and microbial functions are not well understood. A four-year field experiment was established to evaluate the influence of continuous N and P enrichment on plant growth and SOC content in an alpine grassland of the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau. The study included four treatments: Control without addition, N addition, P addition, and N plus P addition. N addition strongly increased aboveground plant biomass and decreased species richness by promoting growth of the dominant grasses species. In contrast, N and P enrichment significantly decreased SOC, especially the recalcitrant organic C content in the surface layer (0-10 cm) by reducing the slow C pool and enlarging the active C pool. Microbial biomass and activities of C-degrading enzymes (beta-glucosidase, cellulase and polyphenol oxidase) and an N-degrading enzyme (chitinase) increased with nutrient inputs. The CO2 emissions during a 300 d incubation period were positively correlated with the cellulase and chitinase activities, while the slow C pool was negatively correlated with the cellulase and polyphenol oxidase activities. Consequently, N and P enrichment accelerated decomposition of the recalcitrant C by stimulating microbial growth and increasing enzyme activities, leading to negative impacts on soil C sequestration. Overall, the results indicate that alpine grassland soils of the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau may be changing from a C sink to a C source under increasing N and P availability, and improvement of alpine grassland management through nutrient inputs should consider not only the aboveground biomass for grazing, but also the soil C sequestration and ecosystem functioning. (c) 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Nitrogen limitation on land: how can it occur in Earth system models?			The representation of the nitrogen (N) cycle in Earth system models (ESMs) is strongly motivated by the constraint N poses on the sequestration of anthropogenic carbon (C). Models typically implement a stoichiometric relationship between C and N in which external supply and assimilation by organisms are adjusted to maintain their internal stoichiometry. N limitation of primary productivity thus occurs if the N supply from uptake and fixation cannot keep up with the construction of tissues allowed by C assimilation. This basic approach, however, presents considerable challenges in how to faithfully represent N limitation. Here, we review how N limitation is currently implemented and evaluated in ESMs and highlight challenges and opportunities in their future development. At or near steady state, N limitation is governed by the magnitude of losses from the plant-unavailable pool vs. N fixation and there are considerable differences in how models treat both processes. In nonsteady-state systems, the accumulation of N in pools with slow turnover rates reduces N available for plant uptake and can be challenging to represent when initializing ESM simulations. Transactional N limitation occurs when N is incorporated into various vegetation and soil pools and becomes available to plants only after it is mineralized, the dynamics of which depends on how ESMs represent decomposition processes in soils. Other challenges for ESMs emerge when considering seasonal to interannual climatic oscillations as they create asynchronies between C and N demand, leading to transient alternations between N surplus and deficit. Proper evaluation of N dynamics in ESMs requires conceptual understanding of the main levers that trigger N limitation, and we highlight key measurements and observations that can help constrain these levers. Two of the biggest challenges are the mechanistic representation of plant controls on N availability and turnover, including N fixation and organic matter decomposition processes.
Non-destructive estimation of tree biomass by using wood specific gravity in the estimator			Estimates of forest biomass are required for understanding several ecological processes such as nutrient cycling and carbon sequestration. We compared the biomass estimates of seven tropical tree species measured on the basis of two methods: (i) allometric equations relating destructively measured tree biomass and the circumference at breast height (CBH), and (ii) non-destructive equation having wood specific gravity (p) in the estimator. There were strong correlations between the two methods for all tree species. We suggest that p-based estimator is a viable option for non-destructive estimation of forest biomass.
Novel growth models for three Brazilian native timber species and their applications for timber production and carbon stock assessment			Sustainable native timber production and the carbon market can be a crucial strategy for scaling up tropical forest restoration. In this context, this study developed both growth models and growth-climate models for Cariniana legalis, Dalbergia nigra, and Zeyheria tuberculosa to predict tree diameter and total height, analyzed growth patterns among species, and estimated their commercial rotation age for timber production. We collected data from 14 tree plantations distributed throughout the Brazilian Atlantic Forest, with a total of 5564 trees sampled. The plantations span a broad climatic gradient, with ages ranging from 1 to 50 years. Dalbergia nigra showed the highest growth rate (1.33 cm/year) and a first harvest age of 22 years, indicating its suitability for furniture and construction wood production. Cariniana legalis showed a slightly lower growth rate (1.16 cm/year) and required 31 years to reach first harvest, with wood ideal for construction and furniture. In contrast, Z. tuberculosa had the lowest diameter increment (0.90 cm/year) and did not reach the diameter at the breast level threshold, making it more suitable for non-premium uses such as utensils and pallets. Through the growth-climate models, we found that climatic water deficit and minimum temperature were the most influential variables explaining tree growth across bioclimatic regions, with higher temperatures and limited water availability significantly constraining species productivity. The developed models can greatly contribute to predicting timber production potential and carbon stock assessment, which can contribute to scaling up restoration efforts and facilitating forest management planning.
Nucleation: An alternative to ecological restoration of neotropical forests			Deforestation and land degradation resulting from intense land use activities pose a significant threat to neotropical forests. Ecological restoration (ER) as an alternative to mitigate the loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services remains a global challenge and priority. Nucleation is a technique aimed at creating microhabitats that facilitate natural regeneration and expand interactions among organisms, promoting ecological succession. Although the formation of tree islands (applied nucleation) is frequently used due to its cost-effectiveness compared to other ER alternatives, the implementation of nucleation in neotropical forests faces challenges that range from defining precise objectives to scaling up in large areas. Our work provides a comprehensive overview of nucleation alternatives for restoring tropical forest areas, evaluating 1) their rationale, conditions and benefits; 2) theoretical and experimental studies, and 3) challenges for their application in different restoration scenarios. We have found that nucleation is an adaptable restoration model suitable for scenarios with varying recovery potential and capable of achieving multiple objectives through different techniques. While current studies have primarily focused on short-term comparisons between applied nucleation and other strategies, issues such as species composition and selection, alternative configurations for combining techniques, and large-scale implementation have received little attention. We recommend that the implementation and monitoring of nucleation be guided by experimentation within projects and that future research should focus on incorporating alternative treatments for adaptive management.
Nutrient acquisition strategies augment growth in tropical N2-fixing trees in nutrient-poor soil and under elevated CO2			Tropical forests play a dominant role in the global carbon (C) cycle, and models predict increases in tropical net primary productivity (NPP) and C storage in response to rising atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations. The extent to which increasing CO2 will enhance NPP depends in part on the availability of nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) to support growth. Some tropical trees can potentially overcome nutrient limitation by acquiring N via symbiotic dinitrogen (N2) fixation, which may provide a benefit in acquiring P via investment in N-rich phosphatase enzymes or arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi. We conducted a seedling experiment to investigate the effects of elevated CO2 and soil nutrient availability on the growth of two N2-fixing and two non-N2-fixing tropical tree species. We hypothesized that under elevated CO2 and at low nutrient availability (i.e., low N and P), N2 fixers would have higher growth rates than non-N2 fixers because N2 fixers have a greater capacity to acquire both N and P. We also hypothesized that differences in growth rates between N2 fixers and non-N2 fixers would decline as nutrient availability increases because N2 fixers no longer have an advantage in nutrient acquisition. We found that the N2 fixers had higher growth rates than the non-N2 fixers under elevated CO2 and at low nutrient availability, and that the difference in growth rates between the N2 and non-N2 fixers declined as nutrient availability increased, irrespective of CO2. Overall, N2 fixation, root phosphatase activity, and AM colonization decreased with increasing nutrient availability, and increased under elevated CO2 at low nutrient availability. Further, AM colonization was positively related to the growth of the non-N2 fixers, whereas both N2 fixation and root phosphatase activity were positively related to the growth of the N2 fixers. Though our results indicate all four tree species have the capacity to up- or down-regulate nutrient acquisition to meet their stoichiometric demands, the greater capacity for the N2 fixers to acquire both N and P may enable them to overcome nutritional constraints to NPP under elevated CO2, with implications for the response of tropical forests to future environmental change. © 2019 by the Ecological Society of America
Nutrient Addition Differentially Affects Soil Carbon Sequestration in Secondary Tropical Dry Forests: Early- versus Late-Succession Stages			There is considerable interest in the potential use of soils to sequester carbon for climate change mitigation. As such, there is a need to evaluate the potential for carbon accumulation in tropical regions. We compared the effects of three annual additions of nitrogen and/or phosphorus on soil carbon and nitrogen contents and pools (bulk soil, macro-, meso-, and microaggregates) of two regenerating secondary tropical dry forest differing in nutrient status and succession stage (10-year-old early-succession stage and approximately 60-year-old late-succession stage). The selected forest sites were located on a shallow calcareous soil in the Yucatan Peninsula (Mexico). The primary production is limited by nitrogen and phosphorus in early-succession stage and by phosphorus in late-succession stage. In each forest site, four independent plots (12 x 12 m2) were established, the treatments being: controls and plots fertilized during three consecutive years with nitrogen, phosphorus, or nitrogen plus phosphorus. In both forests, soil carbon and nitrogen contents were consistently high, with soil carbon:nitrogen ratios generally greater than 10. Results indicate that usually there are no significant increases of soil carbon stock associated to late succession but can be increased to 3.7 Mg center dot ha-1 center dot yr-1 with adoption of fertilizer practices. The potential soil carbon sequestration in early-succession forest was estimated to be 2.7 Mg center dot ha-1 center dot yr-1, and there is no indication that fertilization improves carbon sequestration. In short, results suggest that the soil potential for carbon sequestration in these ecosystems is high and depends on the specific nutrient status of the site.
Nutrient availability and stoichiometry mediate microbial effects on soil carbon sequestration in tropical forests			A one-yearin situsoil incubation experiment using mesh bags (mesh size of 38 mum, allowing colonization of bacteria and penetration of fungal hyphal but precluding root penetration) with fertile sugarcane soil and infertile sand along an elevational gradient characterized by varied climatic and biotic conditions in a tropical forest.Biomarkers, including phospholipid fatty acids, carbon-nitrogen-phosphorus acquiring hydrolases, glomalin-related proteins and amino sugars were measured to characterize the production and accumulation of microbial living biomass, exo-enzymes, extracellular glycoprotein and microbial necromass, and to elucidate their contributions to SOC sequestration. Copyright: Restricted Access
Nutrient dynamics during decomposition of the residues from a sown legume or ruderal plant cover in an olive oil orchard			Spanish olive oil groves are undergoing a marked change in the way that inter-row land is managed. The current recommendation encourages the use of plant cover to increase plant residue input to the soil to improve fertility and reduce erosion. However, there is no quantitative information on the temporal trend and magnitude of nutrient release during decomposition of plant cover residues after the annual topping of vegetation. Decomposition rates and nutrient dynamics (C, N, P and K) were examined for aboveground residues from two types of plant cover (a sown legume and ruderal plant species) and in fine roots. Litterbag experiments were designed to evaluate the effects of the type and location of plant residues (above- or belowground) by placing litterbags of aboveground plant residues on the soil surface or within the soil, which were sampled over a whole year. The highest decomposition rates for above- or belowground residues were found in spring, and were higher for buried plant residues, regardless of plant cover type. After one year, the remaining C, K and P in the soil was about 30%, 20% and 30% of that added, respectively and therefore plant cover could be a useful strategy to improve C sequestration and increase soil nutrient content in olive groves. Decomposition of plant residues left on the soil surface immobilised N, whereas this was not the case when they were buried. The remaining C, N, P and K content in belowground residues was similar to aboveground samples with around 21%, 27%, 23% and 15%, respectively. This study highlighted the importance of plant cover for retaining nutrients when tree demand was low, but releasing a significant proportion of the nutrients in early spring when tree demand was high, especially when residues were incorporated into the soil. (C) 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Nutrient gradients in Panamanian estuaries: effects of watershed deforestation, rainfall, upwelling, and within-estuary transformations			To test whether deforestation of tropical forests alters coupling of watersheds, estuaries, and coastal waters, we measured nutrients in 8 watershed-estuarine systems on the Pacific coast of Panama where watershed forest cover ranged from 23 to 92%. Watersheds with greater forest cover discharged larger dissolved inorganic nitrogen concentrations and higher N/P into estuary headwaters. As freshwater mixed with seawater down-estuary, within-estuary biogeochemical processes erased the imprint of watershed deforestation, increased ammonium, lowered nitrate concentrations, and otherwise altered down-estuary water column composition. As estuarine water left man grove estuaries, ammonium, nitrate, and phosphate, but not dissolved organic nitrogen, were exported to receiving near-shore waters. Mangrove estuaries in this region thus provide important ecological services, by uncoupling coastal waters from changes in terrestrial land covers, as well as by subsidizing adjoined receiving coastal waters by providing nutrients. The pattern of land-sea coupling and exports was disrupted during La Nina-influenced conditions. In one instance when La Nina conditions led to upwelling of deeper layers, high concentrations of marine-derived ammonium were inserted into estuaries. In another instance, La Nina-associated high rainfall diluted nutrient concentrations within estuaries and lowered salinity regionally, and the fresher upper layer impaired coastal upwelling. Regional rainfall has increased during the last decade. If La Nina rainfall continues to increase, disruptions of current land-estuary-sea couplings may become more frequent, with potentially significant changes in nutrient cycles and ecological services in these coupled ecosystems.
Nutrient limitation in tropical secondary forests following different management practices			Secondary forests now make up more than one-half of all tropical forests, and constraints on their biomass accumulation will influence the strength of the terrestrial carbon (C) sink in the coming decades. However the variance in secondary tropical forest biomass for a given stand age and climate is high and our understanding of why is limited. We constructed a model of terrestrial C, nitrogen (N), and phosphorus (P) cycling to examine the influence of disturbance and management practices on nutrient limitation and biomass recovery in secondary tropical forests. The model predicted that N limited the rate of forest recovery in the first few decades following harvest, but that this limitation switched to P approximately 30-40 yr after abandonment, consistent with field data on N and P cycling from secondary tropical forest chronosequences. Simulated biomass recovery agreed well with field data of biomass accumulation following harvest (R-2 = 0.80). Model results showed that if all biomass remained on site following a severe disturbance such as blowdown, regrowth approached pre-disturbance biomass in 80-90 yr, and recovery was faster following smaller disturbances such as selective logging. Field data from regrowth on abandoned pastures were consistent with simulated losses of nutrients in soil organic matter, particularly P. Following any forest disturbance that involved the removal of nutrients (i.e., except blowdown), forest regrowth produced reduced biomass relative to the initial state as a result of nutrient loss through harvest, leaching and/or sequestration by secondary minerals. Differences in nutrient availability accounted for 49-94% of the variance in secondary forest biomass C at a given stand age. Management lessons from this study are the importance of strategies that help retain nutrients on site, recognizing the role of coarse woody debris in immobilization and subsequent release of nutrients, and the potential for nutrient additions to enhance biomass growth and recovery in secondary tropical forests.
Nutrients and wood density in coarse root, trunk and branches in Bornean tree species			Description: Carbon (C), nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), calcium (Ca), and magnesium (Mg) concentrations in woody tissue and bark, and wood density, were quantified for ten common Bornean tree species. The study took advantage of the ongoing logging in August 2014, sampling trees felled in the logging sites (near D Matrix, exact locations of the sampled trees not recorded). Each tree species had three replicates. The diameter of the sampled trees ranged from 12 cm to 44 cm. Sampled trees had no visible damage (e.g. no insect damage, chlorotic leaves and bent stems). The species IDs of the sampled trees were confirmed at the herbarium of the Forest Research Centre in Sepilok, Sandakan.Several points along the length of the tree were sampled: coarse root; trunk bottom, trunk middle and trunk top (highest point of the main stem); and the lowest branch of the tree, from branch bottom, branch middle and branch tip. The sampled components were cut directly after felling using a chainsaw. The samples were then transported to the chemistry laboratory of the Forest Research Centre in Sepilok, Sandakan.Bark (both the outer bark and phloem) was separated from the wood, except for the trunk top and branch tip samples, where the bark layer was too thin. Wood samples were divided into sapwood and heartwood if possible, based on a distinguishable colour difference after mechanical sanding. Sapwood and heartwood for most branch and coarse root samples were not separated due to the absence of colour boundary, but they probably consists mostly of sapwood.For chemical analyses, all samples were oven dried at 50°C to constant weight for five days and ground with a Thomas Wiley Mill to pass through a 100-mush (212-mum) sieve. Each sample was digested following the sulphuric acid-hydrogen peroxide-lithium sulphate digest procedure for vegetation described in Allen (1989). Phosphorus in the digest was determined using the molybdenum-blue method described in Anderson and Ingram (1993) and read at 880 nm on a spectrophotometer (HITACHI UV-VIS, Tokyo, Japan), while K, Ca and Mg contents were measured on an atomic absorption spectrophotometer (GBC Scientific Equipment, Victoria, Australia). Total C and N contents (as total element contents) were determined by a dry combustion method at 900°C using an Elementar Vario Max CN analyzer (Elementar Analysensysteme, Hanau, Germany). Analysis protocols are described in more detail in Majalap and Chu (1992).Wood density was quantified for trunk bottom and trunk middle samples. A strip, running through the wood disk slightly off centre, proportionally covering both sapwood and heartwood, was cut, and three (minimum of two, maximum of five, depending on the lenght of the strip) cubes (tangent ~20 mm * axial ~20 mm * radial ~20 mm length, exact dimensions recorded) were cut for wood density measurements, following the procedure ISO 3131:1975 (E) Wood -- Determination of Density for Physical and Mechanical Tests. Wood density was defined as the oven-dry mass per unit volume of fresh wood cube. Dry mass was measured after oven drying the samples at 1032°C until the dry mass was stabilised. References:Allen, S. E. (1989). Chemical analysis of ecological materials (2nd ed.). Oxford, England; Boston; Blackwell Scientific Publications.Anderson, J. M., and Ingram, J. S. I. (1993). Tropical soil biology and fertility: a handbook of methods (2nd ed.). Wallingford, UK: C.A.B. International.Majalap, N., and Chu, N. H. (1992). Laboratory Manual for Chemical Analysis. Sandakan, Sabah, Malaysia: Forest Research Centre, Sabah Forestry Department.Project: This dataset was collected as part of the following SAFE research project: Changing carbon dioxide and water budgets from deforestation and habitat modificationFunding: These data were collected as part of research funded by: Sime Darby Foundation (Grant, SAFE Core data)Joint Japan/World Bank Graduate Scholarship Program (JJ/WBGSP) (Scholarship, JJ/WBGSP)European Research Council Advanced Investigator Grant, GEM-TRAIT (Grant, Grant number 321131)NERC Human-Modified Tropical Forests Programme: Biodiversity And Land-use Impacts on tropical ecosystem function (BALI) Project (Grant, NE/K016369/1)This dataset is released under the CC-BY 4.0 licence, requiring that you cite the dataset in any outputs, but has the additional condition that you acknowledge the contribution of these funders in any outputs.Permits: These data were collected under permit from the following authorities:Sabah Biodiversity Centre (SABC) (Research licence JKM/MBS.1000-2/2 (187))XML metadata: GEMINI compliant metadata for this dataset is available hereFiles: This consists of 1 file: Inagawa_TreeComponentData_Nutrients_WoodDensity_SAFEdatabase_2023-07-10.xlsxInagawa_TreeComponentData_Nutrients_WoodDensity_SAFEdatabase_2023-07-10.xlsxThis file contains dataset metadata and 3 data tables:TreeInfo (described in worksheet TreeInfo)Description: Local name, confirmed species id, family, and diameter of the sampled treesNumber of fields: 6Number of data rows: 30Fields: TreeNumber: Running number of the sampled trees (Field type: id)Species_LocalName: Local name of the sampled tree (Field type: comments)Family: Family (Field type: comments)Species: Tree species (Field type: taxa)DBH: Diameter at the 1.3 m heigth (Field type: numeric trait)SamplingLocation: Location within the SAFE landscape (Field type: location)Nutrients (described in worksheet Nutrients)Description: Data on nutrients in bark and wood, along the length of the tree (coarse roots, along the trunk, branches) and radially (sapwood and heartwood).Number of fields: 11Number of data rows: 420Fields: LabNumber: Code assigned to each sample at the receiving chemistry lab (Field type: id)TreeNumber: Running number of the sampled trees (Field type: id)SamplingPoint: Site of the sample, from the bottom to the top of the tree: coarse root (CR), trunk bottom (TB), trunk middle (TM), brach bottom (BB), branch middle (BM), branch top (BT), trunk top (TT) (Field type: categorical)TissueType: Tissue type: bark, heartwood, sapwood, wood (if not possible to separate the sample into heart and sapwood), wood and bark (in case of branch tip and trunk tip, not possible to separate wood and bark). (Field type: categorical trait)Species: Tree species (Field type: taxa)K_total: Total potassium content (Field type: numeric trait)Ca_total: Total calsium content (Field type: numeric trait)Mg_total: Total magnesium content (Field type: numeric trait)P_total: Total phosphorus content (Field type: numeric trait)N_total: Total nitrogen content (Field type: numeric trait)C_total: Total carbon content (Field type: numeric trait)WoodDensity (described in worksheet WoodDensity)Description: Data on wood density at the bottom and at the middle of the trunk.Number of fields: 13Number of data rows: 207Fields: TreeNumber: Running number of the sampled trees (Field type: id)Species: Tree species (Field type: taxa)SamplingPoint: Site of the wood sample, either trunk bottom (TB) or trunk middle (TM). (Field type: categorical)Replicate: Replicate wood cube sampled for each wood disk (Field type: replicate)Length_Tangential_Fresh: Length of the wood cube edge in tangential direction, before drying (fresh). (Field type: numeric trait)Length_Axial_Fresh: Length of the wood cube edge in axial direction, before drying (fresh). (Field type: numeric trait)Length_Radia_Fresh: Length of the wood cube edge in radial direction, before drying (fresh). (Field type: numeric trait)Mass_Fresh: Fresh mass of wood cube, before drying. (Field type: numeric trait)Length_Tangential_Dry: Length of the wood cube edge in tangential direction, after oven drying. (Field type: numeric trait)Length_Axial_Dry: Length of the wood cube edge in axial direction, after oven drying. (Field type: numeric trait)Length_Radial_Dry: Length of the wood cube edge in radial direction, after oven drying. (Field type: numeric trait)Mass_Dry: Dry mass of wood cube, after oven drying (Field type: numeric trait)WoodDensity: Wood density, calculated as dry mass divided by fresh volume (Field type: numeric trait)Date range: 2014-08-01 to 2015-11-30Latitudinal extent: 4.1830 to 4.1830Longitudinal extent: 114.0220 to 114.0220Taxonomic coverage: All taxon names are validated against the GBIF backbone taxonomy. If a dataset uses a synonym, the accepted usage is shown followed by the dataset usage in brackets. Taxa that cannot be validated, including new species and other unknown taxa, morphospecies, functional groups and taxonomic levels not used in the GBIF backbone are shown in square brackets.- Plantae -- Tracheophyta --- Magnoliopsida ---- Malvales ----- Malvaceae ------ Pentace ------- Pentace borneensis (as synonym: Pentace laxiflora)----- Dipterocarpaceae ------ Shorea ------- Shorea johorensis ------- Shorea leprosula ------- Shorea micans ------- Shorea parvifolia ------ Parashorea ------- Parashorea malaanonan ---- Fagales ----- Fagaceae ------ Lithocarpus ------- Lithocarpus leptogyne ---- Gentianales ----- Rubiaceae ------ Neolamarckia ------- Neolamarckia cadamba ---- Rosales ----- Cannabaceae ------ Trema ------- Trema orientalis ---- Malpighiales ----- Euphorbiaceae ------ Macaranga ------- Macaranga pearsonii Copyright: Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Open Access
Nutrients limit photosynthesis in seedlings of a lowland tropical forest tree species			We investigated how photosynthesis by understory seedlings of the lowland tropical tree species Alseis blackiana responded to 10 years of soil nutrient fertilization with N, P and K. We ask whether nutrients are limiting to light and CO 2 acquisition in a low light understory environment. We measured foliar nutrient concentrations of N, P and K, isotopic composition of carbon (δ 13C) and nitrogen (δ 15N), and light response curves of photosynthesis and chlorophyll fluorescence. Canopy openness was measured above each study seedling and included in statistical analyses to account for variation in light availability. Foliar N concentration increased by 20% with N addition. Foliar P concentration increased by 78% with P addition and decreased by 14% with N addition. Foliar K increased by 8% with K addition. Foliar δ 13C showed no significant responses, and foliar δ 15N decreased strongly with N addition, matching the low δ 15N values of applied fertilizer. Canopy openness ranged from 0.01 to 6.71% with a mean of 1.76±0.14 (±1SE). Maximum photosynthetic CO 2 assimilation rate increased by 9% with N addition. Stomatal conductance increased with P addition and with P and K in combination. Chlorophyll fluorescence measurements revealed that quantum yield of photosystem II increased with K addition, maximum electron transport rate trended 9% greater with N addition (p = 0. 07), and saturating photosynthetically active radiation increased with N addition. The results demonstrate that nutrient addition can enhance photosynthetic processes, even under low light availability. © 2011 Springer-Verlag.
Object-Based Mapping of Aboveground Biomass in Tropical Forests Using LiDAR and Very-High-Spatial-Resolution Satellite Data			Developing countries that intend to implement the United Nations REDD-plus (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation, and the role of forest conservation, sustainable management of forests, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks) framework and obtain economic incentives are required to estimate changes in forest carbon stocks based on the IPCC guidelines. In this study, we developed a method to support REDD-plus implementation by estimating tropical forest aboveground biomass (AGB) by combining airborne LiDAR with very-high-spatial-resolution satellite data. We acquired QuickBird satellite images of Kampong Thom, Cambodia in 2011 and airborne LiDAR measurements in some parts of the same area. After haze reduction and atmospheric correction of the satellite data, we calibrated reflectance values from the mean reflectance of the objects (obtained by segmentation from areas of overlap between dates) to reduce the effects of the observation angle and solar elevation. Then, we performed object-based classification using the satellite data (overall accuracy = 77.0%, versus 92.9% for distinguishing forest from non-forest land). We used a two-step method to estimate AGB and map it in a tropical environment in Cambodia. First, we created a multiple-regression model to estimate AGB from the LiDAR data and plotted field-surveyed AGB values against AGB values predicted by the LiDAR-based model (R-2 = 0.90, RMSE = 38.7 Mg/ha), and calculated reflectance values in each band of the satellite data for the analyzed objects. Then, we created a multiple-regression model using AGB predicted by the LiDAR-based model as the dependent variable and the mean and standard deviation of the reflectance values in each band of the satellite data as the explanatory variables (R-2 = 0.73, RMSE = 42.8 Mg/ha). We calculated AGB of all objects, divided the results into density classes, and mapped the resulting AGB distribution. Our results suggest that this approach can provide the forest carbon stock per unit area values required to support REDD-plus.
Observational Insights on the Effects of Land Use and Precipitation Seasonality on Water-driven Circulation of Phosphorus in the Tropical Andes			In tropical montane ecosystems, forest conversion into agricultural uses, combined with changes in climate can alter ecosystem hydrological and biogeochemical processes in multiple ways. A deeper understating of the interactions and couplings between land use/land cover, ecohydrological, and biogeochemical processes is needed to identify and evaluate the potential impacts of a changing environment. In this study, we compare the combined effects of forest conversion into agricultural uses and rainfall seasonality, in the dynamics of water-driven phosphorus circulation in a tropical montane area in Colombia. More specifically, we analyze water-driven phosphorus circulation from rainfall to infiltration as it moves through different hydrological compartments, in a case study that includes four types of land use, including two stages of intervention in native oak-dominated forests, transitory crops (vegetative periods of less than 1 year) and non-native pastures. Our results show that mean phosphate (PO4-P) fluxes in infiltration and surface runoff were higher in agroecosystems than in natural forests, while both types of forests exhibited canopy absorption of PO4-P from rainfall, typical of P-limited ecosystems. These differences were exacerbated by rainfall seasonality (P < 0.05). Our results indicate that a large portion of nutrient extra-inputs in agroecosystems from fertilization may be lost to surface runoff or infiltration and may not be available for plant nutrition and potentially causing other impacts downstream. Overall, our results highlight how, from growing on relatively phosphorus-poor soils, natural ecosystems are more effective in controlling phosphorus losses, both in the canopy as well as in the soil. © 2021, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
Offsetting Destruction: The Important Functional Contribution of Carbon Sequestration in the Restoration of a Tropical Forest in Monteverde, Costa Rica			The restoration of tropical forests is critically important for offsetting the destruction of this vital habitat as well as curbing the loss of ecosystem functions, such as carbon harvesting (e.g., capture and sequestration). Attempts to quantify the value of carbon capture in native species restoration efforts in the tropics are limited. This case study analyzed the rates of biomass (C) accumulation in restored plots in Monteverde, Costa Rica. Annual biomass (C) accumulation averaged 5.34kg per tree over the first 17years after seedling planting. This converts to an average capture of 19.57kg of CO2 tree−1 year−1. Carbon sequestration rates in the first decade of growth are low at 1.95kgCyear−1 and carbon offset programs should account for this by requiring a minimum 15-year commitment for emission mitigation. Using an average tree planting and survival estimate per hectare, based on our 20-year restoration program, reforestation in this region can capture up to 12.72Mg (with just planted trees), or 15.7CO2 Mgha−1 year−1 when natural tree recruitment in restored plots is included. Great variation exists among tree planting sites, as well as within sites, and captured amounts differ with tree species capabilities. Given the challenges of accurate, broad-range model development for calculation of tropical forest biomass accumulation, this study utilizes the average of six published allometric equations and discusses their application to this study. © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
Oil Palm Agroforestry Can Achieve Economic and Environmental Gains as Indicated by Multifunctional Land Equivalent Ratios			Driven by increased global demand for vegetable oil in the food and biofuel sectors, oil palm plantations based on monoculture technology have expanded into lowland tropical forests. Interest in diversified, mixed oil palm systems is increasing as these might increase efficiency of the use of land and other resources, reduce farmer risk, and decrease greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions per unit product. Land Equivalent Ratio for provisioning services (LERP) values above 1.0 show that at least some diversified systems use land more efficiently than monocultures and are thus "land sparing," where monoculture LERP cannot exceed 1.0. Diversification also modifies climate and water regulating functions ("land sharing") relative to a forest reference, as indicated in the LERR index. A "multifunctional" LERM indicator combines both; land sparing plus land sharing effects jointly determine expected regulating services. Empirical assessment of multiple ecosystem services in agricultural landscapes is assisted by models that synthesise process-based knowledge, especially for perennial systems where well-designed experiments require a full production cycle, and are costly and scarce. Agroforestry models explore spacing, intercropping and soil management options, predicting harvestable yields, impacts on water flows, nutrient leaching, and greenhouse gas emissions. We used the process-based Water, Nutrient and Light Capture in Agroforestry System (WaNuLCAS) model to explore mixed oil palm + cocoa and oil palm + pepper intercrop systems with modified ("double row") planting patterns for Indonesian contexts and estimated consequences for the carbon footprint. The oil palm + cocoa intercrop provided a high LERP (1.4), while also replenishing more ground water and having a lower C footprint. This combination also has a return to labour equal to that in oil palm monocultures and a higher benefit cost ratio than the oil palm + pepper combination that maximizes Net Present Value. Oil palm + cocoa systems are also less sensitive to price uncertainty for oil palm, and buffer for oil palm and cocoa production risks, assumed to be independent of each other. Considerable economic and environmental system improvements appear to be feasible through mixed oil palm systems and diversification as a pathway to intensification deserves full attention of research and policy development.
Oil palm cultivation enhances soilpH, electrical conductivity, concentrations of exchangeable calcium, magnesium, and available sulfur and soil organic carbon content			The land area under oil palm (Elaeis guineensisJacq.) cultivation (OPC) is increasing in different parts of world. Assessment of the soil parameters of oil palm plantations (OPP) is essential to judge the sustainability of land use for maintaining soil fertility and avoiding land degradation. The effects of OPC in India on soil parameters are poorly understood. Therefore, we evaluated the impact of OPC over the years (by considering oil palm plantations of 6, 12, and 18 years age) on soil properties, nutrient availability, soil organic carbon (SOC) pools, and SOC stock in comparison with those parameters in adjacent fallow land (FL) of southern India. Soils of OPP showed enhanced soil pH value, electrical conductivity, the concentrations of exchangeable calcium and magnesium and available sulfur, and SOC content in 0-20, 20-40, and 40-60 cm depths of soil compared with those parameters in FL. Available phosphorus concentration in soil increased with plantation age revealing the need for rational phosphorus management. However, the concentration of available nitrogen, potassium, exchangeable calcium and magnesium, and available sulfur and boron did not change with plantation age. The contents of SOC and very labile carbon were higher in surface soil layers of OPP than that in FL. Oil palm cultivation led to 20, 18, and 45% enhancement in SOC stock in 6, 12, and 18 years-old OPP, respectively, compared with SOC stock in FL indicating C sequestration due to OPC. The very labile and less labile C stock in FL, 6 and 12 years-old OPP were similar, whereas the values of these parameters were higher in 18 years-old OPP. Positive correlation (p < .01) of SOC with very labile, labile, and less labile carbon pools indicated their inter-relatedness. This information will be utilized in devising rational nutrient management options for the existing as well as ensuing OPP due to variations in soil properties and available nutrients.
Oil palm plantations in an aging agricultural landscape in the eastern Amazon: Pushing Amazon forests farther from biodiversity-friendly landscapes			Oil palm plantations across the tropics are intended to promote sustainable production by incorporating degraded lands while sparing old-growth forests. Here, we examine the trajectory of an Amazonian-forest focal landscape as it experiences the expansion of oil palm and its interactions with multiple land-uses. Land-use composition, landscape spatial configuration and structure in a 765.65-km2 watershed were examined over a 16 -yr period (2002-2018) via Landsat imagery. Briefly, (1) old-growth forest coverage dropped from 37.3 % to 18.3 % across the whole landscape, (2) secondary forest and arable fields expanded until 2014, and (3) oil palm plantations emerged in 2010 with a positive trend thereafter, resulting in an 11.9 % expansion until 2018. In 2018, only 140.7 km2 of old-growth forest persisted, while oil palm plantations covered 91.8 km2. Oil palm expansion resulted from 14 land-use trajectories, with changes involving old-growth forests accounting for half the area (48.1 %) covered by plantations in 2018. However, only 0.4 % of the plantation area resulted from a direct conversion of old-growth forests. Landscape structure became increasingly degraded, which included the elimination of gallery forests, the proliferation of edge-affected habitats and the collapse of forest structural connectivity. Our results suggest that the eastern Amazon is still experiencing forest loss and exhibit highly dynamic land-use changes. Furthermore, landscapes continue to suffer degradation of key attributes related to biodiversity persistence and the provision of ecosystem services. Oil palm plantations have a catalytic effect on land-use dynamics, speeding up forest shrinking and landscape degradation. The oil palm sector requires a better governance based on guidelines able to guarantee either the persistence or the emergence of biodiversity-friendly landscapes.
Old-growth forest loss and secondary forest recovery across Amazonian countries			There is growing recognition of the potential of large-scale forest restoration in the Amazon as a 'nature-based solution' to climate change. However, our knowledge of forest loss and recovery beyond Brazil is limited, and carbon emissions and accumulation have not been estimated for the whole biome. Combining a 33 year land cover dataset with estimates of above-ground biomass and carbon sequestration rates, we evaluate forest loss and recovery across nine Amazonian countries and at a local scale. We also estimate the role of secondary forests in offsetting old-growth deforestation emissions and explore the temporal trends in forest loss and recovery. We find secondary forests across the biome to have offset just 9.7% of carbon emissions from old-growth deforestation, despite occupying 28.8% of deforested land. However, these numbers varied between countries ranging from 9.0% in Brazil to 23.8% in Guyana for carbon offsetting, and 24.8% in Brazil to 56.9% in Ecuador for forest area recovery. We reveal a strong, negative spatial relationship between old-growth forest loss and recovery by secondary forests, showing that regions with the greatest potential for large-scale restoration are also those that currently have the lowest recovery (e.g. Brazil dominates deforestation and emissions but has the lowest recovery). In addition, a temporal analysis of the regions that were >80% deforested in 1997 shows a continued decline in overall forest cover. Our findings identify three important challenges: (a) incentivising large-scale restoration in highly deforested regions, (b) protecting secondary forests without disadvantaging landowners who depend on farm-fallow systems, and (c) preventing further deforestation. Combatting all these successfully is essential to ensuring that the Amazon biome achieves its potential in mitigating anthropogenic climate change.
On the forest cover-water yield debate: from demand- to supply-side thinking			Several major articles from the past decade and beyond conclude the impact of reforestation or afforestation on water yield is negative: additional forest cover will reduce and removing forests will raise downstream water availability. A second group of authors argue the opposite: planting additional forests should raise downstream water availability and intensify the hydrologic cycle. Obtaining supporting evidence for this second group of authors has been more difficult due to the larger scales at which the positive effects of forests on the water cycle may be seen. We argue that forest cover is inextricably linked to precipitation. Forest-driven evapotranspiration removed from a particular catchment contributes to the availability of atmospheric moisture vapor and its cross-continental transport, raising the likelihood of precipitation events and increasing water yield, in particular in continental interiors more distant from oceans. Seasonal relationships heighten the importance of this phenomenon. We review the arguments from different scales and perspectives. This clarifies the generally beneficial relationship between forest cover and the intensity of the hydrologic cycle. While evidence supports both sides of the argument trees can reduce runoff at the small catchment scale at larger scales, trees are more clearly linked to increased precipitation and water availability. Progressive deforestation, land conversion from forest to agriculture and urbanization have potentially negative consequences for global precipitation, prompting us to think of forest ecosystems as global public goods. Policy-making attempts to measure product water footprints, estimate the value of ecosystem services, promote afforestation, develop drought mitigation strategies and otherwise manage land use must consider the linkage of forests to the supply of precipitation.
On the value of temporary carbon: A comment on Kirschbaum			A recent paper by Miko Kirschbaum (Mitigat Adapt Strategies Glob Change 11(5-6):1151-1164, 2006) argues that temporary carbon (C) storage has "virtually no climate-change mitigation value." However, temporary carbon has value in delaying global warming that needs to be recognized in carbon accounting methodologies. The conclusions reached are very sensitive to any value that is attached to time. Basing analysis exclusively on the maximum temperature reached within a 100-year time frame ignores other important impacts of global warming that also need to be included when mitigation strategies are assessed. The relative weightings for long-term versus short-term impacts represent policy choices that result in a greater or a lesser value being attributed to temporary carbon, but that value should not be zero. Global warming is too formidable an enemy to allow us the luxury of discarding part of our arsenal in fighting against it. Both reducing fossil-fuel combustion and increasing biosphere carbon stocks are needed. © 2007 Springer Science+Business Media, B.V.
Opportunities for Small-Scale Forestry in Carbon Markets			This paper presents an explanatory framework of how greenhouse gas emissions offsets produced from natural and planted forests ('carbon forestry') feature in voluntary and regulated carbon markets. An introduction to the convoluted policy malaise surrounding the use of forests in regulated carbon markets is also presented. Whilst there are many opportunities and potential benefits of using forests to produce offsets, relatively few carbon forestry projects currently exist, particularly in regulated carbon markets. This seems due to financial, institutional and administrative obstacles, with prohibitive transaction costs often cited as the most prominent constraint to expanded carbon forestry development. The papers in this special issue present a wide coverage of carbon forestry development policy issues. The special issue provides a unique insight into the state of carbon forestry globally and highlights the pressing need for policy and market reform to facilitate more sustainable carbon forestry development.
Opportunity costs of conserving a dry tropical forest under REDD plus : The case of the spiny dry forest in southwestern Madagascar			Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD +) has been identified as a potentially cost-effective climate change mitigation strategy. The success of REDD + in preventing deforestation and degradation in dry forests will depend partly on whether financial incentives for forest conservation can cover smallholders' opportunity costs of forgone uses of the forest. We therefore compared the opportunity costs of the main forest use activities (slash-and-burn agriculture or charcoal production) with potential benefits from the sale of carbon credits under REDD + from a smallholder perspective for a case study in southwestern Madagascar. Calculations are based on an assessment of carbon stocks in the dry spiny forests as well as benefit and cost data from interviews with smallholders. To assess the risks and uncertainties associated with opportunity costs and the REDD + benefits, we used a Monte Carlo modeling approach. We compare net present values for opportunity costs and potential community profits from REDD + at discount rates of 5% and 20% over a project period of 25 years. Our results show that REDD + community profits can outweigh the profits from charcoal production and the profits from slash-and-burn agriculture in 54-57% of the cases, despite opportunity costs being highly variable for both land uses. Charcoal production in particular has low opportunity costs as smallholders only engage in this activity when no other sources of income are available. The case study shows that potential REDD + payments can provide sufficient financial incentives to preserve dry forests with low carbon stocks but relatively low opportunity costs of preservation.
Optimal plot size and shape for sampling growing stocks and tree species diversity in tropical forests: Results from a forest inventory in Hazarikhil Wildlife Sanctuary of Bangladesh			Tropical Forests play a significant role in providing ecosystem services such as biomass carbon, timber, and tree species diversity. However, variations in sampling layouts such as plot sizes and shapes in forest inventory can cause discrepancies in the estimation of tree biomass carbon, thus hindering planning, sustainable forest management, and conservation of tropical forests. We estimated tree growing stocks (tree density, seedling density, basal area, stand volume, and above-ground biomass carbon) and tree species diversity (Shannon-Wiener Index and Jaccard Index) using different sampling layout in Hazarikhil Wildlife Sanctuary (HWS) of Southeastern Bangladesh. The results obtained from different plot sizes and shapes were compared to those derived from a complete enumeration of 1 ha (10,000 m2) of the same forest land. We also estimated coefficient of variation (CV %) and evaluated optimal plot size and shape in terms of estimation accuracy and time efficiency. The survey was carried out in 450 concentric plots (50 points with three sample plot sizes of 400, 900, and 1134 m2 under circular, rectangular, and square plot shapes) where all trees and bamboo with a DBH of >= 5 cm were measured. Moreover, three subplots with a size of 4, 9, and 20 m2 were placed to count the number of seedlings in three different shapes, thus making a total of 450 subplots in 50 points. Our results revealed that tree density, basal area, stand volume and AGBC were 4652, 38 m2, 526 m3, and 98 Mg per hectare, respectively, in the complete enumeration. Tree growing stocks and Shannon-Wiener index estimated in the large (1134 m2) circular plots were close to those in the complete enumeration. The seedling density in small circular subplots was highest. The lower CV% values observed for all these attributes in large circular plots indicated higher accuracy in estimation. We recommend, large (1134 m2) circular plots to estimate growing stocks and tree species diversity while large (19 m2) circular subplots to estimate seedling density in hill forests.
Optimal restoration for pollination services increases forest cover while doubling agricultural profits			Pollinators are currently facing dramatic declines in abundance and richness across the globe. This can have profound impacts on agriculture, as 75% of globally common food crops benefit from pollination services. As many native bee species require natural areas for nesting, restoration efforts within croplands may be beneficial to support pollinators and enhance agricultural yields. Yet, restoration can be challenging to implement due to large upfront costs and the removal of land from production. Designing sustainable landscapes will require planning approaches that include the complex spatiotemporal dynamics of pollination services flowing from (restored) vegetation into crops. We present a novel planning framework to determine the best spatial arrangement for restoration in agricultural landscapes while accounting for yield improvements over 40 years following restoration. We explored a range of production and conservation goals using a coffee production landscape in Costa Rica as a case study. Our results show that strategic restoration can increase forest cover by approximately 20% while doubling collective landholder profits over 40 years, even when accounting for land taken out of production. We show that restoration can provide immense economic benefits in the long run, which may be pivotal to motivating local landholders to undertake conservation endeavours in pollinator-dependent croplands.
OPTIONS FOR MITIGATING GREENHOUSE-GAS EMISSIONS IN VENEZUELA FOREST SECTOR - A GENERAL OVERVIEW			The objective of this paper is to analyze alternatives within the forest sector for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and enhancing carbon sinks in Venezuela. Forest clearing represents a major source of carbon emissions in the country, accounting for more than 40% of carbon dioxide and 33% of carbon monoxide emissions.The first section of the paper provides a general description of the forest resources and the forest sector in Venezuela and a brief summary of the estimated greenhouse gas emissions associated with forest clearing. The second section presents a detailed analysis of two case studies based on ongoing forest projects, an industrial plantation and a managed protected area. Our analysis assesses the value of these two projects as mitigation options. The third section provides an overview of Venezuela's potential for conserving and sequestering carbon based on technically available land where several options could be implemented The results of the case studies are used here to provide a very rough estimate of the carbon sequestration potential at a national level, based on native forest management, plantations, agroforestry, and forestry protection. Our preliminary results indicate that forest management and forest protection might be the most promising mitigation options for Venezuela. However, given the broad scope of the study and the data uncertainties, the results of our analysis should be viewed as a first attempt to evaluate the carbon benefits derived from the adoption of such measures.
Organic farming enhances soil carbon and nitrogen dynamics in oil palm crops from Southeast Amazon			The expansion of oil palm (Elaeis guineensis Jacq, Arecaceae) crops threatens tropical rainforests. It negatively impacts a series of ecosystem services and functions, including carbon (C) sequestration and dynamics, as well as nutrient cycling. Such negative impacts have pressured companies to adopt conservationist practices in palm oil production. And yet the conversion from conventional to organic farming has gained space in the last decade, studies assessing the effects of organic oil palm crops on ecosystem functioning are still scarce. Here, we assessed how alternative farming practices affect organic matter dynamics in oil palm crops. We compared oil palm crops under conventional (CP) and organic (OP) farming in Southeast Amazon. We also sampled lowland dense ombrophilous forest (floresta densa de terra firme, FT) as reference. Soils were sampled at 0-10, 10-20, and 20-30 cm depth intervals to determine soil physical-chemical properties and C and nitrogen (N) concentrations and stocks. The highest soil C and N concentrations were found at 0-10 cm interval in CP and OP. We detected no variation in soil C and N stocks within depth intervals in FT and CP, while OP had higher soil C and N stocks at the 0-10 cm interval. When comparing OP and CP crops, soil C concentrations and stocks did not vary within zones or depth intervals. All OP zones had higher soil N concentrations and stocks than their conventional counterparts, and we found a variation within depth intervals. Our results show that organic farming has positively influenced organic matter dynamics. Organic oil palm crops preserved and even increased C and N sequestration.
Organic matter decomposition and associated microbial communities in wetlands: insights from tropical and subtropical Melaleuca forests in Australia			Wetlands are characterised by soils rich in organic matter that accumulate carbon, providing an important pathway for carbon dioxide sequestration. Nevertheless, not all the carbon fixed can be accumulated, and a proportion will decompose through microbial consumption and be partly released into the atmosphere. Rates of organic matter decomposition in tropical wetlands and the factors associated with this process are scarce. We conducted a 2-year field study in three Melaleuca wetlands in tropical and subtropical Australia using standardised tea litter substrates (green-labile and rooibos-recalcitrant) to measure organic matter decomposition and the microbial communities associated with this process. Decomposition rates were 4-fold higher in labile litter, which was low in carbon: nitrogen, compared to recalcitrant litter. The prokaryotic communities associated with the decomposing litter were unique at each site and different from the soil. They contained taxonomic groups adapted to anaerobic, high temperatures, acidic conditions and suggestive of slow anaerobic turnover. Microbial communities changed as decomposition progressed, with the latter characterised by taxa with cellulose-degrading functions. The decomposition of recalcitrant organic matter within Melaleuca soils was relatively slow, with half of the organic matter inputs remaining after two years, supporting long-term carbon sequestration.
Organic Wastes and Tropical Forest Restoration			In a recent publication, we documented the benefits of using agricultural waste (specifically, leftover orange peels from a commercial orange juice factory) to promote forest recovery at a site in Costa Rica. While we showed unambiguously positive impacts on soil conditions, forest biomass, and tree diversity, our ability to infer mechanisms behind this recovery was limited because the project was never replicated. It appears our work is one of only a handful of peer-reviewed studies testing the use of unprocessed agricultural waste as part of a tropical forest restoration initiative. We argue that regardless of the mechanism, there are first-principle reasons to expect that minimally processed (and thus low-cost) agricultural wastes could be utilized to accelerate tropical forest restoration in a variety of contexts, potentially creating a new class of biodiversity-friendly carbon offsets that may address previous concerns about linking tropical forestry to global carbon markets. We outline research initiatives that could lead to a richer understanding of when and where it is safe and effective to utilize agricultural and other wastes in tropical forest restoration endeavors.
Partitioning main carbon pools in a semi-deciduous rainforest in eastern Cameroon			Tropical forests contribute to climate change mitigation by absorbing carbon from the atmosphere and storing this in biomass and soil organic matter. However, there is still considerable uncertainty about the above- and belowground quantity and distribution of carbon stocks in African forests. Here, we evaluate how different carbon pools (aboveground live biomass, aboveground dead biomass, belowground biomass) contribute to total carbon stocks, and how different carbon components (e.g. large trees, understorey trees, coarse woody debris, roots, soil organic carbon etc.) contribute to carbon pools and total carbon stocks. We evaluated data of extensive inventories within 30 1-ha plots spanning the terra-finne semi-deciduous forest in eastern Cameroon. Hence, the plots were placed at a mean distance of 1 km from the nearest plot and we analyzed the data using variation partitioning, linear regressions and correlation tests. We found that the terra-firme semi-deciduous forests store 283.97 +/- 51.42 Mg C ha(-1). The aboveground biomass pool, with a carbon stock of 180.99 +/- 25.8 Mg C ha(-1), mostly explained variation in total carbon stocks (R-2 = 0.79). From all aboveground biomass components, carbon in large trees was most strongly correlated with total carbon stocks. The second most important carbon pool was belowground carbon (on average 85.06 +/- 16.86 Mg C ha(-1) ; R-2 = 0.78), mainly explained by coarse root carbon. Carbon in dead biomass had only a small contribution to total carbon stocks (R-2 = 0.04). Hence, our results indicate that aboveground live biomass is a good predictor for variation in total carbon storage within this semi-deciduous terra-firme forest. However, aboveground live carbon and belowground carbon and their interactions explained most of the variation in total carbon stock, indicating that a whole-ecosystem approach is necessary for a full understanding of the carbon cycle.
Passive restoration following ungulate removal in a highly disturbed tropical wet forest devoid of native seed dispersers			Overabundant ungulate populations can alter forests. Concurrently, global declines of seed dispersers may threaten native forest structure and function. On an island largely devoid of native vertebrate seed dispersers, we monitored forest succession for 7 years following ungulate exclusion from a 5-ha area and adjacent plots with ungulates still present. We observed succession from open scrub to forest and understory cover by non-native plants declined. Two trees, native Hibiscus tiliaceus and non-native Leucaena leucocephala, accounted for most forest regeneration, with the latter dominant. Neither species is dependent on animal dispersers nor was there strong evidence that plants dependent on dispersers migrated into the 5-ha study area. Passive restoration following ungulate removal may facilitate restoration, but did not show promise for fully restoring native forest on Guam. Restoration of native forest plants in bird depopulated areas will likely require active outplanting of native seedlings, control of factors resulting in bird loss, and reintroduction of seed dispersers. © 2017 Society for Ecological Restoration
Pastures as natural climate solutions: A socioecological study of tree carbon and beef production trade-offs			Sustainable management strategies that facilitate the incorporation of trees into cattle pastures are widely recognized as emerging natural climate solutions. However, their potential to dually improve ecological functioning and human livelihoods has yet to be evaluated across regions on local scales, utilizing both ecological and sociological data. Further, the relationship between landowner participation in conservation management programs (CMPS) and their management priorities (i.e. production vs sustainability) also remains unclear. Therefore, the aims of this study were to evaluate the accuracy of past global-scale remote estimations of aboveground biomass and derived tree carbon density (MgC ha- 1) within pasturelands at the local scale in both temperate and tropical regions. We also sought to analyze how participation in CMPs related to the perceptions of stakeholders toward the ecological health of their system. We compared findings between farms in temperate (n = 26) and tropical (n = 16) ecosystems. We found that discrepancies exist between previous remote studies and current field estimations of tree carbon in the farms, and these differences were not regionally uniform. In contrast, stakeholders enrolled in CMPs had a higher value of trees in both regions. CMPs participants also had lower annual stocking rates than those that practiced conventional management but no differences in woody species diversity (H') or tree carbon (MgC ha- 1). We demonstrate the urgent need for local-scale studies to accurately estimate tree carbon in mosaic pasture systems and the importance of conservation management in shifting the priorities of landowners, which could eventually lead to more sustainable systems.
Paths of destruction and regeneration: Globalization and forests in the tropics			Globalization has spatially and temporally varied effects on forest cover in the tropics. It destroys primary forests (first nature) in some places at the same time that it creates secondary and scrub growth (second nature) in other places. In any one region, globalization first destroys forest and then induces some regrowth. It also contributes to the emergence of persistent rural poverty in tropical regions. Although forest destruction and regeneration would appear to have mutually offsetting environmental effects, the first effect is stronger than the second, so globalization exerts a negative net influence on biodiversity conservation and carbon sequestration. Case studies of change in forest cover in southeast Asia and west Africa illustrate these processes.
Pathways to positive scenarios for the Amazon forest in Para state, Brazil			Infrastructure projects and agriculture expansion are increasingly threatening forest conservation in Para state (Brazil). It becomes necessary to address the implications of these activities on the Amazon complex socio-ecological system, considering both material and non-material aspects of Nature's Contributions to People (NCP). Multiple studies developed future scenarios for the Amazon, but only a few have focused on discussing positive futures derived from policies and interventions based on conservation and human well-being. Here, we aim at understanding the drivers of forest cover change to produce positive scenarios for the future of the Amazon forest in Para state. By using the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) conceptual framework, we identified as direct drivers of forest cover change: (i) roads construction; (ii) forest degradation; (iii) hydropower projects; (iv) urban expansion; (v) agriculture and pasture expansion; (vi) rural land occupation; (vii) mining; (viii) climate change. As indirect drivers we identified: (i) energy demand; (ii) population growth; (iii) land prices; (iv) commodity demand; (v) consumption behavior. The development of conservation strategies in the borders of deforested areas is needed given the high demand for Nature ' s Contributions to People supply. We also propose policies to address the main drivers of forest cover change, influencing land management and consumption behavior in the state. At last, we envision future positive scenarios that would emerge from policy applications and sustainable actions. Based on our study, we discuss the importance of social learning for developing pathways leading to positive futures that consider the integrity and development of both ecological and social systems.
Pathways to win-wins or trade-offs? How certified community forests impact forest restoration and human wellbeing			Certified community forests combine local governance with forest certification and aim to serve multiple objectives including forest protection, restoration, human wellbeing and equitable governance. However, the causal pathways by which they impact these objectives remain poorly understood. The ability of protected area impact evaluations to identify complex pathways is limited by a narrow focus on top-down theoretical, quantitative perspectives and inadequate consideration of local context. We used a novel mixed-methods research design that integrates the perspectives of multiple actors to develop a generalized conceptual model of the causal pathways for certified community forests. We tested the model using a combination of statistical matching, structural equation modelling and qualitative analyses for an agroforestry landscape in Tanzania. We found certified community forests positively impacted human wellbeing, equitable governance and forest restoration. Equitable governance had the largest impact on wellbeing, followed by crop yield and forest resource availability. Timber revenues varied widely between villages and the average effect of financial benefits did not impact wellbeing due to the immature stage of the certified timber market. We identified positive interactions and trade-offs between conservation and agriculture. Our findings suggest that no simple solution exists for meeting multiple objectives. However, developing understanding of the pathways linking social and conservation outcomes can help identify opportunities to promote synergies and mitigate negative impacts to reconcile competing objectives.This article is part of the theme issue 'Understanding forest landscape restoration: reinforcing scientific foundations for the UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration'.
Patterns and controls on island-wide aboveground biomass accumulation in second-growth forests of Puerto Rico			Understanding the heterogeneity of biomass accumulation in second-growth tropical forests following land use abandonment is important for informing ecosystem carbon models and forest restoration efforts. There is an urgent need for a broad sample of second-growth forests to enhance our knowledge of carbon accumulation in human-dominated landscapes, especially for older forests. Puerto Rico has predominantly second-growth forests, ranging in age from approximately 25 to more than 80 years. We used an island-wide sample of airborne lidar from the NASA Goddard Lidar, Hyperspectral, and Thermal (G-LiHT) Airborne Imager collected on March 2017, forest inventory data, and data on forest age, precipitation, soils, and land use to estimate aboveground biomass stocks in moist and wet, second-growth tropical forests. Biomass accumulation rates in Puerto Rico were lower, on average, than in other Neotropical forests. Median biomass across >16,700 ha of older second-growth forests was 105 Mg ha−1, and sampled biomass rarely surpassed 250 Mg ha−1. Differences in biomass by age were large and persistent across different substrates and land uses, with a plateau in the pattern of island-wide biomass accumulation after about 33 years. A spatial regression model showed that multiple factors were related to biomass accumulation, including time since abandonment, geologic substrate, past land use as coffee or pasture, precipitation, topographic wetness index, and slope. Our findings have important consequences for the total carbon storage and expected climate mitigation benefits of large-scale reforestation efforts, and highlight the value of airborne lidar for quantifying biomass variability in complex tropical landscapes. Abstract in Spanish is available with online material. © 2022 The Authors. Biotropica published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation.
Patterns and drivers of atmospheric nitrogen deposition retention in global forests			Forests are the largest carbon sink in terrestrial ecosystems, and the impact of nitrogen (N) deposition on this carbon sink depends on the fate of external N inputs. However, the patterns and driving factors of N retention in different forest compartments remain elusive. In this study, we synthesized 408 observations from global forest N-15 tracer experiments to reveal the variation and underlying mechanisms of N-15 retention in plants and soils. The results showed that the average total ecosystem N-15 retention in global forests was 63.04 +/- 1.23%, with the soil pool being the main N sink (45.76 +/- 1.29%). Plants absorbed 17.28 +/- 0.83% of N-15, with more allocated to leaves (5.83 +/- 0.63%) and roots (5.84 +/- 0.44%). In subtropical and tropical forests, N-15 was mainly absorbed by plants and mineral soils, while the organic soil layer in temperate forests retained more N-15. Additionally, forests retained more (NH4+)-N-15 than (NO3-)-N-15 , primarily due to the stronger capacity of the organic soil layer to retain (NH4+)-N-15. The mechanisms of N-15 retention varied among ecosystem compartments, with total ecosystem N-15 retention affected by N deposition. Plant N-15 retention was influenced by vegetative and microbial nutrient demands, while soil N-15 retention was regulated by climate factors and soil nutrient supply. Overall, this study emphasizes the importance of climate and nutrient supply and demand in regulating forest N retention and provides data to further explore the impacts of N deposition on forest carbon sequestration.
Patterns of biodiversity response along a gradient of forest use in Eastern Amazonia, Brazil			The preservation of tropical forests is increasingly at risk, including forests located within human-modified landscapes that retain high conservation value. People modify and interact with these landscapes through a wide range of uses. However, our knowledge of how different forest uses affect biodiversity is limited. Here, we analyse the responses of different taxa to four distinct categories of forest management, namely old-growth forest, Brazil nut extraction areas, reduced impact logging areas, and eucalyptus plantations. Within six independent replicates of each category, we sampled three taxa (fruit-feeding butterflies, dung beetles, and trees) in eastern Amazonia. Forests under moderate use (Brazil nut extraction and reduced-impact logging) had similar, albeit slightly lower, diversity levels relative to old-growth forests, while communities in plantations were significantly less diverse. Only 4%, 20%, and 17%, of the sampled butterfly, dung beetle, and tree species, respectively, were restricted to old-growth forests. This study provides further empirical evidence of the importance of old-growth forest conservation in the context of human-modified landscapes. It also suggests that landscape matrices integrating forest uses at varying intensities are well positioned to reconcile biodiversity conservation with the production of goods that support local livelihoods.
Patterns of fine root mass and distribution along a disturbance gradient in a tropical montane forest, Central Sulawesi (Indonesia)			Large parts of the remaining tropical moist forests of South-east Asia are encroached at their margins by selective logging, rattan harvesting and the establishment of small agroforest plantations under the rainforest canopy. These slight to heavy disturbances affect aboveground forest structure by reducing wood biomass and canopy cover; however, they may also have a profound impact on the belowground compartment. In a lower montane moist forest of Central Sulawesi, we studied the profile totals of fine root biomass (FRBtot, roots <2 mm until 50 cm of soil depth) and of fine root necromass (FRN tot), the vertical distribution of fine root mass, and the fine root live/dead ratio by root coring in 12 forest stands that represented a gradient in forest use (or disturbance) intensity (forest use type A: undisturbed natural forest, B and C: slightly or moderately disturbed forests with selective timber extraction, D: heavily disturbed cacao agroforest systems under a remaining rainforest cover; each forest types being replicated three times). FRB tot decreased significantly from forest A to the disturbed B, C and D forests, and reached less than 60% of the FRBtot value of A in the agroforest systems D. A similar decrease with increasing disturbance intensity was found for FRNtot. Forest disturbance intensity had no significant influence on the vertical distribution of fine root biomass in the profiles. According to correlation and principal components analyses, fractional canopy cover was the most important factor influencing FRBtot and FRN tot, whereas diameter at breast height, stand basal area, stem density, soil pH and base saturation had only a minor or no influence on root mass. A reduction in canopy cover from 90% (forest type A) to 75% (types C and D) was associated with a reduction in FRBtot by about 45% which indicates that timber extraction leads not only to canopy gaps but to corresponding 'root gaps' in the soil as well. We conclude that forest encroachment that is widespread in large parts of South-east Asia's remaining rainforests significantly reduces tree fine root biomass and associated carbon sequestration, even if it is conducted at moderate intensities only. © Springer 2006.
Patterns of forest community diversity, regeneration potential and carbon storages along an altitudinal gradient in Eastern Himalaya, India			This study showed changing patterns in the plant species composition, diversity, and carbon storage potential of different forests along altitudinal gradients (i.e. 100 - 1900 m) in Eastern Himalayan India. Different tree, shrub and herb species were sampled along the altitudinal gradients ranging from tropical to temperate forests through Nested Plot design. In each forest, vegetation sampling was made by establishing a permanent plot of 250 m x 250 m as per ISRO-GBP/NCP-VCP protocol. Individuals of trees >= 10 cm girth at breast height (GBH), shrubs and herbs were recorded in 4, 8 and 16 subplots of 31.62 m x 31.62 m, 5 m x 5 m and 1 m x 1 m, respectively. Community attributes such as species richness, density, basal area, diversity indices and biomass and carbon storages were computed for each study site. A total of 5 forest communities (2 each from tropical and subtropical and one from temperate forest) were identified. The woody species diversity was highest in the subtropical forest followed by tropical and temperate forest. Altitude played an important role in the Eastern Himalayan Mountains in the establishment and distribution of forest community. Forest community composition changes with elevation, for instance, the dominant communities like Dipterocarpus retusus-Phoebe goalparensis-Schima wallichii (D-PS), Gmelina arborea-Schima wallichii-Duabanga grandiflora (G-S-D), Schima wallichii-Duabanga grandiflora-Alstonia scholaris (S-D-A), Alstonia scholaris-Terminalia myriocarpa-Bischofia javanica (A-T-B) and Acer thomsonii-Rhodendron arboreum-Quercus lamellose (A-R-Q) were present at elevational ranges of 100-300 m, 300-700 m, 700-1100 m, 1100-1500 m and 1500-1900 m, respectively. The study showed that about 41-57% of the tree species exhibited good regeneration followed by 23-30% as fair, 6-16% as poor, and 6-21% species did not show regeneration along the altitudinal gradient. The total biomass carbon (Mg C ha-1) varied from 84.74 to 163.56 in tropical, 103.12 - 156.41 in subtropical and 133.05 in temperate forest. In conclusion, community composition, regeneration pattern and biomass carbon storage changes along altitude because of altered biophysical characteristics. However, despite variations in elevation, factors for forest disturbance at different altitudes significantly contributed to the community attributes and overall accumulation of biomass carbon. Hence, the traditional management practices carried out by local communities also play a crucial role in shaping the structure, composition, and carbon dynamics of forest ecosystems. Understanding the impacts of these practices is essential for promoting sustainable forest management by conserving forests and preserving carbon stocks for mitigating climate change in future. This study emphasizes the importance of long-term forest monitoring to promote biodiversity conservation and formulate conservation strategies that support sustainable forest management policies to which ensure continuous provision of ecosystem services in the region.
Patterns of litter and nutrient return to the soil during passive restoration in Cerrado, Brazil			Passive restoration offer better preservation for the diverse legacy of forest ecosystems, but many interactions on the restoration process remain poorly understood. In this study, the seasonality of accumulated litter layer, nutrient content, potential return, and soil quality were evaluated under the initial (subjected to 11-year) and advanced (subjected to 46-year) passive restoration conditions in Cerrado, Brazil. Measurements were carried out for a period of one year. Accumulated litter layer, nutrient content, potential return, and nutrient use efficiency were 50%, 43%, 13%, and 42% higher in the advanced passive restoration site compared to the initial restoration site. For both sites, the annual litter content followed the order: N > Ca > K > Mg > P > Fe > Mn > B > Zn > Cu. Significant increases in soil organic matter and cation exchange capacity were found in the advanced passive restoration. The annual average had shown a higher macronutrient concentration in the soil for the initial restoration, while a higher micronutrient concentration was found for the advanced restoration. The seasonality affected the accumulated litter layer, litter nutrients, potential return and soil quality. Some litter and soil nutrients were significantly correlated, evidencing the nutrient associations between litter and soil. Hence, both the passive restoration stages and rain were factors that regulated the temporal patterns of accumulated litter layer as well as the nutrient cycling in Cerrado passive restoration models. © 2022, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Plant Science and Biodiversity Centre, Slovak Academy of Sciences (SAS), Institute of Zoology, Slovak Academy of Sciences (SAS), Institute of Molecular Biology, Slovak Academy of Sciences (SAS).
Pay, talk or 'whip' to conserve forests: Framed field experiments in Zambia			Despite many efforts to conserve tropical forests, high rates of deforestation and forest degradation continue, threatening the products and environmental services they supply. We conducted framed field experiments (FFEs) in Zambia to test, ex-ante, the impacts of different conservation policies: community forest management (CFM), command and control (CAC), and two versions of payments for environmental services (PES). Our FFEs mimicked how local dwellers use forests in real life. Relative to open access (OA), PES to individuals reduced harvest by 15 percentage points (pp) while CFM reduced harvest rates by 8 pp. We conjecture that free and easy-riding, combined with uncertainty on how others will reciprocate, dampens the positive effects of group-based PES. Impatience and risk-loving among participants significantly increased harvest rates while pro-social behavior (altruism) was associated with more pro-conservation. We conclude that conservation outcomes might be achieved by combinations of CFM and individual PES, by which individual households receive clear material benefits that compensate for their reduced forest use. (C) 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Payment for environmental services to reduce deforestation: Do the positive effects last?			Are the forest conservation practices sustained after Payment for Environmental Services (PES) programmes end? Using a sample of 268 (former) PES recipients and non-recipients from the Budongo-Bugoma PES programme in Western Uganda, we employ the before-after-control-intervention (difference-in-difference) approach to esti-mate the PES programme outcome on their privately owned forests. PES is associated with less deforestation during the operational period, but the link has vanished four years after programme termination. We label this weak permanence, i.e., PES recipients abandon the induced practices soon after the programme ended, but the gains (relatively higher forest cover) during the operational period are maintained. We also find that household and contextual variables are important in explaining PES permanence: low levels of agricultural land and remoteness from agricultural markets weaken PES permanence. Therefore monetary payments alone may be insufficient for lasting forest conservation. Integrating PES with other approaches, such as climate-smart agri-culture may result in more permanent reductions in deforestation.
Payment for environmental services: Forest conservation and poverty alleviation in a tropical region of Mexico			Payment for environmental services (PES) is a scheme that seeks to reduce human pressure on forest ecosystems by financially rewarding forest landowners for conserving their forests. However, in Mexico, the program is questioned because it prioritizes communities in the poorest regions over areas with a high risk of deforestation. This study evaluates the effectiveness of the PES program for forest cover conservation and poverty alleviation in a tropical region of Mexico. Deforestation and forest cover maintenance was determined by land use/cover change analysis using GIS. Effect on poverty alleviation was analyzed qualitatively in two communities. In the study area, 4738 ha of tropical and temperate forests were deforested during 2007-2017. The deforestation rate is similar in ejidos and private properties with and without PES. Most ejidos where deforestation occurred correspond to areas with higher economic development. Deforestation and the percentage of the population living in poverty are negatively correlated. Compared to other subsidies, the PES represents very low income, nevertheless, the social perception of the program is positive. Based on the lower percentage of deforestation avoided in the poorest areas and the minimal impact on livelihoods, the current PES approach is not highly effective.
Payment for water-ecosystem services monitoring in Brazil			Abstract The reduction of tropical forests has generated a loss of ecosystem services across the globe. In Brazil, essential biomes related to water provision (such as the Atlantic Forest and Savanna) have been degraded, compromising water-ecosystem services. Payment for water-ecosystem services (water PES) has been implemented as a tool to stimulate changes in the use and management of these areas. Many water PES projects have emerged in Brazil using forest restoration, aiming to improve water ecosystem services. In this context, this study identified the types of monitoring carried out in Brazilian water PES projects, to include their main characteristics and gaps. Five Brazilian projects were selected for analysis as case studies. Interviews were then conducted with stakeholders to get current data on their monitoring practices. The data from the literature review, case study approach, and interviews were analyzed from the perspective of monitoring guides recommendations. Different aspects were analyzed, such as objectives, institutional arrangements, type of monitoring, indicators, and frequency of monitoring. The study indicates that there is a lack of standardized methods, making it difficult to specify the results of the implemented actions. The central gap is related to benefit monitoring. It is necessary to establish a holistic monitoring system, dealing with the ecosystem as a complex socio-ecological system. Some perspectives to solve the problems were proposed. The results of this work may help not only improve the current and future PES schemes in Brazil but also in other countries, especially developing ones, where vulnerable populations depend upon them. Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Payments for Ecosystem Services as Incentives for Collective Action			The design and thriving of payments for ecosystem services (PES) have occurred as a response to the relative failure of integrated strategies for reconciling conservation and development. The most widespread definition of PES conceives these payments as markets to solve environmental externalities. This article analyzes the limitations of this Coasean approach using insights from transaction costs economics, and it pleads for looking at PES with different analytical lenses. It argues that PES should be seen as incentives for collective action. However, the extent to which incentives can contribute to the management of ES should not be taken for granted. The effects of monetary incentives are determined by their social meanings, which are context and culture dependent. The proposed conceptual shift has significant analytical and practical implications.
Payments for ecosystem services in Amazonia. The challenge of land use heterogeneity in agricultural frontiers near Cruzeiro do Sul (Acre, Brazil)			Amazonia became a target area for Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES) initiatives in deforestation. We analysed the implementation of a PES scheme in Acre (Brazil) by taking into account land use heterogeneity in an agricultural frontier. Justified by the modernisation of deforestation control policies, the programme promotes agricultural intensification through fire-free practices. In this way, the PES tends to focus on long-established settlements, where farmers are wealthier and the landscape is dominated by pasture. Agricultural intensification may be adapted to foster reforestation. In order to curb deforestation a specific policy is needed for targeting remote areas where initial stages of deforestation usually take place. By promoting only land sparing, PES programmes in Amazonia may lose sight of their socio-economic and environmental objectives due to limited spatial targeting.
Payments for ecosystem services in forests: analysing innovations, policy debates and practical implementation			0
Payments for Pioneers? Revisiting the Role of External Rewards for Sustainable Innovation under Heterogeneous Motivations			Acknowledging the diversity of preferences, goals and motivations of individuals is key to promote the effectiveness of incentive-based conservation interventions. This paper analyses the heterogeneity of motivations to adopt silvopastoral practices, a social-ecological innovation for soil conservation and carbon emission reduction. We use Qmethodology to identify smallholders' views with regard to these practices in a community in the forest frontier in Chiapas (Mexico). The analysis uncovers three main perspectives: self-sufficient pioneers, environmentally-conscious followers and payment-dependent conservatives. We discuss these perspectives around three topics: smallholders' predisposition to adopt silvopastoral practices, their views about needing external payments to sustain their livelihood and the diffusion of innovative sustainable practices. We relate these perspectives with livelihood characteristics and with observed adoption levels under a pilot programme to promote silvopasture. Our findings suggest that incentives other than payments may be more appropriate for those more likely to adopt, and that payments could encourage rent-seeking strategies and not necessarily promote permanent behavioural change. We suggest ways for designing more effective and adaptive environmental conservation programmes to foster adoption and continuation of social-ecological innovations. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Peasants' Motivations to Maintain Vegetation of Tropical Dry Forests in Traditional Agroforestry Systems from Cuicatlan, Oaxaca, Mexico			The ways traditional rural communities conduct activities to meet their livelihoods commonly contribute to conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem functions. Traditional agroforestry systems (TAFS) are expressions of management that deliberately retain wild vegetation coexisting with crops to obtain multiple socio-ecological contributions. However, processes enhancing productive intensification endanger their permanence. This study aimed to 1) identify the peasants' motivations to maintain the vegetation of tropical dry forest within their agricultural fields, 2) analyze the capacity of TAFS to provide contributions to people's well-being, and 3) identify factors and processes limiting conservation capacities and possible alternatives. The study was conducted in three communities of the Tehuacan-Cuicatlan Valley, Oaxaca, Mexico. We performed a qualitative analysis with information from two workshops with local people, 10 semi-structured interviews with managers of TAFS, participant observation, complementary informal talks, and fieldwork notes. For analyzing the data, we: 1) generated a list of central themes based on the data collected, 2) established preliminary categories of such themes, 3) coded all information through the Atlas. ti software, 4) adjusted the classification of categories and codes to the data, 5) grouped codes and analyzed their relationships. We found that the peasants' motivations to maintain the wild vegetation are the provision of multiple beneficial contributions: material (edible fruit, medicinal plants, fodder, firewood), regulating (shade, soil fertility, humidity keeping, rain attraction), and nonmaterial (regional flavors, ornamental, ritual), among others, which meet some of their fundamental needs (primarily subsistence, identity, and protection). The main reasons for keeping the wild vegetation were material contributions (62%). Also, we observed that TAFS safeguarding a higher forest cover and species diversity provide a broader range of socio-ecological contributions and potential to satisfy human needs than those with lower cover. Peasant agriculture may allow maintaining biodiversity while satisfying fundamental human needs. However, it needs to be revitalized, made more efficient, profitable, and dignified. The agroecological management implemented by peasants in TAFS is crucial for ensuring the continuity of essential environmental functions and people's well-being.
Peatlands: Ecology, conservation and heritage			This book provides an introduction to peatlands for the non-specialist student reader and for all those concerned about environmental protection, and is an essential guide to peatland history and heritage for scientists and enthusiasts. Peat is formed when vegetation partially decays in a waterlogged environment and occurs extensively throughout both temperate and tropical regions. Interest in peatlands is currently high due to the degradation of global peatlands which is disrupting hydrology and contributing to greenhouse gas emissions. This book opens by explaining how peat is formed, its properties and worldwide distribution, and defines related terms such as mires, wetlands, bogs and marshes. There is discussion of the ecology and wildlife of peatlands as well as their ability to preserve pollen and organic remains as environmental archives. It also addresses the history, heritage and cultural exploitation of peat, extending back to pre-Roman times, and the degradation of peatlands over the centuries, particularly as a source of fuel but more recently for commercial horticulture. Other chapters discuss the ecosystem services delivered by peatlands, and how their destruction is contributing to biodiversity loss, flooding or drought, and climate change. Finally, the many current peatland restoration projects around the world are highlighted. Overall the book provides a wide-ranging but concise overview of peatlands from both a natural and social science perspective, and will be invaluable for students of ecology, geography, environmental studies and history. © 2020 Ian D. Rotherham.
People-Centric Nature-Based Land Restoration Through Agroforestry: A Typology			Restoration depends on purpose and context. At the core it entails innovation to halt ongoing and reverse past degradation. It aims for increased functionality, not necessarily recovering past system states. Location-specific interventions in social-ecological systems reducing proximate pressures, need to synergize with transforming generic drivers of unsustainable land use. After reviewing pantropical international research on forests, trees, and agroforestry, we developed an options-by-context typology. Four intensities of land restoration interact: R.I. Ecological intensification within a land use system, R.II. Recovery/regeneration, within a local social-ecological system, R.III. Reparation/recuperation, requiring a national policy context, R.IV. Remediation, requiring international support and investment. Relevant interventions start from core values of human identity while addressing five potential bottlenecks: Rights, Know-how, Markets (inputs, outputs, credit), Local Ecosystem Services (including water, agrobiodiversity, micro/mesoclimate) and Teleconnections (global climate change, biodiversity). Six stages of forest transition (from closed old-growth forest to open-field agriculture and re-treed (peri)urban landscapes) can contextualize interventions, with six special places: water towers, riparian zone and wetlands, peat landscapes, small islands and mangroves, transport infrastructure, and mining scars. The typology can help to link knowledge with action in people-centric restoration in which external stakeholders coinvest, reflecting shared responsibility for historical degradation and benefits from environmental stewardship.
Perceptions of and Adaptation to Environmental Change in Forest-Adjacent Communities in Three African Nations			Semi-structured interviews were used to explore how rural communities near forests are responding to environmental change in three African nations - Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea and Rwanda. The study first recounts people's perception of environmental change - what are the issues of greatest concern identified by local communities? Second, it explores people's responses to identified environmental problems and in particular the role of forests in these processes. Finally, it concludes with a discussion of changing land management practices, and how their implementation may affect the future adaptation strategies of such communities. Results suggest that people's current and potential responses and adaptation to environmental change are influenced by the availability and access to forests and forest resources, and the degree to which their livelihood strategies have diversified away from forest dependence. Thus we conclude that forest policies such as REDD+ will need to be responsive to diverse forest-based adaptation needs, rather than assuming a 'one size fits all' relationship between forest conservation and adaptation to climate change. © 2015, BioOne. All rights reserved.
Perceptions of ecosystem services provided by tropical forests to local populations in Cameroon			In Central Africa, local populations are deeply dependent on tropical forests, which provide numerous ecosystem services (ES). For the first time in Central Africa, we assessed the perceptions of ES provided by tropical forests to local populations, considering three land allocation types: a protected area, a Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)certified logging concession, and three community forests. We conducted a questionnaire survey with 225 forest stakeholders in southeastern Cameroon, combining an open-ended question and 16 directed questions to evaluate the perceptions of ES significance and abundance, respectively. The ES most frequently reported as significant were provisioning (93% of respondents) and cultural & amenity services (68%), whereas regulating services were less mentioned (16%). Bushmeat provision was the only ES perceived as highly significant but not very abundant. There were slight variations of perceptions among forest land allocation types and respondents, suggesting a relative homogeneity in ES abundance. For further integrative ES assessment, we suggest quantifying ES with complementary ecological and economic approaches, such as meat provision, recreation, tourism, timber provision, spiritual experience, firewood provision, water quality regulation, and inspiration for culture. We also give three concrete recommendations for forest management, the most urgent being to provide sources of protein alternative to bushmeat.
Persistence of Coffea arabica and its relationship with the structure, species diversity and composition of a secondary forest in Brazil			Understanding the relationships between Coffea arabica L. and the native tree community of secondary forests regrowing after the abandonment of coffee plantations is important because, as a non-native species in the Neotropics, coffee can outcompete native species, reducing diversity and forests ecosystem services. We aimed to answer three questions: 1) Does coffee regeneration in secondary forests differ between shaded and unshaded abandoned plantations?; 2) How is coffee basal area related to structural attributes, species diversity and composition of the native community?; and 3) Do the relationships between coffee and native community differ between tree and sapling components? We sampled the tree and sapling components in a seasonal tropical dry forest that were previously used as shaded and unshaded coffee plantations. Coffee was the most important species in the sapling component of shaded systems, but was almost absent in unshaded ones. Coffee basal area was negatively related with the native density and absolute species richness of the sapling component; and was negatively related with tree density, and positively related with the percentage of pioneer individuals of the native tree component. Our results indicate that coffee persists in secondary forest communities even after more than 70 years of shaded-coffee plantations were abandoned, potentially reducing density and diversity of native species. Despite limitations, which hinder more general conclusions on coffee invasiveness in Brazilian secondary tropical forests, our results indicate that coffee is a strong competitor in the studied secondary forests and provide important insights for future research on this topic.
Pest management through tropical tree conservation			Tropical trees can provide various ecological services to adjacent agricultural environments, including maintaining and amplifying the numbers of beneficial insects. In Mexico, certain tree species harbor a diverse guild of hymenopteran parasitoids that attack pest fruit flies (Diptera: Tephritidae) and are at the same time sources of valuable hardwood timber. Indigenous trees and their associated fauna are slowly disappearing due to forest clearance and the expansion of crop monocultures. Here we explore the relationship among pest and non-pest fruit flies, their fruit-hosts and parasitoids in the context of mango orchards and surrounding patches of uncultivated vegetation and propose a novel mechanism to use these associations in favor of conservation purposes and pest management. Trees of conservation biological control interest are classified as: (1) parasitoid multiplier plants, species that serve as alternate hosts for key fruit fly pests when their commercial hosts are not available, but in which they are unusually vulnerable to parasitism; (2) parasitoid reservoir plants, native or introduced trees in whose fruits non-pest fruit flies serve as hosts to generalist parasitoids that are able to attack pest tephritids in other species of commercially grown fruit; and (3) pest-based parasitoid reservoir plants, native or introduced species that are not economically important locally, but which harbor fruit flies that would be pests in other circumstances and that serve as hosts for parasitoids of the important pests in the vicinity. Protection, multiplication and dissemination of such tree species has the potential to increase the number of naturally produced fruit fly parasitoids and could assist in the management of tephritid pests in areas where destruction of forests has impoverished the historical sources of fruit fly natural enemies. Tropical forest conservation may help resource-poor farmers reduce crop losses, increase biodiversity within fruit-growing regions and conserve native forests for both conservation purposes and commercial use of native hardwoods. © 2014 The Author(s).
Pests and diseases regulation in coffee agroecosystems by management systems and resistance in changing climate conditions: a review			Coffea (Gentianales: Rubiaceae) is an economic plant considering its production income and the number of people that depend on it for their daily livelihoods. Tropical regions predicted to face severe challenges related to climate change impacts often grow coffee. Like other crops, coffee benefits from many ecosystem services, mainly regulating and supporting ecosystem services that play a role in production. Since the emergence of coffee pests and diseases, there have been two primary control techniques: pesticide application and crops management techniques. In most cases, chemical control is nearly ineffective and associated with pesticide resistance, environmental pollution, chemical hazards, and resurgence. This paper reviews management systems and coffee resistance. Studies show that management systems and plant resistance can maintain functional pest and disease regulatory ecosystem services within coffee plantations. We also evaluate how pest and disease regulation services can behave in climate change. The literature shows that managing coffee farms and plant resistance can mitigate the adverse effects of climate change on pest and disease regulation services. Therefore, they can maintain functional ecosystem services and help farmers in tropical areas adapt and be resilient to changing environmental conditions. It is crucial to update these ecological and environmentally friendly control techniques and understand how they will perform under future climate change. Based on the reviewed literature, we identify knowledge gaps and suggest three priority studies in this substantial area of future research. Finding solutions could enhance farmers' perception of interactions between regulation services and climate change and could support ensuring food security.
Photosynthetic and functional traits of tree seedlings from dry dipterocarp forest			Seedlings frequently suffer the highest mortality rate, as they have different requirements for growth and survival from their mature life cycle stage. However, the links between functional traits and photosynthetic performance traits of tree seedlings, especially from dry evergreen forests, remain largely unexplored. Here, we measured eleven functional traits and six photosynthetic performance traits of thirty species of tree seedlings from the seasonally dry evergreen forest in Southeast Asia. We explored the relationship between traits and photosynthesis, compared them with their canopy layers when mature to their adult stature, and classified growth strategies. The results showed that photosynthetic measurements were highly correlated with seedling growth traits. The measured functional and photosynthetic traits did not correspond with the canopy layers of the mature trees. Through k-mean clustering analyses of the tree seedling trait data, two main groups of growth strategies emerged: (1) the fast-growing group, which mainly consists of shade-intolerant or -avoidance species; and (2) the slow-growing group, which consists of shade-tolerant species. This finding can be applied by future practitioners to select tree seedlings accurately based on their juvenile physiology, which is fundamental to the success of species selection for forest restoration in the face of global climate change. In this study, we collected seeds of 30 plant species from the permanent plot in the seasonally dry evergreen forest of Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary (HKK) (15˚40  N, 99˚10  E), Uthai Thani (Bunyavejchewin et al., 2003), from December 2016 until September 2018. At least five seeds per species were collected to investigate the variation within species. The collected seeds were cleaned and dried under natural sunlight for 14 days (Chamchumroon, 1997). The seeds were then planted in a greenhouse using a prepared mixture of silt, rice husk charcoal, and manure in a ratio of 6:3:1 (Table S1). The plants were grown in 4-inches plastic pots under regular watering, natural light (3,402.9-5,978.2 lumen/m2), and a temperature range of 28.5-33.9˚C. The studied species were chosen to cover the species from all three canopy layers, as identified in previous studies (e.g., Bunyavejchewin et al., 2016; Flora of China; Flora of Thailand; Pooma et al., 2017). These three canopy layers were classified by the average height of mature plants, including nine species from the understory (lower than 10 m), fourteen species in the sub-canopy (11-30 m), and seven species in the canopy layers (31-45 m; Table 1). Functional traits and photosyntheticsis performances traits were measured from six to ten seedlings for each species (Table 1). The seedlings were measured at 12-18 months after planting, which is a typical age for seedlings used in reforestation (Snorrason, 2020). Eleven functional traits were measured from three leaves per samples, including 1) leaf area, 2) leaf fresh weight, 3) leaf dry weight, 4) specific leaf area, 5) seedling height, 6) root collar diameter, 7) leaf thickness, 8) chlorophyll content, 9) carbon content, 10) nitrogen content, and 11) carbon-to-nitrogen ratio (Table S2). Leaf areas were measured by using the scanner and the Fiji software (Schindelin et al., 2012; Umana et al., 2015). Dry weights were measured after drying in a 70˚C hot air oven for 48 hr (Cornelissen et al., 2003; Garnier et al., 2001; Perez-Harguindeguy et al., 2016). Specific leaf area (SLA) was the fraction between leaf area and dried matter, one of the most frequently studied plant traits (Cornelissen et al., 2003; Wright et al., 2004). Seedling height (H) and root collar diameter (RCD) were measured as a proxy for performance to represent plant seedling growth rate for one 2 years old (Table S2). Leaf thickness was determined using the Thickness Gauge 547 (Mitutoyo, Japan) (Onoda et al., 2011). The chlorophyll content was measured using the SPAD-502 Chlorophyll Meter at the leaf apex, middle, and base, avoiding major veins and margins (Coste et al., 2010). Carbon, nitrogen content, and the ratio of C and N were also determined to represent leaf chemistry. Three dried leaves for each species were used for estimating these values, using the Standard Test Methods for Determination of Carbon, Hydrogen, and Nitrogen in Analysis Samples of Coal and Carbon in Analysis Samples of Coal and Coke, CHNS-628 (LECO, USA) at the Biomass and Bio-energy Technology Division, Kasetsart Agricultural and Agro-Industrial Product Improvement Institute (KAPI). Each trait was measured with three replications (Perez-Harguindeguy et al., 2016). Photosynthetic performance trait measurement To determine the performance traits of tree seedling photosynthesis, we measured five fully expanded leaves from each 1-year-old tree seedling before midday (Perez-Harguindeguy et al., 2016) using the LI-6400 Portable Photosynthesis System (LICOR Inc., USA). The leaf chamber contained an LED light source at 25-30˚C air temperature and 400 ppm CO2. Intensities of light were set at 2000, 1600, 1200, 1000, 800, 600, 400, 200, 100, 50, 20, and 0 mol · m-2 · s-1 to measure photosynthetic rate at each light intensity and generate a light response curve. The following photosynthesis parameters were estimated using the equation from Lobo et al. (2013): maximum capacity of photosynthesis (Pmax, mol · m-2 · s-1), quantum yield (ɸ or Phi), dark respiration (Rd, mol · m-2 · s-1), convexity index (theta or Theta), light compensation point (LCP, mol · m-2 · s-1), and light saturation point (Qsat75, mol · m-2 · s-1). # Photosynthetic and functional traits of tree seedlings from dry dipterocarp forest [https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.m905qfvbk](https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.m905qfvbk) ## Description of the data and file structure Average value of functional traits and photosynthetic performance of the seedlings. ### Files and variables #### File: species\_level\_dataset.csv **Description:** ##### Variables * Codes: Species code * LA: leaf area (cm2) * DW:leaf dry weight (g) * FW:leaf fresh weight (g) * H:height (cm) * SLA:specific leaf area (cm2 · g-1) * RCD:root collar diameter (mm) * T:leaf thickness (mm) * SPAD:SPAD index, chlorophyll content * N:nitrogen content (%) * C: carbon content (%) * C:N:carbon-to-nitrogen ratio * Pmax:maximum photosynthesis (mol · m-2 · s-1) * ɸ (phi): quantum yield * Rd:dark respiration (mol · m-2 · s-1) * theta (theta): convexity index * LCP:light compensation point (mol · m-2 · s-1) * Qsat75:light saturation point (mol · m-2 · s-1) Species code | Codes | Scientific Names | | :------ | :------------------------------------------------------------------ | | AFZEXY | *Afzelia xylocarpa* (Kurz) Craib | | ALANCH | *Alangium chinense* (Lour,) Harms | | ALCHRU | *Alchornea rugosa* (Lour.) Muell. Arg. | | ALPHVE | *Alphonsea ventricosa* (Roxb.) Hook. f. & Thomson | | ANTIAC | *Antidesma acidum* Retz. | | ANTIMO | *Antidesma montanum* Blume | | APHAPO | *Aphanamixis polystachya* (Wall.) R. Parker | | ARDIPO | *Ardisia polycephala* Wall. ex A. DC. | | CASEGR | *Casearia grewiifolia* Vent. | | CHUKTA | *Chukrasia tabularis* A. Juss. | | CLEIJA | *Cleidion javanicum* Blume | | CROTHU | *Croton hutchinsonianus* Hosseus | | DILLIN | *Dillenia indica* L. | | DIOSVE | \*Diospyros vera \*(Lour.) A. Chev. | | DIPTAL | *Dipterocarpus alatus* Roxb. | | DISCAB | *Discospermum abnorme* (Korth.) S. J. Ali & Robbr. | | GARCCE | *Garcinia celebica* L. | | GARUFL | *Garuga floribunda* var. *gamblei* (King ex Smith) Kalkman | | GARUPI | *Garuga pinnata* Roxb. | | HOPEOD | *Hopea odorata* Roxb. | | HYPTST | *Hyptianthera stricta* (Roxb. ex Schult) Wight & Arn. | | IRVIMA | *Irvingia malayana* Oliv. ex A.W. Benn. | | MALLNU | *Mallotus nudiflorus* (L.) Kulju & Welzen | | MITRTH | *Mitrephora tomentosa* Hook. f. & Thomson | | MONOVI | *Monoon viride* (Craib) B. Xue & R. M. K. Saunders | | PRISTE | *Prismatomeris tetrandra* subsp. *malayana* (Ridl.) J. T. Johanss. | | PSYCAS | \*Psychotria asiatica \*L. | | PTERMA | *Pterocarpus macrocarpus* Kurz | | SYZYME | *Syzygium megacarpum* (Craib) Bathakr. & N. C. Nair | | TOONCI | *Toona ciliata* M. Roem | ## Code/software The file can be read with any spreadsheet software and statistical programming software, such as R. ## Access information Other publicly accessible locations of the data: * N/A Data was derived from the following sources: * The authors produced these data. Copyright: CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication
Phyllostomid Bat Occurrence in Successional Stages of Neotropical Dry Forests			Tropical dry forests (TDFs) are highly endangered tropical ecosystems being replaced by a complex mosaic of patches of different successional stages, agricultural fields and pasturelands. In this context, it is urgent to understand how taxa playing critical ecosystem roles respond to habitat modification. Because Phyllostomid bats provide important ecosystem services (e.g. facilitate gene flow among plant populations and promote forest regeneration), in this study we aimed to identify potential patterns on their response to TDF transformation in sites representing four different successional stages (initial, early, intermediate and late) in three Neotropical regions: Mexico, Venezuela and Brazil. We evaluated bat occurrence at the species, ensemble (abundance) and assemblage level (species richness and composition, guild composition). We also evaluated how bat occurrence was modulated by the marked seasonality of TDFs. In general, we found high seasonal and regional specificities in phyllostomid occurrence, driven by specificities at species and guild levels. For example, highest frugivore abundance occurred in the early stage of the moistest TDF, while highest nectarivore abundance occurred in the same stage of the driest TDF. The high regional specificity of phyllostomid responses could arise from: (1) the distinctive environmental conditions of each region, (2) the specific behavior and ecological requirements of the regional bat species, (3) the composition, structure and phenological patterns of plant assemblages in the different stages, and (4) the regional landscape composition and configuration. We conclude that, in tropical seasonal environments, it is imperative to perform long-term studies considering seasonal variations in environmental conditions and plant phenology, as well as the role of landscape attributes. This approach will allow us to identify potential patterns in bat responses to habitat modification, which constitute an invaluable tool for not only bat biodiversity conservation but also for the conservation of the key ecological processes they provide.
Phylogenetic patterns of Atlantic forest restoration communities are mainly driven by stochastic, dispersal related factors			Phylogenetic ecology complements trait-based analysis on community assembly by considering that species are not independent units but are related to each other by their evolutionary history. Phylogenetic patterns clustered when there are more close relatives than expected by chance or overdispersed with less close relatives than expected. Patterns among species in a community indicate underlying biotic and abiotic processes acting on species functional traits. However, phylogenetic ecology has seldom been applied to forest restoration. We used floristic and abundance data from six forest restoration sites of different ages and four old-growth reference forests in the Brazilian Atlantic forest to evaluate similarities in phylogenetic patterns between restoration and reference forests as a measure of restoration success. The presence of an initial tree canopy in restoration forests conducted by planting species increases seed dispersal. Nevertheless, we expected random phylogenetic patterns early in restoration due to dispersal limitation in a highly fragmented landscape. As time since planting increases and in reference forests, we expected less of an effect of dispersal on community composition and more of an effect of negative biotic interactions among close relatives to lead to overdispersed patterns. We did not find a clear trajectory showing that restoration sites would resemble the phylogenetic patterns of reference sites with age since planting. We found significant clustering patterns in two sites, the oldest restoration site and one reference forest. The other reference forests showed, non-significant yet clustering tendencies. The functional traits studied were less conserved than expected by chance, therefore, we cannot relate clustering to be solely the result of environmental filters leading to the presence of close relatives with similar habitat requirements. The presence of closely related species in the Meliaceae family in reference forests and in the oldest restoration site, which was next to a forest remnant, points toward dispersal as the main factor driving phylogenetic patterns in the sites studied. Despite the use of a high number of planted species, differences in the composition of planted species among sites also affected the observed phylogenetic structure. We believe that phylogenetic ecology complements floristic studies by providing information on trait conservatism and shedding light on community assembly processes that affect the successional trajectory of restoration forest. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Phylogenetic structure and turnover between lowland and montane subtropical forests indicate differential community assembly processes, affected by successional stage and spatial gradients			Secondary forests represent an increasing proportion of global forest cover and offer a range of ecosystem services that are integral to environmental policy targets. Highly disturbed landscapes with temporal records of forest plant community composition offer key insights into the processes that shape plant communities as forests undergo secondary succession. We investigated patterns of plant community phylogenetic structure and phylogenetic beta diversity. Mean pairwise distance (MPD) and Mean Nearest Taxon Distance (MNTD) metrics were determined between cooccurring species within plant communities, in addition to phylogenetic beta diversity metrics relative to null models of random phylogenetic assembly. MPD and MNTD were compared between elevational and successional classes and modelled as products of intercommunity distance (metres) and forest community age (years). Phylogenetic nonmetric multidimensional scaling explored phylogenetic community structure between lowland and montane forest type in Hong Kong. We found that plant communities in secondary forests in Hong Kong exhibited patterns of increased basal phylogenetic clustering with increasing community elevation, while phylogenetic turnover was influenced by spatial and successional factors in lowland and montane forest. Our findings indicate differential community assembly in lowland compared to montane forest type in Hong Kong, as well as evidence for barriers to plant dispersal in secondary forest communities due to patterns of spatial phylogenetic clustering. Plant communities in montane forests were found to be phylogenetically distinct from lowland forest plant communities. Patterns of spatial phylogenetic clustering may suggest significant dispersal or post-dispersal processes causing the clustering of related species at fine spatial scales, while phylogenetic turnover with increasing successional age may indicate compositional changes during the process of passive forest regeneration. Collectively, these results emphasize the need to investigate active pathways for rewilding dispersal limited late successional forest tree species in Hong Kong.
Phytosociological attributes of high-elevation agroforestry systems in the Western Ghat regions of Kerala, India			The diversity of tree species within agroforestry systems (AFS) plays a critical role in enhancing ecosystem services while fostering resilience and adaptability to environmental changes. Though plant diversity in the forests of Western Ghats is widely studied, research on the compositional and phytosociological characteristics of agroforestry systems remains underexplored. This study aims to assess the diversity and distribution of tree species in AFS to guide conservation strategies and sustainable management practices in Kerala's Western Ghats. A total of 116 quadrates were established randomly and the species richness, stand density, diversity, dominance and other phytosociological attributes were measured. The study recorded 119 tree species with an average stand density of 1099 trees per hectare. The Shannon diversity index indicated relatively high species diversity (3.26), while the Simpson index suggested low dominance (0.08) across the study area. Pielou's evenness index indicated moderate evenness in species distribution (0.68). Among different types of AFS, coffee-based systems exhibited the highest species richness, followed by cardamom, homegarden, rubber, and tea. Dominant tree species varied across different systems with Artocarpus heterophyllus, Grevillea robusta, Hevea brasiliensis, Mangifera indica and Erythrina variegata being the top species in the AFS in general. This study highlights the importance of conserving and managing the diverse AFS in the highland regions of the Western Ghats, a previously underrepresented area in biodiversity assessments, by demonstrating that variations in species composition underscore the unique characteristics of each system, with phytosociological studies playing a crucial role in conservation planning.
Pit volume, soil cover and Eucalyptus forestry residues determine plant growth in restoring areas after gravel mining in eastern Amazon, Brazil			Gravel mining destroys the soil structures, with consequent losses in biodiversity and other ecosystem services, such as nutrient cycling, carbon sequestration and regulation of the hydrological cycle. In this context, planting with native species can be an effective method to restore the ecosystems functioning and structure after mining. A restoration study was conducted to evaluate the influence of different planting pit volumes and soil cover on the development of four Fabaceae tree species in an area degraded by gravel mining in the eastern Amazon, Brazil. Two types of ground cover and two pit sizes were assessed: soil covered with coconut fiber blanket and small pit (T1); soil covered with Eucalyptus forestry residues and small pit (T2); small pit filled with 160 dm(-3) with Eucalyptus forestry residues (T3) large pit filled with 320 dm(-3) of Eucalyptus forestry residues (T4). Periodic Annual Increment (PAI) was calculated 1.3 years after planting for total height (PAI(Ht)) and diameter (PAI(DBH)) as well as the survival percentage. All four evaluated species showed mean PAI(Ht) ranging from 160.75 to 279.26 cm year(-1), in which T2 and T4 provided the best performances. Clitoria fairchildiana showed the highest mean PAI(DBH) value at T2 and statistically differed from T1 and T4. On the other hand, there were no significant differences in the other tested species. Survival percentages were greater than 90% for C. fairchildiana, Inga edulis and Inga thibaidiana. Although there was not a clear pattern in relation to the applied treatments, the Eucalyptus forestry residues such as soil cover and large planting pits were more efficient in relation to the increments in growth, diameter and survival of the species used in the initial planting to restore ecosystems degraded by gravel mining. Such results can be applied in future forest restoration projects in the Amazon and other tropical regions.
Planning restoration in human-modified landscapes: New insights linking different scales			The transformation of tropical ecosystems by humans have resulted in forest loss, which, in turn, have caused negative impacts on biodiversity and the provisioning of ecosystem services. There is an urgent need to plan the restoration of these human-modified landscapes, using methodological approaches that consider key processes occurring at different spatial scales while engage local community participation, offering them the best possibilities of tangible benefits. In this study, was evaluated the landscape spatial pattern and local conservation status of existing forest remnants, showing an analysis of possible restoration scenarios for a human-modified landscape in La Montana, an indigenous region in southwestern Mexico. Therefore, landscape and local scale approaches were linked to identify specific landscape elements where efforts to improve connectivity must be concentrated. Also, this approach allowed finding a set of species from reference sites that showed the best socioecological characteristics to be used in different restoration strategies. As expected, La Montana region showed a spatial pattern typical of highly human-modified landscapes, i.e., several small (<21 ha) and irregular forest remnants with strong forest edge effects. Furthermore, these small and irregular forest fragments displayed forest structure, diversity and composition characteristics similar to those communities disturbed by selective harvesting or in an early successional phase. However, about 100 of woody species were found inside the fragments, some with important potential to provide ecosystem services. The landscape connectivity was very low, and an analysis of possible restoration scenarios showed that is equally important to restore the productive areas as well as open forest, to recover up to 47% of landscape connectivity. In this sense, it was proposed a productive restoration strategy to enrich open forests and create biodiversity-friendly habitat in agricultural areas, using species with high socioecological potential. We believe that the same approach could be applied to other highly human-modified tropical landscapes with similar socioecological problems. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Plant diversity and microbial interaction on soil carbon stock in the tropical homegardens: a nature-based solution to climate change			Understanding relationship between plant diversity, microbial activity and carbon sequestration is crucial for mitigating climate change and promoting sustainable land management, particularly in agroforestry systems such as homegardens. This study evaluated five Land Management Type (LMT) which consist of three homegarden classes: Small Homegardens (SHG) (less than 0.2 ha), Medium Homegardens (MHG) (0.2–0.4 ha), and Large Homegardens (LHG) (more than 0.4 ha), forest area (Fo) a natural land use, and a treeless open area (TrO) in the North central laterite Agro-Ecological Unit of Kerala, India for assessing their impact on soil carbon, nutrient cycling, tree diversity, and microbial activity. Plant diversity was found to be highest in the forest (22.85 ± 0.06) and was on par with small homegardens (SHG) (2.71 ± 0.0), which exceeded the diversity observed in medium (MHG) and large homegardens (LHG). Soil organic carbon (SOC) stock up to a depth of 1 m was highest in forest (202.21 Mg C ha−1), which was on par with SHG (157.62 Mg C ha−1), and significantly different from MHG (135.79 Mg C ha−1), followed by LHG (119.60 Mg C ha−1) and TrO (24.29 Mg C ha−1). Microbial activity also followed the same trend for the bacterial and fungal population. A Hierarchical cluster analysis based on euclidean distance grouped the five LMT into four clusters, among that the MHG and LHG falls into single cluster due to its similarities. From the PCA and the inter cluster distances, the SHG exhibited characteristics that closely resemble natural forests, as compared to other three LMT. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2025.
Plant Traits and Litter Decomposition of Tree Species Naturally Regenerating in Central America Pasturelands			0
Plantations: Biodiversity, carbon sequestration, and restoration			This book's primary content explores plantation and non-plantation biodiversity values, mushrooms and woodlands, the roles of arbuscular mycorrhizal in tropical forestry and agro-forestry, the impacts on the abundance and diversity of soil legume-nodulating rhizobia and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal communities in semiarid regional plantations. The book also investigates carbon biosequestration and bioenergy options of plantations, lessons from plantation forestry carbon sequestration, and carbon sequestration in agro forestry-block plantations or mangrove plantations. The book includes targeted chapters on forest restoration and management of plantations for restoring degraded landscapes, alluvial-gold-mining soil reclamation using Acacia mangium plantations, effects of forest practices on wild populations of Testudo hermanni, effects of incorporation of native species biomass in an acidic andisol to control water contamination from plant residues, and ecohydrology of Amazonian rain forest ecosystems. The international list of authors were carefully selected, and through a rigorous peer review process, this edited book aims to fill some of the information gaps in vegetation restoration and nutrient mobilization, particularly in under researched plantation ecosystems around the world. Our intended audience includes planners of projects to restore and manage forests or plantations; practitioners who implement those plans; forest resource managers who oversee the sites; forestry consultants; tree farms; environmental authorities; conservationists and students of forestry. We also hope that researchers and the public can find valued information for their future use and efforts. We hope that our work can bring scientists and policy-makers together to envision a sustainable future for woodlands' health and productivity management. © 2013 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. All rights reserved.
Plant-derived carbon contribution to soil organic carbon accumulation increases with tropical lowland forest restoration			Natural restoration of tropical forests is an effective strategy for mitigating global climate change and enhancing ecosystem carbon stocks. Although studies have shown soil organic carbon storage following forest restoration efforts, the responses of organic carbon sources and their stabilisation to these restoration practices remain unclear. In this study, we employed amino sugars and lignin phenols as biomarkers to explore the contributions of microbial necromass and plant lignin components to soil organic carbon across a chronosequence of tropical lowland forest restorations (<30, >40, >70 years and old-growth forests). Following forest restoration, the concentration of amino sugars in soil organic carbon substantially decreased, whereas the concentration of lignin phenols showed no notable change. The contribution of microbially derived carbon to soil organic carbon steadily declined from 55 % to 33 % as forest restoration progressed, while the contribution of plant-derived carbon increased from 2.7 % to 3.4 %. Microbial-derived carbon remained the dominant source of soil organic carbon accumulation, although its proportion in the organic carbon pool decreased during the restoration process. The Mantel test and structural equation models showed that soil nutrient availability (available phosphorus, available nitrogen, and inorganic nitrogen) and microbial biomass nitrogen were the primary variables influencing microbially derived carbon, whereas plant-derived carbon was regulated by plant root biomass and microbial biomass nitrogen. These findings highlight the importance of combining plant lignin and microbial necromass in regulate soil organic carbon accumulation during tropical forest restoration. This study supports the development of effective carbon management strategies for tropical forests. © 2025 Elsevier B.V.
Planting exceptional tropical tree species to increase long-term carbon storage in assisted secondary succession			With rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations, strategies for greater carbon sequestration and long-term storage are urgently needed. Current reforestation schemes typically use fast-growing tree species with low wood density, limiting the amount of carbon stored. In most tropical forests, there are native species with relatively fast growth rates, high wood density and low mortality rates that also achieve large adult size-'exceptional species'.We present a simulated assessment of the carbon sequestration potential using these exceptional species in assisted secondary succession in the Neotropics.In our example, the selected exceptional species could add up to 16.2 Mg C/ha of sequestered carbon in secondary wet forests at maturity.Synthesis and applications. By increasing the representation of exceptional species in reforestation efforts, we could potentially boost long-term carbon storage in reforestation projects focussed on carbon sequestration. However, our approach is not a substitute for protecting existing old primary forests and reforested lands plus reducing deforestation and emissions.Con el aumento de las concentraciones atmosfericas de CO2, se necesitan urgentemente estrategias para una mayor captura y almacenamiento a largo plazo del carbono. Los esquemas de reforestacion actuales suelen utilizar especies de arboles de rapido crecimiento con baja densidad de madera, lo que limita la cantidad de carbono almacenado. En la mayoria de los bosques tropicales, hay especies nativas con tasas de crecimiento relativamente rapidas, alta densidad de madera y bajas tasas de mortalidad que tambien alcanzan un gran tamano adulto-'especies excepcionales'.Presentamos una evaluacion simulada del potencial de secuestro de carbono usando estas especies excepcionales en la sucesion secundaria asistida en el Neotropico.En nuestro ejemplo, las especies excepcionales seleccionadas podrian sumar hasta 16.2 Mg C/ha de carbono secuestrado en bosques humedos secundarios en su madurez.Sintesis y aplicaciones. Al aumentar la representacion de especies excepcionales en los esfuerzos de reforestacion, podriamos impulsar potencialmente el almacenamiento de carbono a largo plazo en proyectos de reforestacion centrados en el secuestro de carbono. Sin embargo, nuestro enfoque no reemplaza la proteccion de los bosques primarios antiguos existentes y las tierras reforestadas, ni reduce la necesidad de disminuir la deforestacion y las emisiones.By increasing the representation of exceptional species in reforestation efforts, we could potentially boost long-term carbon storage in reforestation projects focussed on carbon sequestration. However, our approach is not a substitute for protecting existing old primary forests and reforested lands plus reducing deforestation and emissions.image
Planting trees in livestock landscapes to protect soil and water also delivers carbon sequestration			Ecuador has committed to climate change mitigation by reducing greenhouse gas emissions from anthropogenic activities, including livestock production. This sector can also contribute to mitigation by increasing carbon sequestration and storage capacity through increasing tree coverage. Although feasible, tree cover expansion would require agricultural land, creating a conflict with food production, thus appropriate areas need to be selected, and the impacts on livestock production quantified. Following water protection legislation and soil protection guidelines, we use a combination of measurements on 100 farms with land cover datasets to identify suitable areas for increasing tree coverage in livestock landscapes. Land cover classification was performed in 2 km areas around 100 livestock farms in the coastal and Amazon regions in Ecuador. Riparian zones were identified following legislation and steepland pastures identified from a slope map. Pasture in riparian areas or steeplands (slope > 15%) were considered suitable for increasing tree coverage by restoration or silvopastoral systems (SPS). The impact of forest/silvopastoral on biomass production was quantified. Overall, 855 km of rivers were studied, between 1–18% of riparian areas were classified as pastures, whilst from the 85992 ha included in the land cover classification, 41668 ha were identified as steepland, 1–28% of steepland was covered by pastures. We estimate that steepland pasture conversion into forest could offset 1.8–10% of Ecuador’s annual GHG emissions from the agricultural sector, but its impacts could represent a decrease > 50% of pasture biomass production at landscape level. Transformation of riparian and steepland pastures into SPS, could deliver important carbon sequestration, with a reduction in pasture biomass production of less than 20%. © 2023, The Author(s).
Plasticity in branching and crown architecture helps explain how tree diversity increases tropical forest production			0
Policy forum: Shifting cultivation and agroforestry in the Amazon: Premises for REDD			Evidence shows that there is a close link between the intensification of shifting cultivation (SC) and the Amazon forest resilience. However, SC, to this day, is a widely implemented agricultural practice around the Amazon region due to its cultural, social, and economic relevance. In pristine indigenous communities, which have not experienced Western influence, SC will continue to be the main livelihood as part of the conservation of a patrimony of the humanity. Nevertheless, the main adverse effects of SC on ecosystems (i.e. forest degradation), particularly on Amazon forests, are our grounds to justify the implementation of public policies aiming to the substitution by agroforestry systems (AFS) as a sustainable food system. In this context, we propose linking AFS to Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation (REDD + strategies) in shifting cultivation landscapes where there is high local-scale expansion and intensification of SC. AFS has higher potential as sustainable food systems for degraded forest rehabilitation and reduction of the expansion and intensification of SC. Consequently, AFS reduce deforestation of new forest areas for SC, meanwhile, sustainable management of second-growth forests could also be implemented through improved fallows, increasing the planting density of long-cycle agroforestry tree species. AFS should be implemented in local communities, in particular, those undergoing human-modified Amazon landscapes, where there is a high intensification of SC.
Pollination partial recovery across monospecific plantations of a native tree (Inga vera, Leguminosae) in the Atlantic forest: Lessons for restoration			In the last decades several approaches have been adopted for tropical assisted forest restoration from monospecific plantations to the establishment of highly-diverse tree stands. However, the long-term viability of restored forest and their capacity to provide the required services demand continuous evaluation to guide future initiatives. We aimed to evaluate the existence of pollination recovery in monospecific tree plantations in a hyper fragmented landscape of the Atlantic forest in northeast Brazil. By using Inga vera as a model species, we compared several relevant aspects relative to tree reproduction such as reproductive phenology, floral structures, nectar consumption, fruit- and seed-set, between monospecific plantations and native conspecific populations. Populations of I. vera from both native forest stands and planted areas flowered in overlapping periods in the dry season, while fruiting occurred at the beginning of the rainy season. Flowers of planted populations were significantly larger (11% in the size of the calyx, corolla and androecium - staminal tube and filaments) relative to natural populations. Flowers of both planted and natural populations secrete ca. 46 mu l of nectar with concentration of 20.2% and 45.8 mg of sugars throughout the anthesis. However, the average volume of nectar consumed by visitors per flower in planted populations was 30% lower than in natural populations. The frequency of pistils with pollen tubes and the average number of seeds per fruit were similar between natural and planted populations. Nevertheless, surprisingly, the natural fruit set was 49% lower in planted relative to natural populations. Lower consumption of nectar and natural fruit set in planted populations of I. vera, in relation to the natural populations, indicate a partial recovery of the pollination process through the practice of planting single species of a tree in clusters of individuals. Our results add some doubts about the long-term viability and the ability of monospecific plantations in delivering services such as increased pollination capacity in human-modified landscapes.
Pollinators in Coffee Plantations: Opportunities to Foster Their Presence and Benefits for Growers			0
Positive Effects of Scattered Trees on Soil Water Dynamics in a Pasture Landscape in the Tropics			As a result of canopy interception and transpiration, trees are often assumed to have negative effects on the local hydrological budget resulting in reduced soil and groundwater resources. However, it has also been shown that trees can have positive effects through reducing surface run-off and improving soil infiltrability and groundwater recharge, especially in many tropical ecosystems characterized by high rain intensity and degradation-prone soils. In this study, we used isotopic measurements of soil water to better understand the main processes by which trees influence local soil water dynamics within a tropical pasture with scattered tree cover in the Copan River catchment, Honduras. We also determined the stable isotope signature of xylem water in grasses and trees to assess potential competition for water sources during the wet and dry seasons. During the wet season, when soil water availability was not limiting, both grasses and trees primarily utilized soil water near the soil surface (i.e., 0-10 cm). In contrast, during the dry season, we observed niche partitioning for water resources where grasses primarily utilized soil moisture at deeper soil depth (i.e., 90-100 cm) while trees relied heavily on groundwater. Moreover, isotopic data of soil water suggest that trees reduce evaporative water losses from the soil surface, as indicated by the lack of correlation between soil water content and lc-excess (line condition excess) values of surface soil water under trees, and enhance preferential flow as suggested by less negative lc-excess values under trees compared to open areas during the dry season. Taken together, our findings provide further support that trees can have positive effects on the local water balance with implication for landscape management, promoting the inclusion of scattered trees to provide water ecosystem services in silvopastoral systems, adding to other ecosystem services like biodiversity or carbon sequestration.
Positive responses of belowground C dynamics to nitrogen enrichment in China			Determining how nitrogen (N) impacts ecosystem carbon (C) cycling is critical to using C sequestration to offset anthropogenic CO2 emissions. The N deposition rate in China is higher than the global average; however, many results of N enrichment experiments in China have not been included in global syntheses. In this study, we assembled a large dataset that comprised 124 published studies concerning N addition experiments, including 570 observations at 127 sites across China, to quantify the responses of belowground C dynamics to N enrichment in terrestrial ecosystems in China by a meta-analysis. The results showed that overall soil organic C, dissolved organic C (DOC) and soil microbial biomass C (MBC) increased by 1.8, 7.4, and 8.8%, respectively (P < 0.05), in response to N enrichment; belowground biomass and litter increased by 14.6 and 24.4%, respectively (P < 0.05); and soil respiration increased by 6.1% (P < 0.05). N enrichment promoted C inputs into the soil mainly by increasing litter and belowground biomass inputs. Additionally, N enrichment increased C output by increasing soil respiration. Land use type and N addition level had different impacts on the soil C pool and on soil respiration. DOC, MBC, and litter exhibited more positive responses to N deposition in cooler and more arid regions than in other regions. The meta-analysis indicated that N enrichment had a positive impact on belowground C cycles in China. Climate played a greater role than did N deposition level in affecting processes of ecosystem C cycling. Moreover, belowground C cycle processes are determined by complicated interactions among land use type, N enrichment, and climate. (c) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Possibilities for carbon sequestration in tropical and subtropical soils			Soil organic matter is a key component of all terrestrial ecosystems, and any variation in its composition and abundance has important effects on many of the processes that occur within the system. The role of soil organic matter in soil nutrient cycling and soil gaseous emissions is discussed in the context of agricultural sustainability and global environmental change. Recent data on organic carbon and nitrogen reserves in the soils of the world are presented, with special reference to the subtropical and tropical regions. Possibilities for long-lasting, enhanced sequestration of carbon in the soil through management of the land and water resources are reviewed. Finally, the need is stressed for an up-to-date database on soil resources and for a global monitoring system in order to permit the study of changes in soil organic matter quantity and quality over time, as determined by changes in land-use and climate.
Post-Crackdown Effectiveness of Field-Based Forest Law Enforcement in the Brazilian Amazon			Regulatory enforcement of forest conservation laws is often dismissed as an ineffective approach to reducing tropical forest loss. Yet, effective enforcement is often a precondition for alternative conservation measures, such as payments for environmental services, to achieve desired outcomes. Fair and efficient policies to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD) will thus crucially depend on understanding the determinants and requirements of enforcement effectiveness. Among potential REDD candidate countries, Brazil is considered to possess the most advanced deforestation monitoring and enforcement infrastructure. This study explores a unique dataset of over 15 thousand point coordinates of enforcement missions in the Brazilian Amazon during 2009 and 2010, after major reductions of deforestation in the region. We study whether local deforestation patterns have been affected by field-based enforcement and to what extent these effects vary across administrative boundaries. Spatial matching and regression techniques are applied at different spatial resolutions. We find that field-based enforcement operations have not been universally effective in deterring deforestation during our observation period. Inspections have been most effective in reducing large-scale deforestation in the states of Mato Grosso and Para, where average conservation effects were 4.0 and 9.9 hectares per inspection, respectively. Despite regional and actor-specific heterogeneity in inspection effectiveness, field-based law enforcement is highly cost-effective on average and might be enhanced by closer collaboration between national and state-level authorities.
Post-fire ecological restoration in Latin American forest ecosystems: Insights and lessons from the last two decades			Wildfires are responsible for a substantial loss of forest ecosystem services globally and represent a major driving force of forest degradation across Latin American and the Caribbean (LAC). The detrimental effect of forest fires is particularly relevant in regions where fire has been historically absent or has rarely occurred. Nowadays, there is an increasing interest to promote and develop ecological restoration (ER) following fire. LAC constitutes a hotspot where work and interest in ER has been steadily increasing over the last decades, mainly due to the drive of a new generation of young and experienced ecologists and foresters. Despite the increasing attention in post-fire restoration in the region, there is a dearth of initiatives compiling and organizing all the available information on this topic. This work aims to address such constraint, providing current information on post-fire ER in LAC forests. After a brief contextualization of environmental and social consequences of wildfires, we collect and discuss recent advances on restoring degraded forests. From the conifer Mexican ecosystems to the Southern Patagonian evergreen forests, we look back over the last two decades (2000-2020) mainly discussing experiences of success and failure, as well as limitations of implementing approaches based on passive/natural restoration or active/assisted restoration. Furthermore, we also explore other aspects of the restoration process, including those related to social participation and community engagement (e. g. education in restored areas), the use of fire regulation and management to reduce fire risks and increase ecosystem resilience, educational aspects and intermediate approaches as agroforestry and silviculture practices. In the last sections, we identify three major categories of specific constraints that condition ER, including environmental limitations (biotic and abiotic factors), technical/management factors and the socio-economic challenge of restoration. Finally, we briefly discuss future perspectives for ER in LAC.
Post-logging changes in a neotropical dry forest composition and structure modify the ecosystem functioning			Native forests are considered to be the main centers of terrestrial diversity in the world and they provide important ecosystem services for humanity. Unsustainable logging is currently-one of the greatest threats to the biodiversity of these forests. In northwestern Argentina, about 90 % of the piedmont forest in the Southern Yungas has been transformed and the remaining 10% is being intensively logged. The aim of this study was to identify post-logging changes in the structural and compositional attributes affecting the functionality of a dry forest in Argentina. In the control forest, we recorded 1559 individuals from 45 tree species and 22 families, and at post-logging forest, 1376 trees from 47 species and 25 families. Logging affected the forest structure by decreasing timber tree density and basal area. In addition, at the post-logging forest, we observed an increase in the density of non-timber trees and in the horizontal understory cover, which were associated with the normalized difference vegetation index, thus, affecting the forest functioning. The threatened timber species Amburana cearensis and Jacaranda mimosifolia were not recorded in the logged forest. In the control, four timber species had the highest importance value indexes (IVI): Phyllostilon rhamnoides, Anadenanthera colubrina, Cal-icophylum multiflorum, and Myracrodruon urundeuva. Additionally, in the logged forest there was a change in the species order regarding the IVI, with A. colubrina, P. rhamnoides, Cordia americana, and a non-valuable timber species (Ocotea puberula) being the most important tree species. In order to preserve the economic and ecological value of the piedmont forest, the density of non-timber tree species and the horizontal understory cover must be maintained at values close to the control forest. These guidelines can be implemented by applying low-impact logging techniques.
Potential aboveground biomass increase in Brazilian Atlantic Forest fragments with climate change			Fragmented tropical forest landscapes preserve much of the remaining biodiversity and carbon stocks. Climate change is expected to intensify droughts and increase fire hazard and fire intensities, thereby causing habitat deterioration, and losses of biodiversity and carbon stock losses. Understanding the trajectories that these landscapes may follow under increased climate pressure is imperative for establishing strategies for conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services. Here, we used a quantitative predictive modelling approach to project the spatial distribution of the aboveground biomass density (AGB) by the end of the 21st century across the Brazilian Atlantic Forest (AF) domain. To develop the models, we used the maximum entropy method with projected climate data to 2100, based on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 4.5 from the fifth Assessment Report. Our AGB models had a satisfactory performance (area under the curve > 0.75 and p value < .05). The models projected a significant increase of 8.5% in the total carbon stock. Overall, the projections indicated that 76.9% of the AF domain would have suitable climatic conditions for increasing biomass by 2100 considering the RCP 4.5 scenario, in the absence of deforestation. Of the existing forest fragments, 34.7% are projected to increase their AGB, while 2.6% are projected to have their AGB reduced by 2100. The regions likely to lose most AGB-up to 40% compared to the baseline-are found between latitudes 13 & DEG; and 20 & DEG; south. Overall, although climate change effects on AGB vary latitudinally for the 2071-2100 period under the RCP 4.5 scenario, our model indicates that AGB stocks can potentially increase across a large fraction of the AF. The patterns found here are recommended to be taken into consideration during the planning of restoration efforts, as part of climate change mitigation strategies in the AF and elsewhere in Brazil.
Potential carbon mitigation and income in developing countries from changes in use and management of agricultural and forest lands			The many opportunities for mitigating atmospheric carbon emissions in developing countries include reforesting degraded lands, implementing sustainable agricultural practices on existing lands and slowing tropical deforestation. This analysis shows that over the next 10 years, 48 major tropical and subtropical developing countries have the potential to reduce the atmospheric carbon burden by about 2.3 billion tonnes of carbon. Given a central price of $10 per tonne of carbon and a discount rate of 3%, this mitigation would generate a net present value of about $16.8 billion collectively for these countries. Achieving these potentials would require a significant global effort, covering more than 50 million hectares of land, to implement carbon-friendly practices in agriculture, forest and previously forested lands. These estimates of host-country income potentials do not consider that outside financial investment may or may not be available. Our calculations take no account of the additional benefits of carbon sequestration in forest soils undergoing reforestation, increased use of biomass and reduced use of fossil-fuel inputs and reduced agricultural emissions. In all events, realizing these incomes would necessitate substantially greater policy support and investment in sustainable land uses than is currently the case.
Potential carbon sequestration and nitrogen cycling in long-term organic management systems			The fertility and soil health of organic agroecosystems are determined in part by the size and turnover rate of soil carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) pools. Our research contrasts the effects of best management practices (BMP) (reduction in soil disturbance, addition of organic amendments) on C and N cycling in soils from two field sites representing five organic agroecosystems. Total soil organic C (SOC), a standard measure of soil health, contains equal amounts of biologically and non-biologically active C that is not associated with release of mineral N. A three-pool first-order model can be used to estimate the size and turnover rates of C pools but requires data from a long-term incubation. Our research highlights the use of two rapid C fractions, hydrolysable and permanganate (0.02 M) oxidizable C, to assess shifts in biologically active C. Adoption of BMP in organic management systems reduced the partitioning of C to the active pool while augmenting the slow pool C. These pools are associated with potentially mineralizable N supplied by residues, amendments and soil organic matter affecting the concentration and release of mineral N to crops. Our data show that minimizing disturbance (no tillage, pasture) and mixed compost additions have the potential to reduce carbon dioxide emissions while enhancing slow pool C and or its turnover, a reservoir of nutrients available to the soil biota. Use of these rapid, sensitive indicators of biological C activity will aid growers in determining whether a BMP fosters nutrient loss or retention prior to shifts in total SOC.
Potential for Farmers' Cooperatives to Convert Coffee Husks into Biochar and Promote the Bioeconomy in the North Ecuadorian Amazon			Featured ApplicationAgricultural wastes generated in farmers' cooperatives constitute valuable resources for the bioeconomy and can be recycled into biochar to contribute to the implementation of economically and environmentally sustainable agricultural production in the forests of the Ecuadorian Amazon.Improving the livelihoods of communities living in fragile ecosystems, such as tropical forests, is among the main strategies to promote their conservation and preserve wildlife. In the Ecuadorian Amazon, farmers' cooperatives are recognized as an important mechanism to improve the socioeconomic conditions of local communities. This study analyzes the integration of pyrolysis processes to convert agricultural waste into biochar as a way to implement the bioeconomy in these organizations. We found that post-harvesting processes in the studied farmers' cooperatives are similar, and coffee husks are a potential feedstock to produce biochar. Although the environmental policies in Ecuador consider the valorization of agricultural waste, we did not find any specific standard to regulate the operation of pyrolysis facilities. Nonetheless, conversion of agricultural waste into biochar can contribute to (i) replacement of subsidized fossil fuels used in drying processes, (ii) prevention of environmental pollution caused by accumulation of waste, (iii) emergence of new income sources linked with the provision of carbon sequestration services, and (iv) the long-term maintenance of soil fertility. Currently, demonstration projects are needed to stimulate collaboration among farmers' cooperatives, academia, the government, international cooperation agencies, and existing forest conservation initiatives.
Potential land area for reforestation and carbon dioxide mitigation effect through biomass energy conversion			Reforestation has a great potential to fix carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere through photosynthesis of biomass and biomass energy conversion. The magnitude of CO2 fixation depends on the potential land area. We have proposed a potential area of about 350 Mha for reforestation in tropical and semi-tropical areas. If such land is used for energy plantation aimed at substitutive energy production by power generation, the CO2 mitigation effect can be evaluated on the assumption of short rotation energy plantation (6-year rotation), plantation area (1Mha), biomass productivity (10.5 dry ton/ha/y), energy efficiency of power generation (0.27), etc. Assuming these factors, the net carbon dioxide mitigation effect is 1.4 billion t-C on 340 Mha. (C) 1997 Elsevier Science Ltd.
Potential mechanisms for achieving agricultural benefits from biochar application to temperate soils: a review			Natural organic biomass burning creates black carbon which forms a considerable proportion of the soil's organic carbon. Due to black carbon's aromatic structure it is recalcitrant and has the potential for long-term carbon sequestration in soil. Soils within the Amazon-basin contain numerous sites where the 'dark earth of the Indians' (Terra preta de Indio, or Amazonian Dark Earths (ADE)) exist and are composed of variable quantities of highly stable organic black carbon waste ('biochar'). The apparent high agronomic fertility of these sites, relative to tropical soils in general, has attracted interest. Biochars can be produced by 'baking' organic matter under low oxygen ('pyrolysis'). The quantities of key mineral elements within these biochars can be directly related to the levels of these components in the feedstock prior to burning. Their incorporation in soils influences soil structure, texture, porosity, particle size distribution and density. The molecular structure of biochars shows a high degree of chemical and microbial stability. A key physical feature of most biochars is their highly porous structure and large surface area. This structure can provide refugia for beneficial soil micro-organisms such as mycorrhizae and bacteria, and influences the binding of important nutritive cations and anions. This binding can enhance the availability of macro-nutrients such as N and P. Other biochar soil changes include alkalisation of soil pH and increases in electrical conductivity (EC) and cation exchange capacity (CEC). Ammonium leaching has been shown to be reduced, along with N2O soil emissions. There may also be reductions in soil mechanical impedance. Terra preta soils contain a higher number of 'operational taxonomic units' and have highly distinctive microbial communities relative to neighbouring soils. The potential importance of biochar soil incorporation on mycorrhizal fungi has also been noted with biochar providing a physical niche devoid of fungal grazers. Improvements in soil field capacity have been recorded upon biochar additions. Evidence shows that bioavailability and plant uptake of key nutrients increases in response to biochar application, particularly when in the presence of added nutrients. Depending on the quantity of biochar added to soil significant improvements in plant productivity have been achieved, but these reports derive predominantly from studies in the tropics. As yet there is limited critical analysis of possible agricultural impacts of biochar application in temperate regions, nor on the likelihood of utilising such soils as long-term sites for carbon sequestration. This review aims to determine the extent to which inferences of experience mostly from tropical regions could be extrapolated to temperate soils and to suggest areas requiring study.
Potential of adaptive co-management in restoring socio-ecological functions of degraded community forests in temperate Himalaya, India			Scarcity of empirical studies turning the concepts into cost-effective practices is a barrier in achieving the desired trajectory and scale of ecosystem restoration. The present study aimed to assess (i) potential of tree-bamboo-medicinal herb mixed plantation founded on the concept of adaptive co-management in restoration of degraded community forest in a temperate village of Indian Himalaya and (ii) persistence of offer of local people to voluntarily maintain and expand the trial after its economic benefit/cost ratio became >1.0. Biodiversity, carbon stock and economic benefits were assessed in the restored forest 1, 3 and 10 years after 7-year-long-funding phase (i.e., 8, 10 and 20 years after initial planting in 1991), and other land uses in the village landscape. Significant economic loss occurred from gregarious flowering induced mass mortality of bamboo in the 2nd year after funding phase but it was outweighed by the gain from walnut fruiting. People maintained recovery by transplanting Nepalese Alder (Alnus nepalensis) in gaps. The 20-year-old restored forest land had 17% of aboveground and 75% of belowground carbon stocks, and 39% of flowering species present in the intact forest. Restored forest had only four of the eight Near-threatened/Threatened species present in intact forest. Further, intact forest was monetarily the most efficient land use despite absence of payments for its ecosystem services. People did not expand the trial or medicinal plant cultivation in farms induced by it. They abandoned cropping in 39% farm area and leased 24% abandoned area to a company. Flowering plant species richness and carbon stocks changed at the ecosystem scale but not at the village landscape scale. Emission from agricultural abandonment nullified carbon sequestration by forest restoration. Community forest restoration should render both material/monetary and non-material/non-monetary benefits to people. Cultural landscapes should be taken as spatial units for ecosystem restoration planning, monitoring and evaluation.
Potential of agroforestry orchards as a conservation set-aside initiative in industrial rubber tree and oil palm plantations for avian biodiversity			At the expense of irreversible biodiversity loss, industrial modern agriculture is expanding in tropical regions. The conversion of forests to large scale monoculture plantations has fragmented and reduced habitat complexity, and altered biotic communities. However, the establishment of agroforestry orchards as a part of a conservation set-aside programme may aid biodiversity by providing a wider range of ecological niches to support more diverse bird fauna within industrial monoculture plantations. Thus, in this study, we compared avian biodiversity assemblages (species richness, abundance, and functional bird groups) between two types of agricultural production (agroforestry orchards and agriculture monocultures) in Peninsular Malaysia with the aim of assessing the applicability of the conservation set-aside. We measured 14 predictor variables consisting of habitat attributes, vegetation health, and insect food availability, to determine the key ecological drivers for avian biodiversity in tropical agriculture matrices. Across the study area, we recorded 6,284 birds from 110 species (42 families) via point count sampling. Our results revealed that agroforestry orchards were able to support greater avian biodiversity assemblages in terms of species richness and abundance compared to monoculture plantations. Bird species richness and abundance were driven by 10 out of 14 predictor variables, with arthropod order richness, vegetation health, land-use type and season having significant influence on both models. Bird functional groups were attributed to 11 predictor variables with vegetation health, land-use type and season having the most influence over all bird groups. Our findings highlight the potential of agroforestry orchards as conservation set-aside for avian biodiversity in industrialised monoculture plantation landscapes.
Potential of dendrochronology in assessing carbon sequestration rates of Vitellaria paradoxa in southern Mali, West Africa			This study aimed to investigate the applicability of dendrochronology for assessing the growth dynamics and response to climate variability and to estimate the aboveground carbon stock and carbon sequestration potential of Vitellaria paradoxa in southern Mali. Twenty stem disks were collected from three land-use types (parklands, fallows and protected areas) in Koutiala and Yanfolila districts. We cornbined a standard dendrochronological approach with biomass allometric equations to estimate the growth and carbon stocks. The results showed that V. paradoxa forms distinct growth ring boundaries but most of the disks from parklands did not successfully cross-date due to management operations like pruning. The tree-ring width showed a significant standardized coefficient of regression with rainfall (r(2) = 0.66, p < 0.001) but insignificant correlation with temperature. One-way analysis of variance showed no significant difference (p > 0.05) for C-sequestration as well as for carbon stocks in aboveground biomass for both land-use types and sites. Mean values of the amount of C-sequestered in Yanfolila were 0.112 +/- 0.0.065 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1) in parklands, 0.075 +/- 0.018 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1) in fallows and 0.064 +/- 0.028 Mg C ha-(1) yr(-1) in protected areas. In Koutiala, the values were 0.068 +/- 0.020 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1) in the parklands and 0.053 +/- 0.017 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1) in the fallows. These results clearly indicate that dendrochronology can be applied to assess growth and carbon sequestration potential of V. paradoxa. These results also suggest that climate change could affect the growth and carbon sequestration potential of V. paradoxa. Given the limited size of our sample, figures on the amount of carbon are indicative calling for applying the tested approaches to larger samples and also to other tree species in West Africa. (C) 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
Potential of reducing GHG emission from REDD+ activities in Indonesia			Loss of forest cover in large scale in tropical region will have impact on climate significantly. This will change air pressure distribution and shift the typical global circulation patterns and change rainfall distribution. Its contribution to the increase of greenhouse gas emission will also enhance global warming and may increase the frequency and intensity of extreme climate events. Deforestation in the three tropical regions, Amazon, Central Africa, and Southeast Asia, still continues. Without significant change in forest protection efforts, the loss of forests in these three regions by 2050 will reach about 29, 98, and 44 %, respectively. Indonesia has the largest tropical forest in SEA; the contribution of emission from land use change and forest (LUCF) reached 60 % of the total national emission, much higher than energy sector. During the period 1990-2013, the total loss of natural forest reached about 19.7 million hectares or about 0.822 million ha per year. Without significant change in forest protection program, within the period 2010-2050, Indonesia may lose 43.4 million ha of forest or equivalent to deforestation rate of 1.08 million ha per year. Potential of reducing emission from REDD+ activities is quite big. By increasing expenses of the government by 1%annually on top of the external investment for technology change, without necessity of direct forest protection (e.g., increasing agriculture productivity reduces pressure on forests), the deforestation rate could reduce to about 0.337 million ha per year. The issuance of innovative financing and incentive policies for improving land and forest management may further increase the potential of reducing emission from REDD+ activities. Some of the policies include the use of debt-for-nature swap (DNS) scheme for accelerating the development of forest management units in open access area, incentive for permit holders for accelerating the development of timber plantation on degraded land, and increase community access to fund for green investment. The incentive system for the permit holders is for handling land tenurial issues or conflicts. The incentive could be in the form of reducing or exemption of administration/retribution fees for certain period of time depending on the level of conflicts. Policy allowing for transferring the funds to a financing system is relatively easy to be accessed by the community such as blending financing, a financing system that synergizes all financial sources such as CSR funding; government funding such as state budget (APBN); and local government budget (APBD) funds, banking, and international funding. This system can help leverage private funding and supports regional development by supporting community activities in urban agriculture and agroforestry including building human resource capacity through assistance and training activities. © The Author(s) 2016. All rights reserved.
Potential of seagrass habitat restorations as nature-based solutions: Practical and scientific implications in Indonesia			Seagrasses offer diverse ecosystem services, yet, they are among the most threatened ecosystems. When degraded or destroyed, their services are lost or reduced in the process, affecting, for instance, local communities directly dependent on their livelihood provision. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reported that climate change is projected to worsen over time; thus, there is an urgent need for mitigation strategies in practice and also in the longer term. This work aims to provide an alternative perspective of seagrass restoration as a nature based solution (NbS) on a global scale, yet, giving an emphasis on tropical regions such as Indonesia. We focused on seagrass restorations which are not yet well established in comparison with other restoration programs (e.g., mangroves) despite their critical roles. We present in this work how restoring seagrass meadows fits the global standard of NbS published by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). The results of this study can serve as a basis for promoting seagrass restorations as NbS against climate change particularly in countries with a wide extent of seagrass coverage.
Potential of slash-and-mulch system with legumes to conserve soil attributes and macrofauna diversity in Eastern Amazon			Slash-and-burn agriculture has been practiced for thousands of years in the tropics and is sustainable in con-ditions of low population density, and long fallow. However, the population increase leads to intensification, and consequently the reduction of fallow, productivity, and sustainability. Then, public and private institutions with farmers, are seeking alternatives to replace this farming system. The slash-and-mulch technique for smallholder farmers is widespread in Central America and has the potential to be transferred to other regions. Nonetheless, little information is available about its potential for the eastern Amazon. The soil macrofauna is associated with soil quality and agricultural sustainability as it plays a key role in the provision of ecosystem services. Higher taxa of this fauna are often used to evaluate soil management, given that they are influenced by land-use and produce a fast response. Therefore, this study evaluates the short-term effects of the slash-and-burn or the slash -and-mulch system, after different durations of fallow on the composition, density, and diversity of the soil macrofauna higher taxa and selected physical and chemical attributes. Results are compared to old-growth forest and secondary forest fragments. The slash-and-mulch fields had soil fertility attributes similar to slash-and-burn and macrofauna diversity and composition were similar to forests. In particular, functional groups like ecosystem engineers or predators augmented with slash-and-mulch and were efficient indicators of land-use change. Despite its scarcity and their very high fragmentation, old-growth forest small remnants do conserve a more diverse and abundant soil invertebrates community of saprophages and predators, therefore their conservation is of utmost importance. This is the first study to show the potential of the slash-and-mulch system in this region to enhance the resilience of the smallholders' landscapes. Nonetheless, soil quality needs to be monitored to confirm the effective restoration of soil functionality and agriculture productivity.
Potentiality of carbon sequestration by agroforestry species in Bangladesh			Agroforestry, a land-use system, is receiving wider attention not only in terms of agricultural sustainability but also in issues related to climate change. The potentiality to sequester carbon by agroforestry species in sub-tropical regions like Bangladesh is promising. A field experiment was conducted to evaluate the carbon sequestration potentiality of three agroforestry species (Albizia lebbeck, Leucaena leucocephala and Melia azedarach) in the northern part of Bangladesh. The carbon sequestration potential of three agroforestry species varied from 115 to 135 Mg C/ha/year at the age of seven years after plantation. Among the agroforestry tree species, L. leucocephala sequestrated maximum amount (135 Mg C/ha/year) of carbon from the atmosphere followed by M. azedarach (120 Mg C/ha/year) and A. lebbeck (115 Mg C/ha/year). Therefore, carbon sequestration potentiality of the studied agroforestry species can be ranked as L. leucocephala>M. azedarach>A. lebbeck.
Potentials of Bamboo-Based Agroforestry for Sustainable Development in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Review			There is widespread assertion among scientists, government and development experts that bamboo agroforestry could contribute to sustainable rural development in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). However, there are limited available data to verify the suitability of the system in the region. In addition, the current state of knowledge and adoption of agroforestry in SSA offers very little guidance as to which type of agroforestry systems bamboo could be integrated. Here, we reviewed the potential socioeconomic and environmental benefits of bamboo agroforestry and accentuate implications on sustainable rural development in SSA. In addition, we analysed potential research areas that could be intensified, so that future developments and scaling-up of bamboo agroforestry can be rooted in robust scientific findings rather than the intuitions of governments and development actors.
Practitioner views on the determinants of tropical forest restoration longevity			Ensuring the long-term persistence of tropical forest restoration projects is vital to maintaining carbon stocks, biodiversity, and other benefits of restored ecosystems. But our understanding of the factors that determine restoration longevity-the age that a restored ecosystem attains before being converted to another land use-is limited, and derived primarily from studies based on remote sensing or observations at a single site over time. In this article, we apply a new approach by surveying restoration practitioners from across the tropics on the factors that they perceive to influence restoration longevity. Through an online survey (including categorical and open-ended questions) we asked practitioners about the ecological and social characteristics of their restoration projects, and their views on what factors contribute to project longevity. We summarized the information on project characteristics, and conducted thematic analysis and coding of the longevity drivers discussed by respondents. A total of 29 respondents from 15 tropical countries completed our survey, with the majority of projects occurring on previously pastured lands in wet and lowland tropical forests. Practitioners discussed social factors more than twice as frequently as ecological factors. The most frequently cited social factor key to restoration longevity was engagement with multiple stakeholders, followed by long-term funding, the need for innovative project design, as well as effective and inspirational leadership. Overall, the voices of practitioners underscore the critical need to address local social context in order to achieve long-term forest recovery.
Predation pressure by birds and arthropods on herbivorous insects affected by tropical forest restoration strategy			Recovery of animal-dependent ecosystem functions is a key component of ecological restoration on degraded tropical forest lands. One of these functions, regulation of herbivorous insects by predators, shapes tropical communities through cascading trophic effects. An improved understanding of how predation pressure on herbivorous insects varies with reforestation strategy, management decisions, and landscape context would guide restoration practice. We measured predation pressure by birds and arthropods on dummy caterpillars in five forest types in Panama. These land covers represent natural and managed forest conditions: non-native monoculture plantation, native multispecies plantation, young natural forest succession, secondary gallery forest, and old-growth forest. We also placed dummy caterpillars in residential countryside, a heavily disturbed nonforest land cover. In three land covers, we surveyed bird communities to examine the relationship between predator abundance and predation pressure. Predation pressure from birds was lowest in the intensively managed plantations and highest in land covers with structurally complex vegetation: successional forest, gallery forest, and residential countryside. In the non-native plantation, bird predation increased with proximity to gallery forest. We found strong correspondence between bird abundance and bird attacks on dummy caterpillars. Arthropod predation pressure was highest in the native plantation but, unlike bird predation pressure, did not vary strongly by land cover. Our results suggest that ecosystem functions by insectivorous birds can be enhanced on reforestation lands by incorporating unmanaged areas and tolerating nonplanted understory vegetation. We recommend that, regardless of management objectives, forest managers adopt a holistic approach to reforestation to facilitate recovery of animal-dependent ecosystem functions.
Predicting landscape-scale biodiversity recovery by natural tropical forest regrowth			Natural forest regrowth is a cost-effective, nature-based solution for biodiversity recovery, yet different socioenvironmental factors can lead to variable outcomes. A critical knowledge gap in forest restoration planning is how to predict where natural forest regrowth is likely to lead to high levels of biodiversity recovery, which is an indicator of conservation value and the potential provisioning of diverse ecosystem services. We sought to predict and map landscape-scale recovery of species richness and total abundance of vertebrates, invertebrates, and plants in tropical and subtropical second-growth forests to inform spatial restoration planning. First, we conducted a global meta-analysis to quantify the extent to which recovery of species richness and total abundance in second-growth forests deviated from biodiversity values in reference old-growth forests in the same landscape. Second, we employed a machine-learning algorithm and a comprehensive set of socioenvironmental factors to spatially predict landscape-scale deviation and map it. Models explained on average 34% of observed variance in recovery (range 9-51%). Landscape-scale biodiversity recovery in second-growth forests was spatially predicted based on socioenvironmental landscape factors (human demography, land use and cover, anthropogenic and natural disturbance, ecosystem productivity, and topography and soil chemistry); was significantly higher for species richness than for total abundance for vertebrates (median range-adjusted predicted deviation 0.09 vs. 0.34) and invertebrates (0.2 vs. 0.35) but not for plants (which showed a similar recovery for both metrics [0.24 vs. 0.25]); and was positively correlated for total abundance of plant and vertebrate species (Pearson r = 0.45, p = 0.001). Our approach can help identify tropical and subtropical forest landscapes with high potential for biodiversity recovery through natural forest regrowth.
Predicting pan-tropical climate change induced forest stock gains and losses-implications for REDD			Deforestation is a major threat to tropical forests worldwide, contributing up to one-fifth of global carbon emissions into the atmosphere. Despite protection efforts, deforestation of tropical forests has continued in recent years. Providing incentives to reducing deforestation has been proposed in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Bali negotiations in 2007 to decelerate emissions from deforestation (REDD-reduced emissions from deforestation and forest degradation). A number of methodological issues such as ensuring permanence, establishing reference emissions levels that do not reward business-as-usual and having a measuring, reporting and verification system in place are essential elements in implementing successful REDD schemes. To assess the combined impacts of climate and land-use change on tropical forest carbon stocks in the 21st century, we use a dynamic global vegetation model (LPJ DGVM) driven by five different climate change projections under a given greenhouse gas emission scenario (SRES A2) and two contrasting land-use change scenarios. We find that even under a complete stop of deforestation after the period of the Kyoto Protocol (post-2012) some countries may continue to lose carbon stocks due to climate change. Especially at risk is tropical Latin America, although the presence and magnitude of the risk depends on the climate change scenario. By contrast, strong protection of forests could increase carbon uptake in many tropical countries, due to CO2 fertilization effects, even under altered climate regimes.
Predictive model for sustaining biodiversity in tropical countryside			Growing demand for food, fuel, and fiber is driving the intensification and expansion of agricultural land through a corresponding displacement of native woodland, savanna, and shrubland. In the wake of this displacement, it is clear that farmland can support biodiversity through preservation of important ecosystem elements at a fine scale. However, how much biodiversity can be sustained and with what tradeoffs for production are open questions. Using a well-studied tropical ecosystem in Costa Rica, we develop an empirically based model for quantifying the "wildlife-friendliness" of farmland for native birds. Some 80% of the 166 mist-netted species depend on fine-scale countryside forest elements (<= 60-m-wide clusters of trees, typically of variable length and width) that weave through farmland along hilltops, valleys, rivers, roads, and property borders. Our model predicts with similar to 75% accuracy the bird community composition of any part of the landscape. We find conservation value in small (<= 20 m wide) clusters of trees and somewhat larger (<= 60 m wide) forest remnants to provide substantial support for biodiversity beyond the borders of tropical forest reserves. Within the study area, forest elements on farms nearly double the effective size of the local forest reserve, providing seminatural habitats for bird species typically associated with the forest. Our findings provide a basis for estimating and sustaining biodiversity in farming systems through managing fine-scale ecosystem elements and, more broadly, informing ecosystem service analyses, biodiversity action plans, and regional land use strategies.
Preferential substrate use decreases priming effects in contrasting treeline soils			Climate change currently manifests in upward and northward shifting treelines, which encompasses changes to the carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) composition of organic inputs to soils. Whether these changed inputs will increase or decrease microbial mineralisation of native soil organic matter remains unknown, making it difficult to estimate how treeline shifts will affect the C balance. Aiming to improve mechanistic understanding of C cycling in regions experiencing treeline shifts, we quantified priming effects in soils of high altitudes (Peruvian Andes) and high latitudes (subarctic Sweden), differentiating landcover types (boreal forest, tropical forest, tundra heath, Puna grassland) and soil horizons (organic, mineral). In a controlled laboratory incubation, soils were amended with substrates of different C:N, composed of an organic C source at a constant ratio of 30% substrate-C to microbial biomass C, combined with different levels of a nutrient solution neutral in pH. Substrate additions elicited both positive and negative priming effects in both ecosystems, independent from substrate C:N. Positive priming prevailed above the treeline in high altitudes and in mineral soils in high latitudes, where consequently climate change-induced treeline shifts and deeper rooting plants may enhance SOM-mineralisation and soil C emissions. However, such C loss may be compensated by negative priming, which dominated in the other soil types and was of larger magnitude than positive priming. In line with other studies, these results indicate a consistent mechanism linking decreased SOM-mineralisation (negative priming) to increased microbial substrate utilisation, suggesting preferential substrate use as a potential tool to support soil C storage.[GRAPHICS].
Preservation of labile organic compounds is the pathway for carbon storage in a 23-year continuous no-till system on a Ferralsol in southern Brazil			No-till (NT) system has the potential to sequester soil organic carbon (SOC) in the topsoil and increase soil quality. However, SOC accumulation in the soil profile and the mechanisms for SOC stabilization in NT are still a matter of debate, especially for soils of the tropics. Therefore, this study was conducted to investigate the long-term effects of two tillage systems (conventional tillage - CT and no-till - NT) on chemical and physical mechanisms of SOC stabilization and how these are related to the accumulation of SOC in the soil profile. Soils were sampled (0-100 cm depth) from a long-term experiment (23 years) established on a Rhodic Ferralsol in southern Brazil. Soils under native vegetation (NV) were used as a baseline. Results showed that conversion of NV to agriculture decreased on average the SOC stock by 70.8 Mg ha-1 (-33%) in the 0-100 cm soil layer. Between tillage systems, higher SOC stock was observed under NT than that under CT in the 0-5 and 5-10 cm soil layers, resulting in higher SOC stock in the entire topsoil (0-20 cm) in the conservation system. In the subsoil (20-100 cm), SOC was similar for both tillage systems. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy showed differ-ences in the C composition between the tillage systems; an accumulation of labile compounds in the uppermost layer was observed under NT, which resulted in a lower SOM aromaticity index under this treatment than that in soil under CT management. Adoption of NT increased the proportion of large macroaggregates (> 2.0 mm) in 0-5 cm soil layer, resulting in a greater mean weight diameter (MWD) than under CT. Principal component analysis (PCA) and correlation analysis of data for 0-20 cm soil layer showed that SOC stock is positively associated with labile compounds, the proportion of large macroaggregates, and MWD, and negatively with small macroaggregates, aromatic compounds, and aromaticity index. These results indicated that the pathway for SOC accumulation in the topsoil of NT is influenced less by selective preservation but driven by the maintenance of labile organic compounds, a process achieved by the low turnover of large macroaggregates in the NT system.
Primary Forest Degradation and Secondary Re-Growth Dynamics in the Brazilian Amazon			0
Primate and ungulate responses to teak agroforestry in a southern Amazonian landscape			Agroforestry systems are widely extolled as a biodiversity-friendly alternative to food and wood production. However, few studies on large-vertebrates in the tropics consistently support this assumption. In the Amazonian 'arch of deforestation', commodity cropland and pastures for beef production have relentlessly replaced native forests. Agroforestry should therefore be both economically profitable and a more wildlife-friendly land-use alternative. Here we assess the local abundance and habitat use by forest primates and ungulates in a landscape mosaic containing large areas of primary forest and teak (Tectona grandis) agroforestry. We focused on animals of these groups because they have similar day ranges and home ranges, and are at the same trophic level. We surveyed 12 transects in both of these environments, totalling 485 km walked. We recorded four ungulate (Tayassu pecari, Pecari tajacu, Mazama americana, and Tapirus terrestris) and seven primate species (Ateles chamek, Lagothrix cana, Sapajus apella, Saimiri ustus, Chiropotes albinasus, Plecturocebus cf. moloch and Mico cf. emiliae). We indicate the importance of a species-level approach to evaluate the contribution of agroforests to population persistence. Large-bodied atelids, which are ripe-fruit-pulp specialists, were never recorded in teak agroforest. Sakis were more common in primary forest, while the smallest faunivore-frugivores had similar sighting rates in both environments. Ungulates exhibited subtler differences in their use of space than primates, but their sighting rates and track counts indicated temporal niche partition. White-lipped peccaries and red brocket deer were the only ungulates more frequently recorded in primary forest areas. Teak agroforestry still harbours some large and midsized frugivores, which may contribute with some biotic ecosystem services if their patches are connected to primary tropical forests. However, teak agroforestry should not be used to justify population subsidies for all Amazonian forest vertebrate species, since at least some threatened species clearly avoid forest stands dominated by this fast-growing exotic tree. (C) 2019 Published by Elsevier GmbH on behalf of Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Saugetierkunde.
Principles and Methods for Assessing Climate Change Mitigation as an Ecosystem Service in Agroecosystems			The concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the atmosphere has increased considerably over the last four decades. This increase primarily results from the burning of fossil fuels and the conversion of tropical forests to agriculture, with concomitant negative impacts upon the global climate. Agricultural activities account for about 13.5 per cent of total anthropogenic GHG emissions (Rogner et al, 2007) and release mainly nitrous oxide (N2O) and methane (CH4) (about 45 per cent of agricultural GHG emissions each), with CO2 accounting for the remaining share (Baumert et al, 2005). Agricultural N2O and CH4 emissions are expected to increase by 35 to 60 per cent in 2030 due to increased nitrogen fertilizer use, animal manure production and livestock numbers. In contrast, CO2 emissions are likely to remain at the same level due to stable or declining deforestation rates, and increased adoption of conservation tillage practices (Smith et al, 2007). Mitigating agricultural GHGs can be achieved by reducing emissions through more efficient management of carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) flows and by enhancing C storage in soil and vegetation (Smith et al, 2007). Agroforestry systems (AFS) are one means by which the impacts of climate change can be mitigated. The role that AFS play can be increased through payment for ecosystem services (PES) systems that reduce agricultural emissions and increase the quantity of carbon stored. Carbon sequestration (or atmospheric CO2 removal) as an ecosystem service of AFS is generally quantified as the amount of C stored in trees. Nevertheless, increasing tree density in agroforests may also modify soil fluxes of N2O or CH4, which have a global warming potential (GWP) 298 and 25 times higher than CO2, respectively (Forster et al, 2007). Nitrogen-fixing species used as shade trees (e.g. in coffee plantations) may increase soil emissions of N2O (Hergoualc’h et al, 2008) and reduce the soil CH4 sink (Palm et al, 2002). © Bruno Rapidel, Fabrice DeClerck, Jean-François Le Coq and John Beer 2011.
Prioritizing forestation based on biogeochemical and local biogeophysical impacts			Reforestation and afforestation is expected to achieve a quarter of all emission reduction pledged under the Paris Agreement. Trees store carbon in biomass and soil but also alter the surface energy balance, warming or cooling the local climate. Mitigation scenarios and policies often neglect these biogeophysical (BGP) effects. Here we combine observational BGP datasets with carbon uptake or emission data to assess the end-of-century mitigation potential of forestation. Forestation and conservation of tropical forests achieve the highest climate benefit at 732.12 tCO(2)e ha(-1). Higher-latitude forests warm the local winter climate, affecting 73.7% of temperate forests. Almost a third (29.8%) of forests above 56 degrees N induce net winter warming if only their biomass is considered. Including soil carbon reduces the net warming area to 6.8% but comes with high uncertainty (2.9-42.0%). Our findings emphasize the necessity to conserve and re-establish tropical forests and consider BGP effects in policy scenarios.Forests take up carbon from the atmosphere but also change Earth's surface energy balance through biophysical effects. Accounting for these shows that tropical forests have the highest mitigation potential; the climate benefit of higher-latitude forests is offset by their warming effects in winter.
Priority areas for restoring ecosystem services to enhance human well-being in a dry forest			Habitat destruction reduces biodiversity and affects ecosystem functioning, putting at risk the provision of ecosystem services (ESs) essential for human well-being. Ecological restoration using native species with multiple uses may offer a long-term supply of natural resources for vulnerable human populations. We selected priority areas for restoration in the Brazilian Seasonally Dry Tropical Forest (Caatinga), targeting areas with high ES demand but low supply. We estimated the supply and demand for three ESs: (1) food/medicine, (2) wood production, and (3) pollination. We estimated ES supply using maps of the potential geographical distribution of 194 native plant species used by the local population as a means of livelihood. For ES demand, we used maps of population density, rural municipalities, wood productivity, and crops dependent on pollination. We used a large-scale prioritization tool (Zonation) to select two scenarios for each ES: (1) ES supply-only and (2) ES supply + ES demand, selecting only nonvegetated areas. To select priority areas, where the potential occurrence of species (ES supply) corresponds to areas of high demand for the same services, we overlapped the maps of the two scenarios for each ES. The highest percentage of scenario overlap occurred for food/medicine ES (45%), whereas pollination showed the lowest percentage of overlap (10%), indicating little similarity between potential ES supply and demand areas. Our study shows the importance of including ES in ecological restoration opportunities, taking into account the vulnerable human population in dry regions and their demand for natural resources.
Priority science can accelerate agroforestry as a natural climate solution			The expansion of agroforestry could provide substantial climate change mitigation (up to 0.31 Pg C yr-1), comparable to other prominent natural climate solutions such as reforestation. Yet, climate-focused agroforestry efforts grapple with ambiguity about which agroforestry actions provide mitigation, uncertainty about the magnitude of that mitigation and inability to reliably track progress. In this Perspective, we define agroforestry as a natural climate solution, discuss current understanding of the controls on farm-scale mitigation potential and highlight recent innovation on emergent, high-resolution remote sensing methods to enable detection, measurement and monitoring. We also assess the status of agroforestry in the context of global climate ambitions, highlighting regions of underappreciated expansion opportunity and identifying priorities for policy and praxis.In this Perspective, the authors highlight agroforestry as a natural climate solution, discussing definitional refinements, controls on mitigation potential and remote sensing innovations. They assess the status of agroforestry in the context of climate ambitions, identifying key areas and opportunities.
Priority setting for scaling-up tropical forest restoration projects: Early lessons from the Atlantic Forest Restoration Pact			Ongoing conversion of tropical forests makes it urgent to invest in ecological restoration on grand scales in order to promote biodiversity conservation and ecosystem services. The 4-year old Atlantic Forest Restoration Pact (AFRP) aims to restore 15,000,000 ha of tropical forest in 40 years. The approaches and lessons learned appear transferable, and could help achieve the global restoration targets. Fundamental prerequisites for success include: effective technology undergoing continuous improvement, ongoing teaching, outreach and capacity-building efforts, presence of local intelligentsia, maintaining a clear and transparent legal environment, and presence of effective economic instruments and incentives for landowners. These prerequisites can be achieved by expanding and strengthening the network of stakeholders both in public and private forums that must be aware of macroeconomic and social/cultural shifts and trends which may provide opportunities and impose constraints to further restoration activities. Finally, environmental regulations imposing habitat protection and restoration are usually beyond individual land-owners' possibilities and level of interest. Therefore, forest restoration, even in a biodiversity hotspot, must be approached as a potentially sustainable economic activity. Otherwise, private landowners, and most other stakeholders, will not persevere. (C) 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Progress in the study on the impact of land-use change on regional carbon sources and sinks			Land-use change may be carbon sources or sinks that play vital roles in the terrestrial carbon cycle. This paper reviewed the effects of land-use change on the carbon cycle of forests, grasslands, and agricultural ecosystems based on researches carried out in China and worldwide. Globally, the effects of the conversion of forest to cropland and grassland on the global carbon cycle dominate the carbon emissions from deforestation. Regional differences in carbon emissions due to transformation of forests into croplands and grasslands reflect on the regional climate. The carbon emissions per/ hm2 from tropical forest converted into cropland and grassland were 151 and 120 tC/ hm2 higher than the emissions from temperate or boreal forests, respectively. Furthermore, land-use change could promote forest carbon storage through reforestation and improved forest management. Significant differences exist in the potential carbon sinks created through change in land use. Tropical humid and semi-humid regions have greater potential for carbon sequestration than temperate regions, while the potential for carbon sequestration in arid regions is relatively small. Reclamation of grassland to cropland is one of the main human activities that affects the carbon stock of grassland ecosystems, causing the soil carbon stock to fall by 59%. When a forest or grassland is converted to cropland, carbon stocks in both vegetation and soil are reduced as well as the ecosystem忆s carbon storage capacity. With the expansion of cities, the conversion of cropland to land for construction further increases carbon emissions. Currently, researchers employ several methods when analyzing the effects of land-use change including remote sensing and models based on remote sensing, statistical estimation, ecosystem models, and the coupling models of land-use change and ecosystem. Temporal land-use change data can be obtained from remote sensing data, as well as the data related to temperature, soil moisture, and vegetation structure parameters. These data can be used to drive remote sensing models such as the Carnegie-Ames-Stanford Approach (CASA) and Global Production Efficiency Modeling (GLO-PEM). The bookkeeping model is a typical statistical model and is easy to use, while the simulation results cannot provide sufficient accuracy. Ecosystem models include models of static and dynamic types. CENTURY, CASA, and BIOME are believed to be the most widely used static models, while currently the Lund-Potsdam-Jena Dynamic Global Vegetation Model (LPJ-DGVM) and Terrestrial Ecosystem Model (TEM) are the most widely used dynamic models. Although ecosystem models can simulate the carbon balance of an ecosystem quite well, the current models do not consider the impact of land-use change on the carbon cycle and could be applied only at certain geographical scales. Therefore, a land-use model should be coupled with ecosystem models, such as the Integrated Model to Assess the Global Environment (IMAGE) and the Lund-Potsdam-Jena managed Land Dynamic Global Vegetation, Agriculture, and Water Balance Model (LPJmL). Although the research methods have been continually refined and improved, uncertainties remain in both the data and the models. Therefore, unified statistical observation methods should be established to reduce the uncertainties within various datasets, which will improve the accuracy of simulation results. Additionally, we need to improve the use of land-use models coupled with ecosystem models, which is expected to be the main research direction of this field. Integrated technology systems using multi-scale land-use change and ecosystem data should be established while considering social, economic, and environmental factors that drive carbon storage and emission. Furthermore, we need to carry out research designed to aid in the optimization of land-use layout with the target of reducing carbon emissions to provide more valuable information and sound policy recommendations. © 2015 Ecological Society of China. All Rights Reserved.
Prolonged tropical forest degradation due to compounding disturbances: Implications for CO2 and H2O fluxes			Drought, fire, and windstorms can interact to degrade tropical forests and the ecosystem services they provide, but how these forests recover after catastrophic disturbance events remains relatively unknown. Here, we analyze multi-year measurements of vegetation dynamics and function (fluxes of CO2 and H2O) in forests recovering from 7 years of controlled burns, followed by wind disturbance. Located in southeast Amazonia, the experimental forest consists of three 50-ha plots burned annually, triennially, or not at all from 2004 to 2010. During the subsequent 6-year recovery period, postfire tree survivorship and biomass sharply declined, with aboveground C stocks decreasing by 70%-94% along forest edges (0-200 m into the forest) and 36%-40% in the forest interior. Vegetation regrowth in the forest understory triggered partial canopy closure (70%-80%) from 2010 to 2015. The composition and spatial distribution of grasses invading degraded forest evolved rapidly, likely because of the delayed mortality. Four years after the experimental fires ended (2014), the burned plots assimilated 36% less carbon than the Control, but net CO2 exchange and evapotranspiration (ET) had fully recovered 7 years after the experimental fires ended (2017). Carbon uptake recovery occurred largely in response to increased light-use efficiency and reduced postfire respiration, whereas increased water use associated with postfire growth of new recruits and remaining trees explained the recovery in ET. Although the effects of interacting disturbances (e.g., fires, forest fragmentation, and blowdown events) on mortality and biomass persist over many years, the rapid recovery of carbon and water fluxes can help stabilize local climate.
Promoting landscapes with a low zoonotic disease risk through forest restoration: The need for comprehensive guidelines			Zoonotic diseases represent 75% of emerging infectious diseases worldwide, and their emergence is mainly attributed to human-driven changes in landscapes. Land use change, especially the conversion of natural areas to agricultural use, has the potential to impact hosts and vector dynamics, affecting pathogen transmission risk. While these links are becoming better understood, very few studies have investigated the opposite question-how native vegetation restoration affects zoonotic disease outbreaks. We reviewed the existing evidence linking native vegetation restoration with zoonotic transmission risk, identified knowledge gaps, and, by focusing on tropical areas, proposed forest restoration strategies that could help in limiting the spread of zoonotic diseases. We identified a large gap in information on the effects of native vegetation restoration on zoonotic diseases, especially within tropical regions. In addition, the few studies that exist do not consider environmental aspects that can affect the outcomes of restoration on disease risk, such as the land use history and landscape structural characteristics (as composition and configuration of native habitats). Our conceptual framework raises two important points: (1) the effects of forest restoration may depend on the context of the existing landscape, especially the percentage of native vegetation existing at the beginning of the restoration; and (2) these effects will also be dependent on the spatial arrangement of the restored area within the existing landscape. Furthermore, we propose important topics to be studied in the coming years to integrate zoonotic disease risk as a criterion in restoration planning. Synthesis and application. Our results contribute to a more comprehensive forest restoration planning, comprising multiple ecosystem services and resulting in healthier landscapes for both people and nature. Our framework could be integrated into the post-2020 global biodiversity framework targets.
Propensity of farmers to conserve forest within REDD plus projects in areas affected by armed-conflict			The implementation of carbon-storage efforts in countries experiencing armed conflicts or confronting illegal activities (such as illicit crop cultivation) will permit additional tropical forests to be protected for climate change mitigation. Yet, despite these potential gains, the appropriate design and application of forest conservation and climate change mitigation approaches such as the mechanism for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD +) in such contexts remain little studied. Unanswered questions relate to the propensity of farmers in conflict affected areas to conserve forests for climate change mitigation. Such questions include, for what reasons and under what circumstances would such farmer participate in climate change mitigation activities? In this paper we address these questions by developing an econometric Logit model to understand factors influencing the propensity to conserve forest of farmers from 14 villages in Colombia. These villages are located in a region recognized as a stronghold of guerrilla insurgencies and as the center for illegal crop cultivation. The region was selected as it is also the proposed target area for piloting Colombian government REDD + activities. A household survey (n = 90) showed that four explanatory variables are significantly related to the 'propensity to conserve forest'. 'Harvest of non-timber forest products' (specifically bush meat) positively influences a farmer's propensity to conserve forest. In contrast, higher 'percentage of forest area', 'deforestation for (the production of) subsistence crops' and 'harvest of wood product', each have a negative influence. Overall, results show an already high propensity to conserve forest among farmers (70% of respondents) and indicate their growing propensity toward the conservation of primary forest and management of degraded lands and secondary forest. These results might be attributable to efforts undertaken to reduce the causes of armed-conflicts and ecosystem deterioration, such as enhancement of land tenure security and farmer associations' rules to reduce deforestation. They might also be linked to communities' positive attitudes toward water resources conservation. We conclude that most farmers will not oppose forest conservation as long as it is compatible with their respective livelihood priorities. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Prospects for sustainable logging in tropical forests			A convincing body of evidence shows that as it is presently codified, sustainable forest-management (SFM) logging implemented at an industrial scale guarantees commercial and biological depletion of high-value timber species within three harvests in all three major tropical forest regions. The minimum technical standards necessary for approaching ecological sustainability directly contravene the prospects for financial profitability. Therefore, industrial-scale SFM is likely to lead to the degradation and devaluation of primary tropical forests as surely as widespread conventional unmanaged logging does today. Recent studies also show that logging in the tropics, even using SFM techniques, releases significant carbon dioxide and that carbon stocks once stored in logged timber and slash takes decades to rebuild. These results beg for a reevaluation of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change proposals to apply a Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation subsidy for the widespread implementation of SFM logging in tropical forests. However, encouraging models of the successful sustainable management of tropical forests for timber and nontimber products exist at local-community scales. © 2012 by American Institute of Biological Sciences. All rights reserved.
Protected areas and forest fragmentation: sustainability index for prioritizing fragments for landscape restoration			Tropical forests are threatened due to forest clearing and fragmentation which lead to a decrease in forest cover area and landscape connectivity, while also increasing edge effects. These impacts affect biodiversity and ecosystem service provision which are essential for humanity’s well-being. Protected areas are created to minimize these effects on biodiversity, but many of them are threatened due to forest fragmentation in the surrounding areas. Thus, forest restoration is needed to ensure the suitability of protected areas in the landscape. However, restoration planning needs to adopt an ecological landscape approach to ensure the recovery of the biodiversity and the ecological processes. This study developed a forest sustainability index (FSI) which represents the forest patch potential in facilitating landscape restoration in a protected area and its surroundings. A land-use/land-cover map was used to calculate landscape metrics at two levels: landscape and patch. Landscape metrics were subsequently selected to create the index. The tested landscape presents a great number of fragments with most of them being small in size and having irregular shapes. The focus areas for forest restoration are located close to forest fragments with higher FSI values, as these can facilitate natural restoration and guarantee the maintenance of the ecosystem processes. © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group on behalf of the International Water, Air & Soil Conservation Society(INWASCON).
Protecting environmental and socio-economic values of selectively logged tropical forests in the Anthropocene			Global timber demands have penetrated vast tracts of tropical rainforest, with selective logging the most powerful driver of human disturbance within these ecosystems. We review the consequences of timber harvesting on rainforest ecosystems, from individual species through to biological communities. We also investigate the benefits that forest-dwelling communities and wider society can derive from well-managed production forests. Selectively logged forests maintain a wide array of ecosystem services, and orders of magnitude higher levels of biodiversity and carbon storage than the agricultural lands that often imperil them. To unlock the full potential of logged forests in conserving biodiversity, tackling climate change and delivering ecosystem services into the Anthropocene will require several major transitions. These include a pantropical shift towards more environmentally sensitive logging practises, the fostering of new norms in tropical forestry based around long-term forest management, as well as coordinated efforts to limit the negative effects of logging roads, illegal logging and climate change. We discuss potential incentive and enforcement-based mechanisms for precipitating such transitions and highlight key avenues for future enquiry. Research frontiers include determining how best to spatially design logging operations to limit environmental impacts, quantifying the costs and benefits of post-logging activities aimed at recovering logged forest values, and investigating the role of concession licence structures in spawning sustainable forest management. Given their spatial dominance and high conservation value, lofty planetary goals to limit climate change and global biodiversity declines cannot be achieved unless selectively logged tropical forests take a central role in emerging conservation and emissions-reducing agendas.
Protecting tropical forests from the rapid expansion of rubber using carbon payments			Expansion of Hevea brasiliensis rubber plantations is a resurgent driver of deforestation, carbon emissions, and biodiversity loss in Southeast Asia. Southeast Asian rubber extent is massive, equivalent to 67% of oil palm, with rapid further expansion predicted. Results-based carbon finance could dis-incentivise forest conversion to rubber, but efficacy will be limited unless payments match, or at least approach, the costs of avoided deforestation. These include opportunity costs (timber and rubber profits), plus carbon finance scheme setup (transaction) and implementation costs. Using comprehensive Cambodian forest data, exploring scenarios of selective logging and conversion, and assuming land-use choice is based on net present value, we find that carbon prices of $30-$51 per tCO(2) are needed to break even against costs, higher than those currently paid on carbon markets or through carbon funds. To defend forests from rubber, either carbon prices must be increased, or other strategies are needed, such as corporate zero-deforestation pledges, and governmental regulation and enforcement of forest protection.
Proximity to rainforest enhances pollination and fruit set in orchards			1. Tropical rainforests are potential reservoirs of insects that could enhance crop pollination, but only a few instances of the provision of such services by tropical rainforest insects have been reported. Our field study aimed to determine the relative importance of such insects to the pollination of macadamia Macadamia integrifolia and longan Dimocarpus longan crops on the Atherton Tableland, north Queensland, Australia.2. We quantified initial fruit set, a measure of pollination success, in treatments designed to assess the relative importance of the possible modes of pollination. The treatments were applied in orchards that varied in distance from rainforest, in order to compare the effects of the contrasting pools of available pollen vectors. We also recorded the insect species present and estimated the number of visits each made to flowers in crops near and far from rainforest.3. For both crops there was an interaction between pollination treatment and distance from rainforest. Maximum fruit set was only achieved when pollen vectors had access to flowers and orchards were close to rainforest. Exclusion of pollinators near rainforest reduced initial fruit set to a greater extent than exclusion of pollinators far from rainforest.4. We confirmed that pollen transfer in macadamia is by autogamous self-pollination and by pollen vectors, but our design did not distinguish among pollen vectors. The only abundant insects in macadamia orchards were honeybees Apis mellifera. There were more honeybee visits to macadamia flowers in orchards near rainforest than far from rainforest, but we detected no relationship between honeybee visits and initial macadamia fruit set in our sample of observations on a per raceme basis. More detailed studies are needed to identify the pollen vector responsible for enhanced pollination of macadamia near rainforest.5. We established for the first time that pollen transfer in longan is by a combination of autogamous self-pollination, wind and bees. Longan flowers were visited by stingless bees and honeybees but only stingless bees had a positive relationship with initial longan fruit set and higher visitation rates near rainforest than far from rainforest. This suggests that enhanced pollination in longan near rainforest resulted primarily from a more abundant supply of stingless bees from the rainforest.6. Synthesis and applications. By demonstrating that tropical rainforest can act as a reservoir of pollen vectors that benefit crops, our study highlights the existence of a largely unrecognized resource available to agriculture. At the same time our results make a significant contribution to the growing database of studies that underscore the importance of tropical rainforest conservation. Policy and management aimed at sustainable use of this resource would satisfy the goals both of agriculturalists, to improve crop yields, and conservationists, to conserve tropical rainforest.
Public policies can reduce tropical deforestation: Lessons and challenges from Brazil			Reducing carbon emissions from deforestation and forest degradation now constitutes an important strategy for mitigating climate change, particularly in developing countries with large forests. Given growing concerns about global climate change, it is all the more important to identify cases in which economic growth has not sparked excessive forest clearance. We address the recent reduction of deforestation rates in the Brazilian Amazon by conducting a statistical analysis to ascertain if different levels of environmental enforcement between two groups of municipalities had any impact on this reduction. Our analysis shows that these targeted, heightened enforcement efforts avoided as much as 10,653km2 of deforestation, which translates into 1.44×10-1PgC in avoided emissions for the 3 y period. Moreover, most of the carbon loss and land conversion would have occurred at the expense of closed moist forests. Although such results are encouraging, we caution that significant challenges remain for Brazil's continued success in this regard, given recent changes in the forestry code, ongoing massive investments in hydro power generation, reductions of established protected areas, and growing demand for agricultural products. © 2014 Elsevier Ltd.
Pure or mixed plantings equally enhance the recovery of the Atlantic forest			Planting native trees in high diversity has been widely recommended to recover tropical forests to regain ecosystems that are taxonomically and functionally similar to the native forests. However, whether planting mixed stands would provide better results than planting pure stands remains to be demonstrated. Aiming to support seasonal tropical forest restoration in the highly fragmented landscape of the Atlantic Forest, Brazil, we compared the long-term (from 24 to 53 years) outcomes of pure and mixed plantings of native tree species with a broad spectrum of reference ecosystems (degraded, secondary, and old-growth forests). We aimed to verify if pure plantings would be as successful in fostering natural regeneration as mixed plantings and if they could potentially reach the attributes of native forests in the same region. We assessed forest structure (density, biomass, basal area), richness, and taxonomic and functional diversity. We separately analyzed the upper, intermediate, and lower layers of the tree community and assessed the abundance of ferns and climbers. Functional traits included seed dispersal and pollination syndromes, growth rate, seed mass, and specific leaf area. Contrary to our expectations, pure and mixed plantings did not differ in tree density, species richness, and functional diversity. Mixed plantings had higher basal area and biomass, surpassing the reference ecosystems and higher taxonomic diversity, whereas pure plantings had more ferns, climbers, and saplings regenerating in the under story. There was no difference for most of the functional traits between the forest types, except in seed mass, which was higher in mixed plantings. Zoochorous species were dominant in all forest types and size classes. In pure plantings, fast-growing species prevailed, whereas moderate and slow-growth species predominated in the other forest types. Pure plantings did not differ from the reference ecosystems, except in taxonomic diversity and richness when compared with the old-growth forests, which takes longer to be achieved. Our results indicate that the sparse remnants of forests are still effective sources of propagules to colonize the plantings - whether using a single species or a mix - even in a highly fragmented landscape, which was the case in our study. In general, pure plantings were as effective as mixed plantings to foster the recovery of seasonal tropical forests in terms of structure and functionality in the long term. As for taxonomic diversity and richness, mixed plantings were more efficient, whereas pure plantings have not reached old-growth forests but did not differ from degraded and surpassed secondary forests in several attributes. These results highlight the relevance of planting trees, even in low diversity, for increasing biodiversity and providing ecosystem services on a landscape scale.
P-values from the linear model output (one-way ANOVA) comparing the studied parameters (water-holding capacity (WHC; in %), total carbon content (TC; in %), C:N ratio and pH (unitless)) between the soils and treatments, and their interaction (n = 3, p.adj. = 0.05).			#VALUE!
Qualifying the Information Detected from Airborne Laser Scanning to Support Tropical Forest Management Operational Planning			(1) Background: Forests throughout the world are managed to fulfil a range of commercial and ecosystem services. The same applies to managed areas of the Amazon forest. We explore a method of sustainable forest management (SFM) which anticipates the result of processes of natural mortality of large, mature trees that could fall and damage their neighbors. Collecting all the information required for planning logging in the Brazilian Amazon is, currently, a hard, time-consuming and expensive task. (2) Methods: This information can be obtained more quickly, accurately and objectively by including airborne laser scanning (ALS) products in the operational plan. We used ALS point clouds to isolate emergent crowns from the canopy height model. Then, we performed field work to validate the existence of these trees, and to understand how many commercial trees (tree diameter >= 50 cm) we identified by orienting the trees search through the emergent canopy model. (3) Results: We were able to detect 184 (54.4%) trees from 338 field-recorded individuals in 20 plots (totaling 8 ha). Of the detected trees, 66 individuals were classified as having potential for commerce. Furthermore, 58 individuals presented the best stem quality for logging, which represents more than seven high quality commercial trees per hectare. The logistic regression showed that the effects that positively influence the emergent crown formation are strongly presented in the commercial species. (4) Conclusions: Using airborne laser scanning can improve the SFM planning in a structurally complex, dense and mixed composition tropical forest by reducing field work in the initial stages of management. Therefore, we propose that ALS operational planning can be used to more efficiently direct field surveys without the need for a full census.
QUANTIFICATION OF CARBON IN FOREST NECROMASS: STATE OF THE ART			Necromass play a significant ecological function, including the deposition of organic matter, which is essential for carbon cycling in forest ecosystems. Despite the devoted attention to the role of forest necromass into the global carbon cycle, international organizations such as IPCC and FAO have reported the lack of compatible data concerning the carbon stocks in forest necromass among different regions. This paper reviews the terminologies and sampling methods regarding the quantification of carbon stock in forest necromass. Volume, biomass and carbon content determination methods were examined into the literature and then notably in Brazil. We address the problems associated with sampling methods and spatial distribution in related studies. Conflict in nomenclatures, components and diameter threshold confound the comparison of regional results. Meanwhile, we present a standard terminology for similar studies. Coarse woody and non-woody (litter) necromass are frequently computed, although fine woody necromass stands ignored in most studies and reports. Finally, we provide recommendations on specific sampling and measurement methods, taking into account necromass size and spatial pattern for both necromass and litter.
Quantifying above- and belowground biomass carbon loss with forest conversion in tropical lowlands of Sumatra (Indonesia)			Natural forests in South-East Asia have been extensively converted into other land-use systems in the past decades and still show high deforestation rates. Historically, lowland forests have been converted into rubber forests, but more recently, the dominant conversion is into oil palm plantations. While it is expected that the large-scale conversion has strong effects on the carbon cycle, detailed studies quantifying carbon pools and total net primary production (NPPtotal) in above- and belowground tree biomass in land-use systems replacing rainforest (incl. oil palm plantations) are rare so far. We measured above- and belowground carbon pools in tree biomass together with NPPtotal in natural old-growth forests, 'jungle rubber' agroforests under natural tree cover, and rubber and oil palm monocultures in Sumatra. In total, 32 stands (eight plot replicates per land-use system) were studied in two different regions. Total tree biomass in the natural forest (mean: 384 Mg ha-1) was more than two times higher than in jungle rubber stands (147 Mg ha-1) and >four times higher than in monoculture rubber and oil palm plantations (78 and 50 Mg ha-1). NPPtotal was higher in the natural forest (24 Mg ha-1 yr-1) than in the rubber systems (20 and 15 Mg ha-1 yr-1), but was highest in the oil palm system (33 Mg ha-1 yr-1) due to very high fruit production (15-20 Mg ha-1 yr-1). NPPtotal was dominated in all systems by aboveground production, but belowground productivity was significantly higher in the natural forest and jungle rubber than in plantations. We conclude that conversion of natural lowland forest into different agricultural systems leads to a strong reduction not only in the biomass carbon pool (up to 166 Mg C ha-1) but also in carbon sequestration as carbon residence time (i.e. biomass-C:NPP-C) was 3-10 times higher in the natural forest than in rubber and oil palm plantations. © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Quantifying aboveground biomass in African environments: A review of the trade-offs between sensor estimation accuracy and costs			Increased global recognition of the role of forests in regulating the biosphere-atmospheric carbon cycle through carbon sequestration, has resulted in a wide range of scientific studies on estimation, mapping, monitoring and the prediction of Aboveground Biomass (AGB) on various scales in sub-Saharan Africa. In many parts of the developing world, specifically in sub-Saharan Africa, the accurate quantification of AGB, although still a challenge, is important for national carbon accounting, REDD+ project payments, sustainable forest management and strategic policy-making. In this review, an overview of remote sensing applications in AGB estimation in sub-Saharan Africa, including research challenges and basic information related to the trade-offs between sensor estimation accuracy and costs, is provided. It is assumed that this review is timely, due to a relative increase in the number of remotely sensed forests carbon studies in the recent years (specifically the period between 1998 and 2013). Remotely sensed data is particularly appealing, due to its robustness, instantaneity and repeated spatio-temporal coverage and hence the ability to successful estimate and map AGB. However, estimation accuracy and image acquisition cost vary with sensor resolution and type. It is assumed that this study will provide guidance in future national carbon accounting studies, which is one of the main objectives of the Kyoto Protocol and the REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation) project, housed under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), particularly for the developing world.
Quantifying carbon and amphibian co-benefits from secondary forest regeneration in the Tropical Andes			Tropical land-use change is a key driver of global declines in biodiversity and a major source of anthropogenic carbon emissions, yet there is a substantial shortfall in the funding available to tackle these issues. We urgently need mechanisms that can simultaneously tackle both biodiversity and carbon losses, with carbon-based payments for ecosystem services (e.g. REDD+) of particular interest. A critical question is whether such payments offer strong carbon-biodiversity co-benefits via the regrowth of forests on abandoned farmlands (carbon enhancements) for amphibians, which are the most threatened vertebrate group and reach the greatest richness of threatened and small-ranged species in the montane tropics (>1000 m a.s.l.). Here, we study changes in amphibian communities across a typical Andean habitat transition from cattle pasture through secondary forests (8-35 years) to primary forest. As secondary forests mature, they recovered the abundance, species richness, species composition and Red-listed (near threatened and threatened) species typically found in primary forest. By contrast, cattle pasture contained much lower richness of Red-listed species and a different species composition compared to forest. We then reveal positive relationships between carbon stocks and amphibian species richness and abundance, Red-listed species richness and abundance and the similarity of communities to primary forests, confirming significant carbon-biodiversity co-benefits. Our results underscore the high conservation value of secondary forests and the strong potential for carbon and biodiversity recovery. Using carbon-based funding initiatives to support the regrowth of forests on marginal agricultural land is therefore likely to conserve threatened biodiversity in the Tropical Andes.
Quantifying carbon stocks in shifting cultivation landscapes under divergent management scenarios relevant to REDD			Shifting cultivation dominates many tropical forest regions. It is expanding into old-growth forests, and fallow period duration is rapidly decreasing, limiting secondary forest recovery. Shifting cultivation is thus a major driver of carbon emissions through deforestation and forest degradation, and of biodiversity loss. The impacts of shifting cultivation on carbon stocks have rarely been quantified, and the potential for carbon-based payments for ecosystem services (PES), such as REDD+, to protect carbon in shifting cultivation landscapes is unknown. We present empirical data on aboveground carbon stocks in old-growth forest and shifting cultivation landscapes in northeast India, a hotspot of threatened biodiversity. We then model landscape-level carbon stocks under business-as-usual scenarios, via expansion into the old-growth forest or decreasing fallow periods, and intervention scenarios in which REDD+ is used to either reduce deforestation of primary or secondary forest or increase fallow period duration. We found substantial recovery of carbon stocks as secondary forest regenerates, with a 30-yr fallow storing about one-half the carbon of an old-growth forest. Business-as-usual scenarios led to substantial carbon loss, with an 80% reduction following conversion of old-growth forest to a 30-yr shifting cultivation cycle and, relative to a 30-yr cultivation landscape, a 70% reduction when switching to a 5-yr cultivation cycle. Sparing old-growth forests from deforestation using protected areas and intensifying cropping in the remaining area of shifting cultivation is the most optimal strategy for carbon storage. In areas lacking old-growth forest, substantial carbon stocks accumulate over time by sparing fallows for permanent forest regeneration. Successful implementation of REDD+ in shifting cultivation landscapes can help avert global climate change by protecting forest carbon, with likely co-benefits for biodiversity.
Quantifying mammal biodiversity co-benefits in certified tropical forests			Aim Financial incentives to manage forests sustainably, such as certification or carbon storage payments, are assumed to have co-benefits for biodiversity conservation. This claim remains little studied for rain forest mammals, which are particularly threatened, but challenging to survey.Location Sabah, Malaysia, Borneo.Methods We used photographic data from three commercial forest reserves to show how community occupancy modelling can be used to quantify mammalian diversity conservation co-benefits of forest certification. These reserves had different management histories, and one was certified by the Forest Stewardship Council.Results Many threatened species occupied larger areas in the certified reserve. Species richness, estimated per 200x200-m grid cell throughout all reserves, was higher in the certified site, particularly for threatened species. The certified reserve held the highest aboveground biomass. Within reserves, aboveground biomass was not strongly correlated with patterns of mammal richness (Spearman's rho from 0.03 to 0.32); discrepancies were strongest along reserve borders.Main conclusions Our approach provides a flexible and standardized tool to assess biodiversity and identify winners of sustainable forestry. Inferring patterns of species richness from camera-trapping carries potential for the objective designation of high conservation value forest. Correlating species richness with aboveground biomass further allows evaluating the biodiversity co-benefits of carbon protection. These advantages make the present approach an ideal tool to overcome the difficulties to rigorously quantify biodiversity co-benefits of forest certification and carbon storage payments.
Quantifying market prevalence, abundance, and suitable habitats of bulbuls in Java, Indonesia			The prevalence of bulbuls in the Indonesian cage bird trade raises concerns about its impact on their distributions and, consequently, the ecological balance. This study delves into the trade dynamics of bulbuls, examining their market prevalence and its correlation with their abundance in the wild and their suitable habitats. We conducted bird market surveys across Java, supplemented by online trade surveys to ascertain market prevalence. Concurrently, we collected bulbul's presence data from three databases and field surveys from 2018 to 2023. We used a Random Forest algorithm to predict the suitable habitats for bulbuls. The findings revealed that 20 bulbul species, comprising 11 native and 9 non-native to Java, were encountered in 20 bird markets, totalling 35,715 individuals. Sooty-headed (Pycnonotus aurigaster) and yellow-vented (P. goiavier) bulbuls, both Least Concern, dominated the field-RAI (Relative Abundance Index) and trade-RAI. Notably, rare species such as the straw-headed bulbul (P. zeylanicus, Critically Endangered) and extirpated from Java, were present in markets. We found no relationship between the field-RAI and the trade-RAI, suggesting that all species were sought after regardless of their abundance. However, we found that threatened species face over-harvesting based on the ratio between trade-RAI and field-RAI. A significant portion of predicted suitable habitats for resident species fell outside bird-friendly areas. Urgent intervention measures, targeting small-scale agroforestry landowners and key sites for population protection, are imperative to mitigate the potential ecological consequences of the bulbul trade and ensure their continued contribution to tropical ecosystem health. © 2025 Elsevier Ltd
QUANTIFYING THE CONSERVATION VALUE OF PLANTATION FORESTS FOR A MADAGASCAN HERPETOFAUNA			Plantations are becoming a dominant component of the forest landscape of Madagascar, yet there is very little information available regarding the implications of different forms of plantation agriculture for Madagascan reptiles and amphibians. I determined the conservation value of bamboo, secondary, open-canopy plantation, and closed-canopy plantation forests for reptiles and amphibians on the island of Nosy Komba, in the Sambirano region of north-west Madagascar. Assistants and I conducted 220 Visual Encounter Surveys between 29 January 2016 and 5 July 2017 and recorded 3,113 reptiles (32 species) and 751 amphibians (nine species). Closed-canopy plantation supported levels of alpha diversity and community compositions reflective of natural forest, including several threatened and forest-specialist species. Open-canopy plantation exhibited diminished herpetofaunal diversity and a distinct community composition dominated by disturbance-resistant generalist species. Woody tree density and bamboo density were positively correlated with herpetofaunal species richness, and plantation species richness, plantation species density, sapling density, and the proportion of wood ground cover were negatively associated with herpetofaunal diversity. I recommend the integration of closed-canopy plantations on Nosy Komba, and across wider Madagascar, to help mitigate the negative effects of secondary forest conversion for agriculture on Madagascan herpetofauna; however, it will be necessary to retain areas of natural forest to act as sources of biodiversity for agroforestry plantations. It will also be necessary to employ plantation management techniques that maintain environmental variables known to enhance alpha diversity.
Quantifying the Effects of Stand and Climate Variables on Biomass of Larch Plantations Using Random Forests and National Forest Inventory Data in North and Northeast China			The accurate estimation of forest biomass is crucial for supporting climate change mitigation efforts such as sustainable forest management. Although traditional regression models have been widely used to link stand biomass with biotic and abiotic predictors, this approach has several disadvantages, including the difficulty in dealing with data autocorrelation, model selection, and convergence. While machine learning can overcome these challenges, the application remains limited, particularly at a large scale with consideration of climate variables. This study used the random forests (RF) algorithm to estimate stand aboveground biomass (AGB) and total biomass (TB) of larch (Larix spp.) plantations in north and northeast China and quantified the contributions of different predictors. The data for modelling biomass were collected from 445 sample plots of the National Forest Inventory (NFI). A total of 22 independent variables (6 stand and 16 climate variables) were used to develop and train climate-sensitive stand biomass models. Optimization of hyper parameters was implemented using grid search and 10-fold cross-validation. The coefficient of determination (R-2) and root mean square error (RMSE) of the RF models were 0.9845 and 3.8008 t ha(-1) for AGB, and 0.9836 and 5.1963 t ha(-1) for TB. The cumulative contributions of stand and climate factors to stand biomass were >98% and <2%, respectively. The most crucial stand and climate variables were stand volume and annual heat-moisture index (AHM), with relative importance values of >60% and -0.25%, respectively. The partial dependence plots illustrated the complicated relationships between climate factors and stand biomass. This study illustrated the power of RF for estimating stand biomass and understanding the effects of stand and climate factors on forest biomass. The application of RF can be useful for mapping of large-scale carbon stock.
Quantifying uncertainty about forest recovery 32-years after selective logging in Suriname			The inclusion of managed tropical forests in climate change mitigation has made it important to find the sustainable sweet-spot for timber production, carbon retention, and the quick recovery of both. Here we focus on recovery of aboveground carbon and timber stocks over the first 32 years after selective logging with the CELOS Harvest System in Suriname. Our data are from twelve 1-ha permanent sample plots in which growth, survival, and recruitment of trees ≥15 cm diameter were monitored between 1978 and 2012. We evaluate plot-level changes in basal area, stem density, aboveground carbon, and timber stock in response to average timber harvests of 15, 23, and 46 m3 ha−1. We use a linear mixed-effects model in a Bayesian framework to quantify recovery time for aboveground carbon and timber stock, as well as annualized increments for both. Our statistical models accounted for the uncertainty associated with the height and biomass allometries used to estimate aboveground carbon and increased precision of annualized aboveground carbon increments by including data from forty-one plots located elsewhere on the Guiana Shield. The probabilities of aboveground carbon recovery to pre-logging levels 32 years after harvests of 15, 23 and 46 m3 ha−1 were 45%, 40%, and 24%, respectively. Net aboveground carbon increment for logged forests across all harvest intensities was 0.64 Mg C ha−1 yr−1, more than twice the rate observed in unlogged forests (0.26 Mg C ha−1 yr−1). The probabilities of timber stock recovery at the end of the 32-year period were highest after harvest intensities of 15 and 23 m3 ha−1 (with 80% probability) and lowest after the harvest of 46 m3 ha−1 (with 70% probability). Timber stock recovery across all harvest intensities was driven primarily by residual tree growth. Application of the legal cutting limit of 25 m3 ha−1 will require more than 70 and 40 years to recover aboveground carbon and timber stocks, respectively, with 90% probability. Based on the low recruitment rates of the twelve species harvested, the 25 year cutting cycle currently implemented in Suriname is too short for long-term timber stock sustainability. We highlight the value of propagating uncertainty from individual tree measurements to statistical predictions of carbon stock recovery. Ultimately, our study reveals the trade-offs that must be made between timber and carbon services as well as the opportunity to use carbon payments to enable longer cutting rotations to capture carbon from forest regrowth. © 2017 Elsevier B.V.
Quantitative assessment of past and future tropical forest transition and its dynamic to streamflow of the catchment, Malaysia			The consequences of human interventions on land use have been empirically demonstrated to affect substantially hydrological processes and ecosystem services within watershed environments. Since 1970, Malaysia has faced deforestation, driven mainly by logging and agricultural expansion, aligning with its developmental goals by 2020. From 1970 to 2000, deforestation led to a 25.5% decline in forested land, causing a significant 10.2% rise in excess runoff. Moreover from 2001 to 2021, the nation lost 17% of its total land to deforestation. These trends emphasize the need for a thorough investigation of sustainable conservation efforts in Malaysia. This study focuses on the Langat basin in Malaysia, evaluating past and future land use changes and their effects on the basin’s hydrological response. The study employed key informant reports, population growth data, observed land use change, field survey and agricultural land availability considered for developing change scenarios. We emphasized the significance of integrating diverse modeling methods to analyze LULC changes effectively. The use of a semi-distributed hydrological model, SWAT, in combination with Markov chain and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) model and Geographic Information Systems (GIS) techniques proved to be an integrated and suitable tool for comprehensive change analysis and modeling of land use. Markov chain modeling is valuable for predicting land use changes over time, providing input scenarios for SWAT simulations. MLP is a powerful algorithm to capture non-linear relationships and complex patterns in the data, enhancing the modeling accuracy. The simulation results, based on historic land use data (1984-2006-2010) and projected future land use maps (2030-2050-2080), revealed a consistent pattern of urban expansion and deforestation leading to increased streamflow. Projections indicated a substantial rise in streamflow by 20%, 61%, and 71% for the 2030s, 2050s, and 2080s, respectively. To mitigate potential flood and sediment loss, it is crucial to involve local stakeholders such as local communities, government bodies, environmental organizations, and businesses. Such analysis facilitates understanding their perspectives and concerns regarding afforestation and urban expansion control, informing future development programs and land use planning effectively. © SISEF.
Rainfall interception and plant community in young forest restorations			The conversion of tropical forests to human land-use threatens biodiversity conservation and the delivery of many ecosystem services, especially water-related ecosystem services. In these landscapes, many investments have been made to restore native forests and recover hydrological processes lost by deforestation. Rainfall interception is a key hydrological process for water-related ecosystem services' maintenance, which plays an important role in runoff, infiltration, erosion control, and flood regulation. We evaluated rainfall interception over a 1-year period in eight restoration sites within the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. We used the interception function as an indicator of water dynamics recovery in actively restored forests. Monthly rainfall interception was measured by 80 interceptometers distributed within the sites (10/site), and 24 pluviometers were installed in open fields (3/site) close to the restoration sites to collect total precipitation (P) incidents over the sites. We also measured plant community attributes involved in the interception process (density, basal area, tree species richness, and the ratio of deciduous plants). The average rainfall interception reached 21.4 +/- 3.9%, but a significant variability was observed among sites. Results showed that 65% of the monthly interception collected is below 30 mm.month(-1). Basal area and species richness were forest attributes positively correlated to each other and the most important in the interception process. The results show that actively restored forests can reestablish rainfall interception rates similar to those of mature tropical forests in the short term (10 years). In addition, more time or complementary interventions are needed for plant communities to reach expected attributes' values. Self-organized maps analysis showed a negative relationship between interception and the proportion of deciduous plant individuals. We present information to support land-use policy decisions, as the results revealed insights regarding the effects on the water cycle that may result from increasing forest cover. We argue that restoring ecosystem services should be the main goal of restoration programs and determining if hydrological processes are being effectively recovered by restoration actions is crucial for achieving water sustainability.
Rainfall Modifies the Disturbance Effects on Regulating Ecosystem Services in Tropical Forests of Bangladesh			Tropical forests are critical for ecosystem functioning and are the major provider of global ecosystem services. The combined effects of climate change and anthropogenic disturbances in the tropics, however, have caused a mass decline in major ecosystem services in recent decades. Nevertheless, most previous studies focused entirely on these disturbances' effects on forest ecosystem services without taking into consideration the combined effects of climate change and disturbances on key ecosystem services' indicators. This is more pronounced in Bangladesh, which is one of the countries most adversely affected by global climate change. We investigated anthropogenic disturbances' effects on regulating ecosystem services under different rainfall regimes in Khadimnagar National Park (KNP) and Satchari National Park (SNP), two major forested, protected areas in Northeast Bangladesh. We considered twelve indicators for five aboveground ecosystem services (i.e., primary production, carbon storage, biodiversity, wildlife habitat, and timber production) and four indicators for four belowground ecosystem services (i.e., organic carbon storage, soil aggregate stability, soil physical support, and soil water regulation) in our study. The effects of disturbances on the indicators of four aboveground ecosystem services (i.e., primary production, tree carbon storage, biodiversity conservation, and timber production) and one belowground ecosystem service (soil physical support) differed in terms of rainfall regimes. Disturbances negatively influenced indicators of primary production (p = 0.03, r = -0.28), tree carbon storage (p = 0.02, r = -0.29), and timber production (p = 0.002, r = -0.39), and positively impacted soil organic carbon storage (p = 0.04, r = 0.27) only under a medium-rainfall regime. Interestingly, a significant positive impact of disturbances on soil physical support (p = 0.001, r = 0.39) was observed under heavy rainfall in our study. In addition, disturbances were significantly associated with biodiversity conservation (p < 0.05) and wildlife habitat quality (p < 0.05) under both rainfall classes. Our findings provide critical insights into the synergistic role of anthropogenic perturbations in regulating ecosystem services with rainfall pattern as a key climatic parameter, which can be useful in restoring large tracts of degraded tropical forests in the United Nations (UN) Decade on Ecosystem Restoration.
Rainfall patterns and geomorphological controls driving inundation frequency in tropical wetlands: How does the Pantanal flood?			The Pantanal is one of the world’s largest freshwater wetlands. The spatial and temporal variability of flooded areas is a key factor for preserving and managing the flora and fauna of this biodiversity hotspot, and thus, its dynamic is crucial to maintain ecosystem services. However, existing inventories of flooded areas with high spatial resolution are scarce or do not represent a continuous time series considering the entire Pantanal wetland. In this study, flooded areas were derived from Landsat and Resourcesat satellite imagery time series for the years 2000 to 2020 through big data analytical tools. Our results show that permanently flooded areas accounted for 3.40% of the total Pantanal wetland and 8.85% of the study area was flooded during only one year, indicating a complex and dynamic fluvial system. In addition, approximately 39% of the basin was composed of non-flooded areas. During the analyzed period (2000–2020), the highest flood event occurred in 2011 covering an area of 57,969 km2, followed by 2014, with 52,500 km2 (respectively 38.55% and 34.91% of the total area of the Pantanal). The year with the smallest flooded area was 2020 (10,668 km2), 83% lower when compared to the period-based average. The Pantanal is a seasonal wetland, thus, rainfall plays a significant role in the flood pulse, accounting for approximately 60% of the total variability of the flooded areas. The flood dynamics is also affected by the morphology of the modern depositional system of the Pantanal, which is composed by large megafans created by several distributive rivers, and by neotectonics that generates differential movements of blocks creating lower areas that will determine how flood pulse moves spatially and temporally. Therefore, the understanding and analysis of this dynamism becomes an indispensable tool for the public government ordering defining policies for the occupation and the economic zoning of the Pantanal. © The Author(s) 2021.
Rainforest conservation as a strategy of climate policy			Tropical forest conservation in developing countries has repeatedly been highlighted as a new element in international climate policy. However, no clear ideas yet exist as to what shape such a conservation strategy might take. In the present paper, we would like to make some observations to this end. It is shown how projects in order to reduce CO2-emissions resulting from deforestation and degradation (REDD) can be integrated into a system of tradable emission rights in an industrialised country and which requirements ought to be fulfilled. Instruments are emission credits and emission allowances. Driving actors interested in emission rights through forest projects may be private investors or the rainforest state itself. The efficiency of the system depends on a great extent on a binding reference path for the tolerable emissions from deforestation, which has been agreed upon and adhered to by the rainforest country by means of a forest law aimed at limiting deforestation. Our considerations lead us to conclude that the national baseline approach with an appropriate contribution by the rainforest country coupled with a decentralised system with private investors seems the most viable option. Since additional burdens are imposed on the rainforest country to some extent, a compromise could consist of agreeing on a moderate deforestation path, which is harmonised with the benefits from the forest projects. Combining both programmes (offset credits and emission allowances) is particularly attractive because all participants, and especially the industrialised country, benefit from it. The industrialised country can expand its climate conservation programme without any additional costs to a certain degree. © 2011 The Author(s).
Rainforest transformation reallocates energy from green to brown food webs			Terrestrial animal biodiversity is increasingly being lost because of land-use change(1,2). However, functional and energetic consequences aboveground and belowground and across trophic levels in megadiverse tropical ecosystems remain largely unknown. To fill this gap, we assessed changes in energy fluxes across 'green' aboveground (canopy arthropods and birds) and 'brown' belowground (soil arthropods and earthworms) animal food webs in tropical rainforests and plantations in Sumatra, Indonesia. Our results showed that most of the energy in rainforests is channelled to the belowground animal food web. Oil palm and rubber plantations had similar or, in the case of rubber agroforest, higher total animal energy fluxes compared to rainforest but the key energetic nodes were distinctly different: in rainforest more than 90% of the total animal energy flux was channelled by arthropods in soil and canopy, whereas in plantations more than 50% of the energy was allocated to annelids (earthworms). Land-use change led to a consistent decline in multitrophic energy flux aboveground, whereas belowground food webs responded with reduced energy flux to higher trophic levels, down to -90%, and with shifts from slow (fungal) to fast (bacterial) energy channels and from faeces production towards consumption of soil organic matter. This coincides with previously reported soil carbon stock depletion(3). Here we show that well-documented animal biodiversity declines with tropical land-use change(4-6) are associated with vast energetic and functional restructuring in food webs across aboveground and belowground ecosystem compartments.
Rapid degradation of pyrogenic carbon			Pyrogenic carbon (PC- charcoal, biochar or black carbon) represents a poorly understood component of the global carbon (C) cycle, but one that has considerable potential to mitigate climate change through provision of long-term soil C sequestration. Mass balance calculations suggest global PC production and stocks are not in balance, indicating a major gap in our understanding of the processes by which PC is re-mineralized. We collected PC samples derived from the same wood material and exposed to natural environmental conditions for 1 and 11 years. We subjected these materials to repeated laboratory incubation studies at temperatures of up to 60 °C, as ground surface temperatures above 30 °C and up to 60 °C occur regularly over a significant area of the tropics and sub-tropics. Mineralization rates were not different for the two samples and followed an exponential Arrhenius function that suggest an average turnover time of 67 years for conditions typical of a tropical savannah environment. Microbial biomass as measured by chloroform fumigation and DNA extractions was the same for the two samples, but abiotic CO2 production was lower for the fresh PC sample than that for the aged sample. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, hydrogen pyrolysis and scanning electron microscopy demonstrate that the measured CO2 production originates dominantly from polycyclic aromatic compounds rather than any minor labile components. Therefore, rapid, sub-centennial rates of re-mineralization of PC on the soil surface in tropical and sub-tropical environments may represent a major and hitherto unidentified mechanism for balancing the PC production at the global scale. © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Rapid recovery of ant-mediated seed dispersal service along secondary succession in a Caatinga dry forest			Global expansion of secondary forests results from old-growth forest conversion to agriculture and livestock fields, followed by abandonment. Dry forests heavily rely on resprouting for rapid biomass recovery, but some species depend on seed dispersers. Ants are important seed dispersers in dry forests, as they can transport seeds over long distances, help species join the soil seed bank, and promote seed germination and seedling recruitment. We investigated seed-dispersing ant community, ant-seed interactions, and seed removal rates and distances along a Caatinga dry forest secondary succession using forest stands (8–54 years) after slash-and-burn agriculture and old-growth forest stands. We observed 796 interactions with 29 ant species and four plant species. About 26.51% were removals by 12 ant species, notably Dinoponera quadriceps and Ectatomma muticum, dispersing seeds up to 15 m. Only 14% of removed seeds reached nests while the rest were lost along foraging trails. Ant abundance of seed-dispersing ant community increased significantly with forest aboveground biomass, and both ant abundance and richness were significantly higher in secondary forest stands. Ant-seed interactions increased with biomass, being higher in old-growth forests. However, ant community composition, removal rates, and dispersal distances remained consistent across biomass and forest types. These findings may suggest that ant-mediated seed dispersal service quickly recovers during secondary succession, with implications for the dynamics of forest regeneration, given that ant-mediated seed dispersal is a prevalent and widespread phenomenon in the Caatinga dry forest. © 2024 Elsevier B.V.
Rapid response of habitat structure and above-ground carbon storage to altered fire regimes in tropical savanna			Fire regimes across the globe have been altered through changes in land use, land management, and climate conditions. Understanding how these modified fire regimes impact vegetation structure and dynamics is essential for informed biodiversity conservation and carbon management in savanna ecosystems. We used a fire experiment at the Territory Wildlife Park (TWP), northern Australia, to investigate the consequences of altered fire regimes for vertical habitat structure and above-ground carbon storage. We mapped vegetation three-dimensional (3-D) structure in high spatial resolution with airborne lidar across 18 replicated 1 ha plots of varying fire frequency and season treatments. We used lidar-derived canopy height and cover metrics to extrapolate field-based measures of woody biomass to the full extent of the experimental site (R2 D 0:82, RMSED7.35 tC ha1) and analysed differences in above-ground carbon storage and canopy structure among treatments. Woody canopy cover and biomass were highest in the absence of fire (76% and 39.8 tC ha1) and lowest in plots burnt late in the dry season on a biennial basis (42% and 18.2 t Cha1). Woody canopy vertical profiles differed among all six fire treatments, with the greatest divergence in height classes < 5 m. The magnitude of fire effects on vegetation structure varied along the environmental gradient underpinning the experiment, with less reduction in biomass in plots with deeper soils. Our results highlight the large extent to which fire management can shape woody structural patterns in savanna landscapes, even over time frames as short as a decade. The structural profile changes shown here, and the quantification of carbon reduction under late dry season burning, have important implications for habitat conservation, carbon sequestration, and emission reduction initiatives in the region. © Author(s) 2019.
Rapid tree carbon stock recovery in managed Amazonian forests			0
Rapidly growing tropical trees mobilize remarkable amounts of nitrogen, in ways that differ surprisingly among species			Fast-growing forests such as tropical secondary forests can accumulate large amounts of carbon (C), and thereby play an important role in the atmospheric CO2 balance. Because nitrogen (N) cycling is inextricably linked with C cycling, the question becomes: Where does the N come from to match high rates of C accumulation? In unique experimental 16-y-old plantations established in abandoned pasture in lowland Costa Rica, we used a mass-balance approach to quantify N accumulation in vegetation, identify sources of N, and evaluate differences among tree species in N cycling. The replicated design contained four broad-leaved evergreen tree species growing under similar environmental conditions. Nitrogen uptake was rapid, reaching 409 (+/- 30) kg.ha(-1).y(-1), double the rate reported from a Puerto Rican forest and greater than four times that observed at Hubbard Brook Forest (New Hampshire, USA). Nitrogen amassed in vegetation was 874 (+/- 176) kg.ha(-1), whereas net losses of soil N (0-100 cm) varied from 217 (+/- 146) to 3,354 (+/- 915) kg.ha(-1) (P = 0.018) over 16 y. Soil C:N, delta C-13 values, and N budgets indicated that soil was the main source of biomass N. In Vochysia guatemalensis, however, N fixation contributed >60 kg.ha(-1).y(-1). All species apparently promoted soil N turnover, such that the soil N mean residence time was 32-54 y, an order of magnitude lower than the global mean. High rates of N uptake were associated with substantial N losses in three of the species, in which an average of 1.6 g N was lost for every gram of N accumulated in biomass.
Rate of carbon sequestration at two thicket restoration sites in the Eastern Cape, South Africa			Ecosystem carbon storage in intact thicket in the Eastern Cape, South Africa exceeds 20 kg/m2, which is an unusually large amount for a semiarid ecosystem. Heavy browsing by goats transforms the thicket into an open savanna and can result in carbon losses greater than 8.5 kg/m2. Restoration of thicket using cuttings of the dominant succulent shrub Portulacaria afra could return biodiversity to the transformed landscape, earn carbon credits on international markets, reduce soil erosion, increase wildlife carrying capacity, improve water infiltration and retention, and provide employment to rural communities. Carbon storage in two thicket restoration sites was investigated to determine potential rates of carbon sequestration. At the farm Krompoort, near Kirkwood, 11 kg C/m2 was sequestered over 27 years (average rate of 0.42 ± 0.08 kg C m22 yr21). In the Andries Vosloo Kudu Nature Reserve, near Grahamstown, approximately 2.5 kg C/ m2 was sequestered over 20 years (0.12 ± 0.03 kg C m22 yr21). Slower sequestration in the Kudu Reserve was ascribed to browsing by black rhinoceros and other herbivores, a shallower soil and greater stone volumes. Planting density and P. afra genotype appeared to affect sequestration at Krompoort. Closely-packed P. afra planting may create a positive feedback through increased infiltration of rainwater. The rate of sequestration at Krompoort is comparable to many temperate and tropical forests. Potential earnings through carbon credits are likely to rival forestplanting schemes, but costs are likely to be less due to the ease of planting cuttings, as opposed to propagating forest saplings. © 2006 Society for Ecological Restoration International.
Rate of forest recovery after fire exclusion on anthropogenic savannas in the Democratic Republic of Congo			Deforestation in the tropics is often followed by the creation of anthropogenic savannas used for animal husbandry. By discontinuing burning regimes, forests may recolonize the savanna and carbon stocks may recover. However, little is known about the success and speed of tropical forest recovery, while such information is vital for a better quantification of efforts to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD +) as well as supporting Forest Landscape Restoration (FLR) practices. Therefore, we designed a forest regeneration experiment within a savanna patch in the Mayombe hills (Democratic Republic of Congo), by discontinuing the annual burning regime in an 88 ha exclosure since 2005. 101 permanent inventory plots (40.4 ha) were installed in 2010 and remeasured in 2014. Tree species were classified as savanna or forest specialists. We estimate a forest specialist encroachment rate of 9 stems ha(-1) yr(-1) and a savanna specialist disappearance rate of 16 stems ha(-1) yr(-1). Average diameter of forest specialists did not change due to an increasing influx of recruits, while average diameter of savanna trees increased due to decreasing recruitment. Carbon stored by forest specialists increased from 3.12 to 5.60 Mg C ha(-1), suggesting a forest carbon recovery rate of 0.62 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1). Using the average carbon stock of 19 nearby mature rainforest plots as a reference, we estimate a total forest carbon recovery time of at least 150 years. The Manzonzi exclosure may potentially become an important reference experiment to quantify REDD + schemes in Central Africa. Furthermore, this natural regeneration experiment demonstrates how carbon sequestration and biodiversity conservation can go hand-in-hand. However, more censuses are needed to better quantify the long-term carbon recovery trajectory within the protected area.
RE:Growth-A toolkit for analyzing secondary forest aboveground carbon dynamics in the Brazilian Amazon			0
REALU vs. REDD plus : Carbon and biodiversity in the Afromontane landscapes of SW Ethiopia			A major constraint to current REDD+ initiatives is the arbitrariness of the operational definition of 'forest'. The UN-REDD+ framework ignores the high potential of other (tree containing) land uses for carbon sequestration and the generation of co-benefits, in contrast to a whole landscape approach known as 'Reducing Emissions from All Land Uses' (REALU). To indicate this potential, carbon stocks and biodiversity were assessed at the landscape scale around Jimma, SW Ethiopia. Notwithstanding the indigenous forests' high carbon stocks per hectare (336.96 +/- 120.6 Mg C ha(-1)) 80% of the total carbon stock of the 10(6) ha assessed landscape window was found to be stored in non-forest land uses. Especially local agro-forestry systems, such as managed semi-forest coffee production fragments (179.92 +/- 38.5 Mg C ha(-1)), homegardens (106.26 +/- 16.8 Mg C ha(-1)) and pole wood plantations (112.36 +/- 23.9 Mg ha(-1)) store large amounts of carbon. Together with local maize fields (69.45 +/- 12.3 Mg C ha(-1)), teff fields (69.51 +/- 6.5 Mg C ha(-1)) and grazing lands (76.90 +/- 10.3 Mg C ha(-1)) these non-forest land uses play an important role in a prospective 'high-carbon-stock rural-development' under a REALU framework. A REDD+ approach, applying a stringent forest definition that disqualifies for agriculture and a 30% canopy cover threshold, would only account for 24 Gg C in the 10(6) ha landscape window. Applying the canopy cover threshold alone, would triple the amount to 72 Gg C, while a REALU project would account for the whole 116 Gg landscape carbon. The biodiversity assessment, based on tree community composition and Hill's diversity indices, indicated important biodiversity co-benefits under a REALU approach. Biodiversity indices such as the Hill's Ni diversity of abundant tree species showed a strong positive correlation with local carbon stocks (R-2 = 0.56). Since the cover of indigenous forest is reduced to only 7% of the landscape window's area, most of the remaining trees and biodiversity can be found within the surrounding landscape mosaic. Semi-forest coffee production fragments for example still harbour almost half of all encountered native tree species. An interesting result of the simultaneous biodiversity assessment was that a regrouping of plots based on tree biodiversity provides a more precise and cost efficient way to assess carbon stocks, reducing the number of plots needed with 23%, to achieve the same precision level. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Reassessing the environmental impacts of sugarcane ethanol production in Brazil to help meet sustainability goals			The potential for sugarcane ethanol from Brazil to mitigate GHG emissions is undeniable, but the way that ethanol is produced during the agricultural and industrial phases will ultimately determine its benefits to society. In this paper, we evaluate the environmental impacts of sugarcane agriculture and ethanol production in Brazil as management practices continue to change and production expands to new frontiers. We focused our evaluation on the impacts on water, atmosphere, and soils, including how the application of organic and inorganic fertilizers and the accumulation of crop residue in the field affect emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG). We also addressed the impacts of land use changes on threatened biomes and discussed some of the present obstacles regarding conservation and restoration efforts. We concluded that, since a similar assessment was put forth in 2008, our knowledge about the environmental impacts of sugarcane ethanol in Brazil has advanced with regard to soil degradation, nitrogen dynamics, and soil carbon stocks. However, more information is still needed about the impacts of the increasing use of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers in sugarcane agriculture, especially on water resources. Furthermore, without a better understanding about how landscape fragmentation affects the biodiversity of terrestrial and aquatic tropical ecosystems and the services they provide, policies created to protect and restore them may be ineffective. On the other hand, the use of presently available scientific information to end unsustainable farming and the implementation of conservation strategies proposed by the Brazilian Forest Code could be a first step to guarantee that ethanol is produced more sustainably in Brazil. (c) 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All tights reserved.
Recarbonization of the humid tropics			To curb the effects of anthropogenic carbon (C) emissions, it is essential to explore the capacity of natural ecosystems to store and sequester atmospheric C. Tropical humid forests store most of their carbon in their above ground biomass which can be rapidly depleted by extractive industries or rapidly replenished through natural regeneration or reforestation. This rapid exchange of carbon dioxide between the forest and the atmosphere make humid tropical forests one of the most dynamic C pools on Earth. Tropical humid forests act as a store and sink for C, but are also the source of almost all anthropogenic C emissions from the land-use and land-use change. The influence of tropical humid forests also extends far beyond the edges of their canopies, affecting global C cycles, biodiversity, hydrological cycles, and the livelihoods of millions of rural people. These interlinked factors are what make tropical humid forests one of the most compelling actors in the recarbonization of the biosphere. This report presents the current state of knowledge on C stocks and fluxes in humid tropical forests, and investigate management interventions for the recarbonization the humid tropics. The C sequestration potential of seven recarbonization options is explored as well as co- benefits, risks and costs. Finally, relevant policies that could be harnessed to encourage recarbonization in humid tropics are reviewed. © Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012.
RECLAMATION OF SODIC SOIL THROUGH AFFORESTATION			A forest ecosystem was developed on barren sodic land at Banthra Research Station of National Botanical Research Institute, Lucknow, India during 1960s. About 74 species belonging to 34 families were recorded in this new forest, which was characterized as mixed dry sub-tropical forest with deciduous and evergreen species. The forest was classified into overstory, understory and ground layer vegetation based on the morphological variation and vertical strata of the vegetation. Frequency, density, abundance and basal area were evaluated for each species and dominants were assorted on the basis of basal area and Importance Value Index. Shannon Wiener's diversity index measured as 3.6, 3.3, and 1.8 for overstory, understory and ground layer vegetation, respectively.Forest biomass (dry weight) was estimated to be 347 Mg ha(-1) with a net primary production of 25 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1) at the age of 40 years. Forest sequestered about 168 Mg ha(-1) carbon content in their standing biomass with current accumulation rate of 11 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1) and conserved 8.9 TJ ha(-1) energy in their standing stock. Annual energy fixation was estimated to 644 GJ ha(-1). Nutrient pool and fluxes in the forest were also determined. Further, the role of litter and fine roots in reclamation of sodic soil was quantified.
Recovering ecosystem functions through the management of regenerating community in agroforestry and plantations with Khaya spp. in the Atlantic Forest, Brazil			Our aims were to describe the role of the selective management of regenerating community (RC) on the recovery of ecosystem functions in production areas of African mahoganies under mixed stands and agroforestry systems, established on abandoned farmland. A randomized block experiment was set up with the following treatments: (T1) mixed-plantation of African mahogany under conventional system (including herbicide application); (T2) mixed-plantation of African mahogany with selective conduction of RC; (T3) agroforestry system with African mahogany; (T4) agroforestry system with African mahogany with selective conduction of RC. The parameters of horizontal structure, diversity and ecological attributes of species of the regenerating community were studied. In addition, the production of aboveground biomass and nutrient stocks, soil fertility, and soil microbial activity were assessed. In T1, herbicide application (glyphosate) affected the floristic composition of the regenerating community by reducing the dominance of monocots and Pteridium arachnoideum, allowing the regeneration of other taxonomic groups of herbaceous species. In response, there was a reduction in the litter biomass stock comparing to the other treatments. The treatments with selective management of the RC (T2 and T4) produced more biomass and accumulated higher amounts of C and nutrients than the conventional treatments (T1 and T3). These treatments also allowed other shrub and tree species to overcome the ecological filter imposed by grasses and colonize the experimental area. Baccharis dracunculifolia, Vismia guianensis, Cecropia pachystachya and Inga sp. were the most important regenerating species that contributed most to the stocks of all nutrients in living aboveground biomass. Pruning and selective management in T4 increased the soil effective cation exchange, while in the T1 treatment there was a lower activity of the beta-glucosidase enzyme. The selective management of RC in agroforestry systems through the manipulation of competitive relationships allowed the colonization of native tree and shrubby species that provide several additional ecosystem services, including pollination, fauna attraction, food production, pest control and environmental regulation for the agroecosystem.
Recovery of biodiversity and carbon stocks in forest landscape restoration			The forest cover in the Atlantic Forest biome is currently composed of different origins, such as natural regeneration, restoration plantations, commercial monocultures, degraded forest areas, among others. Furthermore, they have different ages, floristic composition and varied structures, having different market impacts with their diversity. Understanding the dynamics of aboveground carbon (AGC) stocks in restoring forests is essential to support international forest restoration agreements and the UN Decade of Ecological Restoration.Monitoring restored areas with different previous land uses and different restoration strategies is crucial for quantifying carbon stocks and evaluating ecosystem services, such as biodiversity, and soil and water protection. New remote sensing approaches have revolutionized the way we monitor the diversity, structure and function of forests, and can play a key role in tracking the progress of restoration programs.AGC estimates are generally performed indirectly (non-destructively) using allometric models developed in mature forests. Little is known about the allometric relationships of individuals (diameter, height and biomass of trees) and the landscape (canopy structure and forest AGB) of forests under restoration. Due to the lack of equations and studies of carbon dynamics in restored forests, it is common to use generalised equations for tropical forests for this carbon estimate, adding many uncertainties to the estimates.In this project, we will explore remote sensing technologies to generate specific equations from lidar metrics to estimate above-ground carbon in different types of restoration. From the results generated, it will be possible to quantify the uncertainties associated with the use of generalized equations to estimate carbon in restored forests, as well as the equations with lower uncertainties for each type of restoration.
Recovery of biogeochemical processes in restored tropical dry forest on a coal mine spoil in La Guajira, Colombia			Open-cast coal mining eliminates vegetation, alters physical and chemical characteristics of soils, and therefore limits the establishment of native vegetation by lack of sufficient moisture, increase bulk density, and low organic matter content. Restoration of extremely degraded areas through plantation of fast growing species is expected to accelerate the recovers of soil organic matter and nutrient cycles. The purposes of this study were to compare intrasystem cycling of C, N, P, and base cations in native and restored forests at an open-cast coal mine in a dry region of Colombia. Leaf-fall, standing leaf litter, and their N, P, Ca, Mg, and K contents were measured for 1 year in native forests and restored forests of various ages (7, 10, and 21 years). The exploitation of coal in La Guajira degraded soil fertility, and although tree planting was sufficient to achieve the partial recovery of soil chemistry and N cycling relative to reference conditions (i.e., native forest), a P deficiency in forest function remained unresolved even 21 years after restoration. The restoration of biogeochemical processes, particularly of critical processes of the P cycle, requires additional human interventions (such as the application of nutrient-rich litterfall from native forests of the region) that favor nutrient dynamics and lead to the recovery of a self-sustaining ecosystem. Thus, multiple efforts are needed for the restoration of these dryland forests to recover ecosystem services (such as soil fertility) that improve C sequestration and help mitigate climate change. © 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Recovery of biomass and merchantable timber volumes twenty years after conventional and reduced-impact logging in Amazonian Brazil			Concerns about the sustainability of tropical forestry motivated this study on post-logging timber and carbon dynamics over a 20-year period in Paragominas, Pará, Brazil. Previously unlogged forest was subjected to conventional logging (CL), reduced-impact logging (RIL), or was set aside as an unlogged control. All trees ≥25 cm DBH and all trees of commercial species ≥10 cm DBH were monitored in a 24.5 ha plot in each treatment, with a 5.25 ha subplot in each for monitoring all trees ≥10 cm DBH. Above-ground biomass and bole volumes of merchantable species were tracked based on 10 inventories made between 1993 and 2014. Pre-logging biomass and bole volumes of commercial species were estimated as 237, 231, and 211 Mg ha-1, and 78, 80, and 70 m3 ha-1, in the RIL, CL, and unlogged plots, respectively. One year after logging, biomass was reduced 14% by RIL and 24% by CL with corresponding merchantable species volume reductions of 21% and 31%. By 2014, biomass and bole volumes of commercial species had recovered 95% and 98% of their pre-logging stocks in the RIL plot but only 76% and 72% in the CL plot, respectively; timber volumes from large trees (≥50 cm DBH) were only recovered to 81% in the RIL plot and to 53% in the CL plot. Over the first twenty years after logging, average volume increments from commercial species were substantially higher in the RIL plot (0.72 m3 ha-1 year-1) than in the CL plot (0.08 m3 ha-1 year-1). Recovery of both biomass and timber volumes were temporarily reversed between 2009 and 2014 due to a 4-fold increase in annual mortality rates in the RIL plot and a 5.5-fold increase in the CL plot (as well as a 3-fold increase in the control plot), all presumably related to the extreme drought of 2010. Our findings support the claim that use of RIL techniques accelerates rates of biomass and timber stock recovery after selective logging. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Recovery of bird activity and species richness in an early-stage tropical forest restoration			Bird habitat creation is often a goal of tropical forest restoration because bird-driven ecosystem services can accelerate forest recovery. However, resident tropical bird responses are not well characterized in the earliest years following restoration action. During a five-year study of the bird community in an experimental tropical forest restoration, we examined temporal trends in bird activity and diversity and the effects of habitat variables on the distribution of bird species within the site. Our site consisted of 16 replicate plots with 1, 2, 4, or 8 native tree species planted into former heavily-grazed pasture. Four years after tree planting, we observed a 3-fold increase in bird activity and 11-fold increase in species richness compared to preplanting. We also found changes in proportions of habitat guilds, with marked declines in open country birds and increases in birds associated with brushy, early secondary growth, and forest edge habitats. Number of bird species observed differed strongly between plots four years postplanting. Using a multispecies occurrence model under a Bayesian framework, we considered possible reasons for these differences related to plot content and context. Content features within plots ("content"), including number of tree species planted, canopy cover, tree species identity, and presence of legacy trees, did not explain differences in number of bird species observed, potentially because of small plot size relative to bird mobility. Neighborhood features ("context") of each plot did explain differences; more bird species were detected in plots with more adjacent woodland and farther from actively grazed pasture. Our results demonstrate that planting native tree species in highly degraded sites can generate rapid, positive responses from tropical bird communities. These responses are likely mediated by surrounding habitat matrix, which influences rates of bird community recovery. Considering site context can improve predictions of fine-scale distribution of bird activity and diversity within restoration sites.
Recovery of sandy campinaran soils degraded by sand mining to unleash the ecological restoration of this ecosystem			Sand mining is an activity that causes undesirable environmental impacts on the soil, fauna and flora, leading to the loss of habitats, biodiversity and various ecosystem services. In the Metropolitan Region of Manaus, the main mining activity is the extraction of sand in Campinaranas from sandy soils. Campinaranas are vegetable portions in the middle of the forest, with typical flora and fauna, forming islands of endemic species, from herbaceous to arboreal. Although they have less diversity than the tropical forests that surround them, these islands have great ecological importance, since they are rich in species unique to this ecosystem, also providing relevant ecosystem services like replacement of aquifers and carbon storage. Despite the intense environmental impact, the need for this material in abundance for civil construction and the lack of substitutes on the necessary scale, make sand extraction a very intense economic activity today. Therefore, controlled and rational mining becomes necessary, with the consequent recovery of degraded ecosystems. However, the ecological restoration of mined areas is a a costly activity, which requires a set of elaborate techniques, especially based on the recovery of the soil in the initial phase. The recovery of soils from the mined areas of Campinaranas is even more challenging because it is fragile, highly erodible, poor in nutrients, which occur as entrapments within the forest environment, whose capacity for recolonization and natural regeneration is very restricted. The traditional technique employed to promote the restoration of areas explored in sand mining projects in the region is the direct planting of seedlings of native species, which due to soil degradation, is not proving to be effective. Despite the importance and urgency of this topic (recovery of the soils of Campinaranas), no studies were found that focused on the recovery of the degraded soils of Campinarana by sand mining activities and, therefore, the great majority of the initiatives of recovery of campinaranas mined were not successful. Therefore, the main objective of this proposal is to identify an adequate and economically viable technical procedure for the recovery of degraded soils in Campinaranas after sand exploration. Initially, the characterization of preserved campinaran soils as reference ecosystems will be carried out, as well as the characterization of degraded soils (or mining floor) in Campinaranas after sand mining, through morphological, physical, chemical and soil macrofauna attributes. With the characterization of the degradation of these soils, using the reference ecosystems, the need to recover these soil features will be quantified. Thus, for the recovery of degraded soils, we will implement experiments in greenhouse, and later, in the field, in order to select which treatment is most suitable for the recovery of degraded soils in Campinaranas, by sand extraction. During the experiments, the following materials will be used: a) addition of top layer of top soil, collected from reference areas; b) planting commercial species of green manure; c) addition of residues from açaí processing; d) addition of tanned sawdust; e) correction of acidity and fertilization, according to the results of chemical characterization. These treatments are focused on replacing the organic matter necessary to fix nutrients, which will trigger the trajectory of soil recovery. This study will produce unprecedented data, which will allow to understand the levels of degradation of the impacted soils, to select indicators of the soil quality, the rate of loss of natural vegetation, know which species are established after leaving the area, as well as select the most suitable treatment for the recovery of degraded soils. Finally, based on these results, we will prepare an initial protocol for the restoration of areas of campinaranas degraded by sand mining, which will represent an excellent service for society. (AU)
RECOVERY OF SOIL C AND N IN A TROPICAL PASTURE: PASSIVE AND ACTIVE RESTORATION			Soil degradation by deforestation and introduction of exotic grasses is a grave consequence of land-use change in tropical regions during the last decades. Soil restoration following natural succession (i.e., passive restoration) is slow because of low tree establishment. Introduction of tree plantings by human intervention (i.e., active restoration) results in a promising strategy to accelerate forest succession and soil recovery in tropical region. The present research was carried out to explore the restoration of soil properties after cattle exclusion and of grazing combined with native tree planting introduction (legumes and nonlegumes) in a tropical pasture in Veracruz, southeast Mexico. Results indicate that land-use changes decreased soil C and N pools in both litter and mineral soil. In addition, soil heterogeneity increased by land-use changes at both temporal and spatial scales. In the short term, passive succession (i.e., cattle exclusion) favors the recovery of C and N content in labile soil pools, indicated by the increase in litter C and N masses as well as C and N concentrations in soil microbial biomass. Soils under active restoration showed trends to recover the N cycling, such as a greater accumulation of N in litter, in soil total N concentrations, soil microbial biomass N concentrations, rates of net N transformations, and extractable water and microbial biomass C:N ratios mainly under legumes species. Active restoration including legume introduction is a key factor for rapid recovery of soil fertility. Copyright (c) 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Recovery of the reproductive functional diversity of edible fruit plant assemblages along the regeneration of a Caatinga dry forest			The ability of dry forests to deliver ecosystem services of both local and global relevance depends on the capacity of those forests to recover from constant disturbances in human-modified landscapes. Here we examine the effects posed by biomass, chronic human disturbances and aridity on the recovery of reproductive functional diversity by edible fruit plant assemblages following slash-and-burn agriculture in a Caatinga dry forest, in northeastern Brazil. The edible fruit plant assemblages were described across 24 forest stands, including regenerating stands of varying age (4 to 50 yr old) and old-growth stands, adopting a large set of reproductive traits as floral sizes, reproductive systems, and pollination systems. Such a chronosequence covered a gradient relative to aboveground biomass, aridity, and chronic anthropogenic disturbances (CAD). We observed that edible fruit plant assemblages across both regenerating and old-growth forest stands exhibited similar taxonomic diversity scores. This pattern is also figured in the recovery of reproductive traits, which is relatively fast as regenerating forest scores are generally similar or higher to those in old-growth forests. Generally, regenerating forest stands support more specialized reproductive traits and strategies than old-growth forest stands [e.g., edible fruit plants with very large flowers (>30 mm), specialized pollination systems, large fruits (>1.5 ≤3.0 mm), and medium-sized seeds (>0.6 ≤1.5 cm). However, the functional diversity of specialist reproductive traits decreased with increases in the levels of biomass and aridity, isolated, but was also impacted by the interactive effect. Considering the effects of biomass, CAD or aridity individually, we observed that biomass itself was responsible for most of the effects (42.8%), while 52.3% of the reproductive traits were negatively affected by CAD or aridity, which seems to be a major force against the recovery. © 2024 Elsevier B.V.
REDD and PINC: A new policy framework to fund tropical forests as global 'eco-utilities'			Tropical forests are 'eco-utilities' providing critical ecosystem services that underpin food, energy, water and climate security at local to global scales. Currently, these services are unrecognised and unrewarded in international policy and financial frameworks, causing forests to be worth more dead than alive. Much attention is currently focused on REDD (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation) and A/R (Afforestation and Reforestation) as mitigation options. In this article we propose an additional mechanism PINC (Proactive Investment in Natural Capital) that recognises and rewards the value of ecosystem services provided by standing tropical forests, especially from a climate change adaptation perspective. Using Amazonian forests as a case study we show that PINC could improve the wellbeing of rural and forest-dependent populations, enabling them to cope with the impacts associated with climate change and deforestation. By investing pro-actively in areas where deforestation pressures are currently low, the long-term costs of mitigation and adaptation will be reduced. We suggest a number of ways in which funds could be raised through emerging financial mechanisms to provide positive incentives to maintain standing forests. To develop PINC, a new research and capacity-building agenda is needed that explores the interdependence between communities, the forest eco-utility and the wider economy.
REDD plus -related activities in Kenya: actors' views on biodiversity and monitoring in a broader policy context			Activities related to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries (REDD+) bear potential benefits for, and also pose risks to, the conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services (ES). Next to ecological, socioeconomic and technical factors, the priorities of key actors in REDD+ implementation shape the integration of biodiversity concerns. This study aimed to identify the views of key actors in the REDD+ implementation process in Kenya with regard to biodiversity conservation and monitoring in order to evaluate the degree to which biodiversity is likely to be considered in the (sub-) national REDD+ context. In Kenya, avoided deforestation in dry forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in different forest types are major REDD+ activities. Interviews with 34 (sub-) national and project level actors showed that the solving of socioeconomic issues was paramount for REDD+ implementation in general and for achieving additional conservation benefits. In REDD+ initiatives in dry forests, conservation objectives were primarily related to wildlife; actors stressed the importance of specific management measures to minimize human-wildlife conflicts. In initiatives to enhance forest carbon stocks, the sustained provision of timber, fuel wood and hydrological ES was regarded as a conservation priority and a prerequisite for project viability. The biodiversity indicators and monitoring schemes considered to be available by the actors were mostly related to particular species. In conclusion, integration of biodiversity concerns into REDD+ depends heavily on the resolution of socioeconomic and political issues. Increased collaboration between Kenyan actors can contribute to the development of monitoring schemes for detecting REDD+ impacts on biodiversity and ES on a landscape scale.
REDD: How can scientists change the political jungle?			Many years ago, I dreamed of researching the tropical forest canopy. Later, I built walkways there and found myself 70 m up in an enchanted world—where life meets the atmosphere. Little did I think that this might one day hold a key to the survival of the rain forest. © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013.
REDD+ and Business Sustainability: A Guide to Reversing Deforestation for Forward Thinking Companies			This book provides a detailed look at REDD+ business case studies and best practice and highlights the future of REDD+ in providing a promising mechanism for financing forest conservation while increasing the sustainability and profitability of forward-thinking companies. How can sustainability leaders reverse tropical deforestation? What exactly are payment for ecosystem service forest conservation projects, otherwise known as Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+), and how can these projects contribute to business sustainability and profitability? Tropical forests are quickly disappearing – at a rate of nearly one football or soccer field every few seconds. REDD+ simultaneously offers a scalable conservation finance mechanism and a platform for business sustainability. This book focuses on the nexus between tropical forest conservation projects and the sustainability practices of major global businesses. This book contextualizes the issues, defines REDD+ and focuses on its significance to business sustainability including: the role of REDD+ in mitigating global greenhouse gas emissions while reducing business risk to a changing climate; as part of a firm’s philanthropic work; a mechanism to increase consumer loyalty; benefitting upstream local communities and ecosystem services; enhancing corporate social responsibility image and upholding corporate principles; and providing unique marketing opportunities and product positioning through private-sector support of charismatic REDD+ projects. © 2013 Brian McFarland.
REDD+ and international leakage via food and timber markets: A CGE analysis			This paper studies the effect of international trade in food and timber on land use and potential carbon leakage in the context of actions to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+). First a simple analytical model of international leakage is presented that focuses on international competition between firms that produce food and timber. A formula for the leakage rate in the model is derived. The results of the analytical model are then tested with a large Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) model and it is verified that the qualitative results from the analytical model hold. Finally, a scenario of leakage rate trajectories is presented for a number of key tropical forest regions for the next two decades and a sensitivity analysis is performed on key parameters. Computed leakage rates range between 0.5 % for Brazil and 11.3 % for Malaysia and are fairly stable over the projection period. Leakage rates increase with a higher supply elasticity of land and a higher trade elasticity, they decrease with a higher elasticity of input substitution in production and appear to be independent of the rates of forest conservation and absolute prices of food and timber. © 2013 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht.
REDD+ in Brazil: A profusion of pilot projects with an institutional framework still under construction			Brazil adopted its first laws on the REDD mechanism (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation) in 2008. These laws setting out goals and orientations show the importance given by Brazil to this mechanism, now called REDD+ since its scope was widened to include carbon storage in soils and, more generally, "sustainable" tropical forest management. From surveys based on interviews with those involved and field observations supplemented by an analysis of the regulations and the bibliography, this article sets out to elucidate the construction of the REDD+ institutional framework in Brazil, with a description of external financial contributions. Although the institutional framework is still under construction and the national REDD+ strategy still awaiting development and adoption, REDD+ in Brazil is already being received with great enthusiasm, as illustrated by numerous initiatives from federated States (Amazonas, Para, Acre and Mato Grosso) as well as many pilot projects. The regional contexts of these pilot projects show that they are mainly taking place in areas that are already under protection (protected areas or indigenous lands), although they could have focused more particularly on the areas most threatened by deforestation. Looking in particular into the Juma Reserve REDD+ project, this article raises a great many questions, including on governance and the involvement or participation of local populations, on greenhouse gas accounting, on the reality of avoided deforestation and on linkages between the local and national scales.
REDD+ policy options: Including forests in an international climate change agreement			We an overview of the role of tropical forests in the international efforts to negotiate a new global climate treaty. Under the existing treaty, the Kyoto Protocol and its “flexible mechanisms” - particularly the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) - have succeeded in building a billion dollar market for emission reduction projects in developing countries. The role of forests and land use in those markets has been a major source of controversy, and debate however. Owing, in part, to concerns about a focus on forests taking pressure off of other industrial emissions, only afforestation and reforestation projects can be included under the CDM with deforestation and degradation efforts ineligible. However, increasing political support following the “2007 Bali Action Plan” for reducing emissions from deforestation and degradation (REDD), which was spearheaded by developing countries themselves, as well as scientific evidence about the current emissions from tropical forests surpassing those of the global transportation sector has led to a consensus that a post Kyoto architecture will expand to include forest activities excluded under the CDM. The positions taken by different countries on what is now referred to as “REDD+” are often explained by the condition, and state, of their own forests. The overarching issues to be decided in developing the framework of a REDD+ mechanism include: the scope of the forestry activities to be covered; the scale of accounting for forestry activities and the baseline for measuring reference emissions levels; the type of financing to be provided for REDD+ activities; how to address fundamental issues of capacity and governance; and the consideration of co-benefits. Many of these remain contentious so that the role of REDD+ in addressing tropical forest challenges remains uncertain Despite the many different interests of the countries seeking to take part in a REDD+ mechanism and their different positions, it is possible summarize what is known and what is not known about the key components of a REDD+ mechanism and where the debate stands on these issues as of the fall of 2010. © Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012.
REDD+, transformational change and the promise of performance-based payments: a qualitative comparative analysis			Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) has emerged as a promising climate change mitigation mechanism in developing countries. This article examines the national political context in 13 REDD+ countries in order to identify the enabling conditions for achieving progress with the implementation of countries’ REDD+ policies and measures. The analysis builds on a qualitative comparative analysis of various countries’ progress with REDD+ conducted in 12 REDD+ countries in 2012, which highlighted the importance of factors such as already initiated policy change, and the presence of coalitions calling for broader policy change. A follow-up survey in 2014 was considered timely because the REDD+ policy arena, at the international and country levels, is highly dynamic and undergoes constant evolution, which affects progress with REDD+ policy-making and implementation. Furthermore, we will now examine whether the ‘promise’ of performance-based funds has played a role in enabling the establishment of REDD+. The results show a set of enabling conditions and characteristics of the policy process under which REDD+ policies can be established. The study finds that the existence of broader policy change, and availability of performance-based funding in combination with strong national ownership of the REDD+ policy process, may help guide other countries seeking to formulate REDD+ policies that are likely to deliver efficient, effective and equitable outcomes. Policy relevance Tropical forest countries struggle with the design and implementation of coherent policies and measures to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. Evidence on which factors and configurations are crucial to make progress towards these challenging policy objectives will be helpful for decision makers and practitioners at all levels involved in REDD+. Key findings highlight the importance of already initiated policy change, and the availability of performance-based funding in combination with strong national ownership of the REDD+ process. These findings provide guidance to REDD+ countries as to which enabling conditions need to be strengthened to facilitate effective, efficient and equitable REDD+ policy formulation and implementation. © 2016 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.
REDD+: Quick assessment of deforestation risk based on available data			The evaluation of the future dynamics of deforestation is essential to creating the basis for the effective implementation of REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation) initiatives. Such evaluation is often a challenging task, especially for countries that have to cope with a critical lack of data and capacities, higher uncertainties, and competing interests. We present a new modeling approach that makes use of available and easily accessible data sources to predict the spatial location of future deforestation. This approach is based on the Random Forest algorithm, which is a machine learning technique that enables evidence-based, data-driven decisions and is therefore often used in decision-making processes. Our objective is to provide a straightforward modeling approach that, without requiring cost-intensive assessments, can be applied in the early stages of REDD+, for a stepwise implementation approach of REDD+ projects in regions with limited availability of data, capital, technical infrastructure, or human capacities. The presented model focuses on building business-as-usual scenarios to identify and rank potentially suitable areas for REDD+ interventions. For validation purposes we applied the model to data from Nicaragua. © 2017 by the authors.
Reduced productivity and carbon drawdown of tropical forests from ground-level ozone exposure			Elevated ground-level ozone, a result of human activity, is known to reduce plant productivity, but its influence on tropical forests remains unclear. Here we estimate how increased ozone exposure has affected tropical-forest productivity and the global carbon cycle. We experimentally measure the ozone susceptibility of various tropical tree species, and then incorporate these data into a dynamic global vegetation model. We find that current anthropogenic-derived ozone results in a substantial decline in annual net primary productivity (NPP) across all tropical forests, with some areas being particularly impacted. For example, Asia sees losses of 10.9% (7.2-19.7%) NPP. We calculate that this productivity decline has resulted in a cumulative loss in carbon drawdown of 0.29 PgC per year since 2000, equating to similar to 17% of the tropical contemporary annual land carbon sink in the twenty-first century. We also find that areas of current and future forest restoration are disproportionately affected by elevated ozone. Future socioeconomic pathways that reduce ozone formation in the tropics will incur benefits to the global carbon budget by relieving the current ozone impacts seen across both intact forest and areas of forest restoration, which are critical terrestrial regions for mitigation of rising atmospheric carbon dioxide.
Reducing Emissions From Tropical Deforestation and Forest Degradation			Forests are an integral element of life on earth. Providing oxygen to breathe, watershed protection, erosion control, carbon storage, and opportunities for people to connect with nature. Science warns us that at the rate forests are being destroyed, humans will alter the planet so significantly, that many lives (human and other species) will be extirpated. Recognition of the true value of forests, for their carbon storage function, is driving global agreements and policies to promote emissions reductions from land use across all biomes, but particularly in the tropics. Sizable levels of financial support have been directed at reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, in the scope of USD 1.1-2.7 billion per year. But is this enough? This level of investment is still dwarfed by income from timber, agriculture, mining and palm oil cultivation—key drivers of tropical forest loss. We describe opportunities for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, discuss risks in measuring emissions reductions and draw attention to key political, social and environmental challenges from a regional perspective of Southeast Asia; a region in the spotlight for the mass expansion of oil palm plantations and polluting wildfires. © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions by forest protection: The transaction costs of implementing REDD			Understanding and minimizing the transaction costs of policy implementation are critical for reducing tropical forest losses. As the international community launches REDD, a global initiative to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from tropical deforestation, policymakers need to pay attention to the transactions costs associated with negotiating, monitoring and enforcing contracts between forest users, governments, and donors. The existing institutional design for REDD relies heavily on central government interventions in program countries. Analysing new data on forest conservation outcomes, we identify several problems with this centralized approach to forest protection. We describe options for a more diversified policy approach that could reduce the full set of transaction costs and thereby improve the efficiency of the market-based approach to conservation. © 2012-IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved.
Reducing intensification by shifting cultivation through sustainable climate-smart practices in tropical forests: A review in the context of UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration			The tropical forests provide important ecosystem services at local and global scales (i.e. climate regulation, carbon cycling, and food resources). Shifting cultivation (SC) is the most common traditional farm system in tropical forest landscapes, which along with hunting and gathering from forests, have been the main food sources and livelihoods. This traditional SC was probably sustainable for nomadic indigenous populations for centuries. However, the non-traditional shifting cultivation is a consequence of cultural changes of indigenous communities influenced by western culture that induce land-use changes using new technologies, promoting the high local -scale expansion and intensification, and overhunting. The intensification occurs due to the short-term farm system, low crop diversity or monocultures, and larger slash and burn forest patches inducing agricultural expansion due to higher commercial crop demand. This expansion and intensification determine the loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services, forest degradation and fragmentation, higher greenhouse gas emissions, defaunation and local extinction. Thus, degraded forest rehabilitation with different sustainable food systems (i. e. Agroforestry) can reduce the expansion and intensification of SC. Restored forest, agroforestry, and second -growth forests can be restored as reservoirs for valuable biodiversity and a host of different ecosystem ser-vices. Tropical forests are central to climate change mitigation efforts and should prioritize the UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration. In this context, we provide a review on the effects of shifting cultivation intensification on tropical forest landscapes as a base to apply sustainable climate-smart practices in the context of UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration.
Reducing natural vegetation loss in Amazonia critically depends on the formal recognition of indigenous lands			The Brazilian Amazon contains the world's largest tract of tropical forest, about 22 % of which is within demarcated indigenous territories. Formal governmental recognition of these traditional territories is often a critical deterrent to deforestation, but the relative conservation performance of Indigenous Lands (ILs) under different legal categories and geographic contexts remains poorly understood. We used 30-m resolution LANDSAT satellite imagery to quantitatively assess the land cover status and annual rates of natural vegetation loss be-tween 1985 and 2020 for 381 indigenous territories amounting to-115 million hectares. Using a comprehensive set of environmental and socio-economic covariates and a mixed-modelling approach, we found that all stages of formal IL recognition consistently inhibit natural vegetation loss throughout the Brazilian Amazon compared to adjacent unprotected areas. Formal physical demarcation and distance from roads were the main proximate drivers of avoided natural vegetation loss inside ILs. Forest loss associated with road access is substantially curbed by ILs, showing the importance of frontier expansion when assessing indigenous reserve performance in counteracting natural vegetation loss. Because loss of natural forest and savannah areas associated with agri-business frontiers and infrastructure projects are likely to intensify, the importance of ecosystem services pro-vided by ILs is expected to increase across the Brazilian Amazon. Cultural profile and human density exerted no impacts on IL effectiveness in precluding natural vegetation loss. Given widespread encroachment of timber extraction and agribusiness, formal recognition of indigenous territories is a critical factor in decelerating pri-mary habitat conversion across the Amazon.
Reducing the impacts of Neotropical oil palm development on functional diversity			Large-scale conversion of natural habitats to agriculture reduces species richness and functional diversity, with important implications for the provision of many ecosystem services. We investigated possible solutions to minimise loss of functional diversity: retaining forest fragments to enhance functional diversity within agricultural lands, and restricting future expansion of tropical crops to degraded lands or low-productivity farmlands to conserve functional diversity at a landscape level. We focused on birds, which play key functional roles and have well-known functional ecology, and oil palm, a rapidly expanding tropical crop. We did so in the Colombian Llanos, a region highlighted for the planting of sustainable oil palm, where plantations are currently replacing two main habitat types: forest remnants and improved cattle pasture. We found that levels of functional diversity (FD) and richness (FRic) were highest in remnant forests. Furthermore, levels of functional diversity and richness in oil palm and improved pasture were positively related to the proportion of forest in a 250 m radius surrounding each sample point. Frugivorous and canopy foraging species were particularly associated with remnant forests, while aquatic and terrestrial foragers were associated with pasture. This suggests that retaining forest remnants in agricultural landscapes is important in preventing large losses of functional diversity, and might also play a role in maintaining avifaunal functional richness within farmland. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Reduction of emissions by avoided deforestation in andean high-land tropical forests			Deforestation and forest degradation, mainly in areas with high carbon density, is one of the most important source of greenhouse gases (GHG). The impact of deforestation on carbon storage in total biomass and its CO2 emissions is analyzed in four land covers in the Santuario de Fauna y Flora Iguaque (SFFI), Boyaca, Colombia. A total of 32 temporal sampling plots (TSP) of 250m(2) was established to measure trees with diameter at breast height (dbh) >= 10 cm whereas 17 TSP of 36m(2) were established to measure total and stipe height of all frailejones (Espeletia boyacensis Cuatrec, E. tunjana Cuatrec and E. cf. Incana). Above and belowground biomass was estimated with allometric models, whereas carbon was calculated using the a fraction of 0.47. The sampling area was proportional to the area of each land cover: open heathlands and moorlands (OMH), dense heathlands and moorlands (DMH), broad-leaved forest with continuous canopy, not on mire (BFCC), natural grassland prevailingly without trees and shrubs (NSWT). BFCC and DMH showed higher carbon storage in biomass (55 and 27Mg C/ha, respectively). SFFI stored around 135.9Gg C, from which 25-38Gg CO(2)e could be emitted to the atmosphere in the 20 next years if the deforestation rates continue. BFCC and OMH are the covers with the highest potential of CO2 emissions to the atmosphere. Therefore, prioritizing the preservation of these ecosystems by Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+) programs, is a key to counter the effects of climate change and ensure the supply of ecosystemic services that support local communities' livelihoods.
Reduction of forest soil respiration in response to nitrogen deposition			The use of fossil fuels and fertilizers has increased the amount of biologically reactive nitrogen in the atmosphere over the past century. As a consequence, forests in industrialized regions have experienced greater rates of nitrogen deposition in recent decades. This unintended fertilization has stimulated forest growth, but has also affected soil microbial activity, and thus the recycling of soil carbon and nutrients. A meta-analysis suggests that nitrogen deposition impedes organic matter decomposition, and thus stimulates carbon sequestration, in temperate forest soils where nitrogen is not limiting microbial growth. The concomitant reduction in soil carbon emissions is substantial, and equivalent in magnitude to the amount of carbon taken up by trees owing to nitrogen fertilization. As atmospheric nitrogen levels continue to rise, increased nitrogen deposition could spread to older, more weathered soils, as found in the tropics; however, soil carbon cycling in tropical forests cannot yet be assessed.
Reductions in water, soil and nutrient losses and pesticide pollution in agroforestry practices: a review of evidence and processes			Background and aims Agroforestry systems combining trees with crops or pastures have been widely used to reduce water, soil, and nutrient losses and associated water pollution from agricultural lands in both temperate and tropical regions. However, reviews on improvement/efficiency and the scope of such reductions by soil, management, climate, and hydrological processes are limited. Methods This paper synthesized the available evidence on the reduction in surface runoff, soil erosion, nutrient, and pollutant losses (e.g., herbicides, pesticides, and antibiotics) to quantify the effectiveness of agroforestry systems on water quality improvement based on published studies. Results On average, agroforestry systems reduced surface runoff, soil, organic carbon, and related nutrient losses by 1-100%, 0-97%, -175-92%, and -265-100%, respectively, with average values of 58%, 65%, 9%, and 50%, respectively. They also lowered herbicide, pesticide, and other pollutant losses by -55-100% (49% on average). Conclusions Reduction efficiency of agroforestry systems is site-dependent and varies widely depending on different biophysical factors. A comprehensive science-based review is needed to generalize agroforestry design and site adaptability for water and soil conservation where climatic, geographical, ecological, and socio-economic conditions are relatively similar in the world.
Re-evaluation of forest biomass carbon stocks and lessons from the world's most carbon-dense forests			From analysis of published global site biomass data (n = 136) from primary forests, we discovered (i) the world's highest known total biomass carbon density (living plus dead) of 1,867 tonnes carbon per ha (average value from 13 sites) occurs in Australian temperate moist Eucalyptus regnans forests, and (ii) average values of the global site biomass data were higher for sampled temperate moist forests (n = 44) than for sampled tropical (n = 36) and boreal (n = 52) forests (n is number of sites per forest biome). Spatially averaged Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change biome default values are lower than our average site values for temperate moist forests, because the temperate biome contains a diversity of forest ecosystem types that support a range of mature carbon stocks or have a long land-use history with reduced carbon stocks. We describe a framework for identifying forests important for carbon storage based on the factors that account for high biomass carbon densities, including (i) relatively cool temperatures and moderately high precipitation producing rates of fast growth but slow decomposition, and (ii) older forests that are often multiaged and multilayered and have experienced minimal human disturbance. Our results are relevant to negotiations under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change regarding forest conservation, management, and restoration. Conserving forests with large stocks of biomass from deforestation and degradation avoids significant carbon emissions to the atmosphere, irrespective of the source country, and should be among allowable mitigation activities. Similarly, management that allows restoration of a forest's carbon sequestration potential also should be recognized.
Reference scenarios for deforestation and forest degradation in support of REDD: a review of data and methods			Global climate policy initiatives are now being proposed to compensate tropical forest nations for reducing carbon emissions from deforestation and forest degradation ( REDD). These proposals have the potential to include developing countries more actively in international greenhouse gas mitigation and to address a substantial share of the world's emissions which come from tropical deforestation. For such a policy to be viable it must have a credible benchmark against which emissions reduction can be calculated. This benchmark, sometimes termed a baseline or reference emissions scenario, can be based directly on historical emissions or can use historical emissions as input for business as usual projections. Here, we review existing data and methods that could be used to measure historical deforestation and forest degradation reference scenarios including FAO ( Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations) national statistics and various remote sensing sources. The freely available and corrected global Landsat imagery for 1990, 2000 and soon to come for 2005 may be the best primary data source for most developing countries with other coarser resolution high frequency or radar data as a valuable complement for addressing problems with cloud cover and for distinguishing larger scale degradation. While sampling of imagery has been effectively useful for pan-tropical and continental estimates of deforestation, wall-to-wall ( or full coverage) allows more detailed assessments for measuring national-level reference emissions. It is possible to measure historical deforestation with sufficient certainty for determining reference emissions, but there must be continued calls at the international level for making high-resolution imagery available, and for financial and technical assistance to help countries determine credible reference scenarios. The data available for past years may not be sufficient for assessing all forms of forest degradation, but new data sources will have greater potential in 2007 and after. This paper focuses only on the methods for measuring changes in forest area, but this information must be coupled with estimates of change in forest carbon stocks in order to quantify emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.
Reflecting on species diversity and regeneration dynamics of scientific forest management practices in Nepal			Implementation of sustainable forest management approaches, balancing mass timber production and intact ecosystem services through maintaining species diversity, has ever been the challenges for policy makers and practitioners in tropical forestry. Scientific forest management (SciFM) is a popular management approach that is increasingly adopted in Sal (Shorea robusta) dominated forests of Nepal, aiming to accelerate timber production and to improve forest condition. Being based on specific management plan, SciFM practices involve application of various silvicultural practices to manipulate forest composition and stand structure referring to the whole rotation period of a particular forest stand. Of the various aspects of SciFM, we aim to quantify the effect of SciFM on species diversity and regeneration dynamics, and compare diversity indices and regeneration attributes between managed and unmanaged forest stand in lowlands of Nepal, through establishment of permanent sample plots and its measurement in 2014 and 2018. Data collection about plant species and regeneration attributes was carried out in 50 sample plots of size 10 m x 10 m, established by stratified random sampling using quadrat method. Data analysis was done by using various diversity indices and compared through paired t-test. We also carried out correlation and regression analysis of diversity indices with predictor variables; such as canopy cover, number of individuals ha(-1), basal area ha(-1) and site productivity index. Our study found that plant diversity is significantly decreased but the concentration of dominance is significantly increased in managed forest blocks. Diversity indices were found to have a higher degree of relationship with number of individuals ha(-1) and canopy cover as compared to site productivity index and basal area ha(-1). Similarly, seedling density and sapling density is found to be increased in managed blocks, ensuring the production and productivity of forest stand sustainably. Based on our analysis, we argue that opening of canopy through regeneration felling is important in promoting regeneration establishment and growth but further research is needed to balance the species diversity along with the practice of intensive management interventions.
Reforestation of agricultural land in the tropics: The relative contribution of soil, living biomass and debris pools to carbon sequestration			Tropical regions of the world experience high rates of land-use change and this has a major influence on terrestrial carbon (C) pools and the global C cycle. We assessed land-use change from agriculture to reforested plantings (with endemic species), up to 33 years of age, using 10 paired sites in the wet tropics, Australia. We determined the impacts on 0-50 cm below-ground C (soil organic C (SOC), charcoal C, humic organic C, particulate organic C, resistant organic C), C stored in roots (fine and coarse), C stored in living above-ground biomass and debris C pools. Reforested areas accumulated ecosystem Cat a rate of 7.4 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1). Reforestation plantings contained, on average, 2.3 times more ecosystem C than agricultural areas (102 Mg ha(-1) and 233 Mg ha(-1), respectively). Most of the C accumulation was in living above-ground and below-ground biomass (60 and 30%, respectively) with a smaller amount in debris pools (16%). Apart from C in roots, soil C accumulation was not obvious across sites ranging from 8 to 33 years since reforestation, relative to the agricultural baseline. Differences in SOC (and associated SOC pools) to a depth of 50 cm, did exist between reforested areas and adjacent agriculture at some sites, however there was not a consistent trend in SOC associated with reforestation. Local site-based factors (e.g. soil texture and mineralogy, land-use history and microbial activity) appear to have a strong influence on the direction of the change in SOC. While reforestation in the tropics has great potential to accumulate C in biomass in living vegetation, and debris pools, it is likely to take approximately 50 years before C stocks of reforested areas resemble natural ecosystems. Accumulation of SOC through reforestation is difficult to achieve, highlighting the need to conserve carbon pools in remnant forests in the tropics. (C) 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Reforestation of tropical rainforests as a negative emissions technology in Malaysia: An environmental and economic sustainability assessment			Forest carbon sequestration is a promising negative emissions technology as it is relatively simple and inexpensive. Its potential for climate mitigation could be particularly high in tropical rainforests as they can store more carbon at a faster rate. However, the understanding of its sustainability is limited due to the scarcity of studies. Focusing on reforestation, this work is the first to present an extensive environmental and economic assessment of forest CO2 sequestration in a tropical rainforest country such as Malaysia. Life cycle assessment (LCA) and life cycle costing (LCC) are combined to evaluate the sustainability of reforestation with four tropical tree species: keruing (Dipterocarpus spp.), meranti (Shorea leprosula), rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) and kapok (Ceiba Pentandra). Considering the horizon of 60 years, the system boundaries comprise site infrastructure, land clearing, tree planting and growing, and forest management. The dynamics of greenhouse gas (GHG) and other air emissions are also considered over the period, including carbon sequestration and land use change, nitrous oxide and ethylene emissions. All tree species lead to a net-negative GHG emissions, ranging from −558 to −808 kg CO2 eq./t CO2 removed, with kapok having the highest and rubber the lowest sequestration potential. The latter has the highest values in 13 other impact categories considered, while keruing is the best option for 12 impacts. The main environmental hotspot for all species is the forest management stage. The LCC range from –US$17 to US$12/t CO2 removed. Reforestation on lands available in Malaysia could remove 105.9–473.3 Mt CO2 over 60 years, or 1.8–7.9 Mt CO2/yr, equivalent to 7.4–33 % of the agricultural emissions. Rubber and kapok could generate US$640 M and US$8.06 bn in profits over 60 years from latex and fibre, respectively. Therefore, reforestation has a significant potential to help tropical countries, such as Malaysia, achieve net-negative emissions, while at the same time boosting the economy. © 2024 The Authors
ReforesTree: A Dataset for Estimating Tropical Forest Carbon Stock with Deep Learning and Aerial Imagery			Forest biomass is a key influence for future climate, and the world urgently needs highly scalable financing schemes, such as carbon offsetting certifications, to protect and restore forests. Current manual forest carbon stock inventory methods of measuring single trees by hand are time, labour, and cost intensive and have been shown to be subjective. They can lead to substantial overestimation of the carbon stock and ultimately distrust in forest financing. The potential for impact and scale of leveraging advancements in machine learning and remote sensing technologies is promising, but needs to be of high quality in order to replace the current forest stock protocols for certifications.In this paper, we present ReforesTree, a benchmark dataset of forest carbon stock in six agro-forestry carbon offsetting sites in Ecuador. Furthermore, we show that a deep learning-based end-to-end model using individual tree detection from low cost RGB-only drone imagery is accurately estimating forest carbon stock within official carbon offsetting certification standards. Additionally, our baseline CNN model outperforms state-of-the-art satellite-based forest biomass and carbon stock estimates for this type of small-scale, tropical agro-forestry sites. We present this dataset to encourage machine learning research in this area to increase accountability and transparency of monitoring, verification and reporting (MVR) in carbon offsetting projects, as well as scaling global reforestation financing through accurate remote sensing.
Regional differences of functional and taxonomic bird diversity in tropical agroforests of Peru			Diversity and functionality of bird communities in tropical agroforests are shaped by their surrounding landscape, particularly the extent and type of natural forest. However, most evidence comes from tropical rainforest landscapes, whereas the bearing of such trends in other forest types remains understudied. We compared functional and beta diversity of bird communities in 23 cacao agroforests embedded in landscapes of two contrasting Peruvian regions: seasonally-dry tropical forests and subtropical rainforests from the Andean foothills. Strong climatic seasonality affects both landscapes, but forest vegetation structure and complexity differ. We found higher bird species richness (n = 179 spp) and higher species turnover in the subtropical forest than in the dry forest landscape (n = 64 spp). Only in the dry forest landscape, distance from forest increased dissimilarity driven by species loss, that is, the nestedness component of beta diversity. This points to the importance of conserving dry tropical forests within the broader landscape matrix, with known benefits for pest control and cacao yield. Functional diversity indices were not influenced by forest distance in either landscape, but the proportion of insects in birds' diet decreased by 27% along a 1 km distance gradient from forest in the subtropical forest landscape. In the dry forest landscape, however, it decreased by only 3% across the same distance gradient. Far from forest (>= 1 km), forest specialization decreased by similar to 33% and 20% in the subtropical and dry forest landscapes, respectively. These differences indicate that regionally-adapted agroforest management is paramount for conserving bird diversity and ecosystem services as pest control. Procuring high-canopy shade trees and adequate microhabitats for insectivorous species is essential to maintain biocontrol services in the subtropical forest. Conversely, in the dry forest enhancing low-canopy vegetation with a focus on frugivores and ensuring forest closeness to agroforests may maximize bird diversity and their ecosystem services. A complete version of this article is translated to Spanish in the supplements.
Regional scale variation in forest structure and biomass in the Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico: Effects of forest disturbance			Aboveground biomass is a key variable in understanding the role of tropical forests in the global carbon cycle. The forests of the Yucatan Peninsula form part of the largest remaining tract of Mesoamerican forests, where the predominant land use is still slash-and-burn agriculture. Previous estimates of aboveground live phytomass of late-successional forests in this region vary almost twofold, but are derived from relatively few forest plots. We estimate aboveground forest biomass using data from 243 inventoried forest plots (totalling 58.5 ha), ranging across a disturbance gradient from nearly intact to severely degraded forests. We assess the effects of environmental and disturbance variables on forest basal area, stand-level wood specific gravity and aboveground biomass. Major differences in basal area and aboveground biomass were explained by levels of human disturbance (clear-cutting, logging, and fire disturbance), whereas edaphic factors played only a minor role. Total mean phytomass density estimates ranged from 28.8 +/- 3.8 mg ha(-1) in plots aged 10-15 years to 191.9 +/- 9.5 mg ha(-1) in undisturbed old-growth forest plots (>50 years). Severe logging and fire disturbance reduced AGB in late- successional plots (30-50 years) by 36% and 37%, respectively. Stand-level wood specific gravity increased with succession, due to an increase in the proportion of total basal area contributed by high wood density genera. Logging intensity had a small additional effect on stand-level wood specific gravity. Incorporating stand-level wood specific gravity into the algorithm explained only an additional 4% of the variation in estimates of aboveground biomass, which was largely determined by basal area. However, ignoring plot-level variation in wood specific gravity resulted in overestimates of 19% in plots aged 10-15 years. Our aboveground biomass estimates were highly comparable with previous studies using the same allometric equations, and fell within the highest range of estimates reported for tropical dry forests. Forest of this region still retains a significant carbon stock, but rates of biomass recovery (2.8 +/- 0.2S.E. mg ha(-1) year(-1)) were low compared to other neotropical forests. (c) 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Relationships between biodiversity and carbon stocks in forest ecosystems: a systematic literature review			A systematic literature review was conducted to explore the relationships between multiple measures of biodiversity (e.g. species diversity, functional divergence and dominance) and carbon (C) stocks (both aboveground and soil organic) in different forest ecosystems. A total of 47 studies, searched in Web of Science or Knowledge, were selected based on different biodiversity indices, strength of the datasets and particularly focusing on C stocks. The majority of relationships between species diversity or richness and C stocks were positive, while only few were negative. The niche complementarity and the mass ratio hypotheses are the two major hypotheses for explaining the effect of functional diversity on C stocks. These two hypotheses did not contradict each other but reflect the two different sides of functional trait attribute i.e., dominance and divergence. The majority of studies suggested that strong dominance by tall and conservative species, rather than a set of coexisting species with diverse heights and acquisitive role, results in more C stocks in various forest ecosystems. Thus, most of the studies supported mass ratio hypothesis instead of the niche complementarity hypothesis in terms of increasing C stocks in forest ecosystems. We concluded that experimental works in other forest ecosystems have shown that each measure of biodiversity often increases C stocks, although the extent to which direct causal relationships exist between biodiversity and C stocks in subtropical forests are still uncertain. Thus, a little is understood how multiple measures of biodiversity affect C stocks, when also considering the effects of biotic and abiotic components of an ecosystem.
Relationships between carbon and nitrogen contents and enzyme activities in soil of three typical subtropical forests in China			Aims Forest conversion is an important factor affecting the ecosystem organic matter cycle, and has an impact on the productivity of forest ecosystems, carbon sequestration and nutrient conservation. This study aims to provide more scientific evidence for better understanding the mechanism of different forest types regulating forest soil carbon and nitrogen cycling in the context of forest conversion.Methods The study site is located in Sanming City, Fujian Province, in subtropical China. Soil samples in the A horizon from an artificial-assisted natural regeneration forest of Castanopsis carlesii (AR), a natural secondary forest of C. carlesii (SF) and a plantation of Pinus massoniana (PM) sites were collected in November, 2016. We investigated the contents of soil organic carbon, soil organic nitrogen, soil dissolved organic matter (DOM), NH4+-N and NO3--N. The spectroscopic characteristics of soil DOM were also measured by means of ultraviolet absorbance and fluorescence emission spectroscopic techniques. The activity of five kinds of enzymes related to carbon and nitrogen cycle were determined to decipher their relationships with soil properties.Important findings The results showed that, due to different tree species and man-made disturbance, the contents of dissolved organic carbon (DOC), DON, humification index of fluorescence emission spectrum were all in the order SF > AR > PM, whereas the aromatization index was in the order PM > AR > SF. NH4+-N were significantly richer for SF and AR than for PM, while NO3--N content was low and similar across the three stands. The beta-glucosidase activity of PM was significantly lower than that of SF and AR. The activities of cellulolytic enzyme were in sequence of AR > SF > PM. The activities of polyphenol oxidase enzyme in PM was significantly higher than in SF and AR. There was no significant difference in the type of forest peroxidase. The activity of beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase of AR was significantly higher than those of the other two kinds of stands. The redundancy analysis indicates that total nitrogen (TN) and DON are the major environmental factors driving soil enzyme activity. Soil total nitrogen content and NAG activity were positively correlated, and DON may be an important component of the N cycle. Soil microorganisms prefer to use readily decomposable carbon; and there is a certain coupling relationship between carbon and nitrogen cycles. Higher soil N contents would increase the C-related hydrolytic enzyme activity, thereby promoting carbon turnover.
Relationships of wood density and wood chemical traits between stems and coarse roots across 53 Bornean tropical tree species			Wood density and wood chemical traits are strong predictors of tree performance, carbon stock, and wood decomposition, which play important roles in ecosystem processes and carbon and nutrient cycling in forests. However, it remains unknown how root wood traits are related to stem wood traits. We examined the relationships of wood density and wood chemical traits (lignin and nitrogen concentrations, carbon-to-nitrogen ratio) between the stems and coarse roots of 90 individuals representing 53 tropical tree species in Malaysian Borneo. We developed regression equations of each wood trait using the standardized major axis method. Each root wood trait was highly correlated with the corresponding stem wood trait, and most regression equations fitted well (R2 > 0.5). The lignin concentration of roots was significantly greater than that of stems. We conclude that root wood traits can be estimated from the corresponding stem wood traits in South-East Asian tropical trees. Further analysis of coarse root decomposability will provide more accurate estimates of carbon and nutrient fluxes in tropical forest ecosystems. © Cambridge University Press 2016.
Relative changes (%) of a) water-holding capacity (WHC), b) total carbon (TC) content, c) C:N ratio and d) pH after application of sole (biochar (B1: Coconut shell, B2: Rice husk) and composts (C1: Compost, VC1 and VC2: Vermicomposts)) and mixed inputs (combination of each biochar with one of the...			#VALUE!
Relevance of secondary tropical forest for landscape restoration			Tropical Secondary Forests (SFs) are vulnerable forest systems growing in areas that have been subject to unsustainable human activities leading to deforestation. SFs account for swathes of tropical forest landscapes that have lost their capacity to provide a high level of goods and services. They are also located in highly dynamic and human-pressured landscapes and are vulnerable to natural and human-induced catastrophic events, such as hurricanes or fires. Without appropriate silvicultural management to increase their economic value and restore their ecological functions, they often become degraded and are sometimes cleared for more short-term economically productive activities. Given the increasing demand for tropical timber in recent decades that will continue in the near future, we suggest that active restoration geared towards wood production is an opportunity for SF conservation. Promoting sustainable wood production -i.e. associated with other environmental services- in these disturbed forest ecosystems is also a way to reduce logging pressure on the remaining intact primary tropical forests, indeed, this may be the most important reason to enhance active restoration aimed at wood production in tropical SFs worldwide. Future research in forest ecology and management should produce experimental evidence of enhanced production of wood and ecosystem services in SFs through appropriate silvicultural experimentations.
Removing understory vegetation in oil palm agroforestry reduces ground-foraging ant abundance but not species richness			Ants are known to provide valuable ecosystem services in agricultural landscapes, including oil palm plantations. Their communities are less diverse and more uneven in oil palm compared with forest, and this may increase their vulnerability to disturbance. This study quantifies ant communities in oil palm agroforestry and experimentally tests their robustness to a common practice high-disturbance management intervention: removing understory vegetation.Fieldwork was based at the Biodiversity and Ecosystem Function in Tropical Agriculture (BEFTA) Understory Vegetation Project in Sumatra, Indonesia, where three treatments varying in their degree of understory vegetation management were established in 2014: (1) widespread herbicide was applied removing all understory vegetation (Reduced); (2) herbicide was applied to the harvesting paths and circles, and other vegetation was allowed to grow (Normal control); (3) no herbicide was applied (Enhanced). We measured ground-foraging ant communities before and after the treatments were implemented, using pitfall traps over 324 trap-nights (a trap-night is one trap set for one night). We investigated how ant abundance, species richness, species evenness, beta diversity, and community composition differed between the treatments.We found 3507 ants across 68 species or morphospecies. Seven of these were highly abundant and accounted for 78% of individuals. Post-treatment ant abundance was lower in the reduced treatment (mean per plot: 84) than in the normal (159) and enhanced (131) treatments, which did not differ from each other. Species richness, species evenness, beta diversity and community composition were not affected by the vegetation treatments.We recommend that oil palm growers maintain understory vegetation in oil palm plantations to support ground-foraging ants. Though not tested here, this may also improve ant-mediated ecosystem services, such as pest control, seed dispersal, nutrient redistribution, and the maintenance of soil health. This study demonstrates that enhancing habitat complexity through management practices can support biodiversity in monocrop landscapes. (C) 2020 Gesellschaft fur okologie. Published by Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.
Rescue tree monocultures! A phylogenetic ecology approach to guide the choice of seedlings for enrichment planting in tropical monoculture plantations			Monoculture tree plantations have been preferred by farmers and companies because they maximize the production of specific products and are easier to manage, while multispecies plantations can provide multiple ecosystem services but have still been adopted at very limited scales. One potential midway to enhance the ecological contribution of monoculture plantations is to introduce native tree species in the plantation understory. We conducted phylogenetically explicit enrichment planting experiments beneath the monocultures of two tree species native to the Brazilian Atlantic Forest to assess if the evolutionary distance of each seedling species to the overstory tree explained variations in seedling performance. We planted in the understory of two replicate plantations of species Esenbeckia leiocarpa Engl. (Rutaceae; 38 and 25 years old) and Zeyheria tuberculosa (Vell) (Bignoniaceae; both replicates were 30 years old) six native tree species, ranging in their evolutionary distances to these overstory species. We assessed individual seedling survival and height at 1, 7, and 19 months after planting. We found a weak yet significant, positive correlation between seedling performance (growth and survival) and the phylogenetic distance of the planted seedling to the overstory species, which was driven by the poor performance of conspecifics. Seedlings of the same order and class as the overstory trees showed a significantly lower risk of death compared to conspecifics and to the furthest relative, Cryptocarya aschersoniana. These findings highlight that very close relatives to the overstories should be avoided when planting beneath monoculture plantations, but that knowledge on species-specific requirements is still the most important for a successful planting.
RESEARCH AND EDUCATION TO IMPROVE TROPICAL FOREST CONSERVATION AND LOCAL LIVELIHOODS			Tropical forest cover nearly 10% of the earth's land surface and house the largest assemblages of biodiversity of any terrestrial ecosystem. They also are home to over 60 million indigenous forest residents and an additional 400 to 500 million nonindigenous who depend directly on these forests to provide critical subsistence needs such as food, construction materials, medicines, fuel, and cash as well as local ecosystem services such as flood control and soil enrichment and stabilization. However, local communities are not just passive users, but rather own and/or manage an estimated 25% of all tropical forests, and that proportion is increasing. Indeed while many benefits of tropical forests accrue at higher transnational and global scales (i.e., climate regulation, biodiversity conservation, carbon storage and sequestration), the costs of maintaining them are disproportionally borne at lower national and regional scales, with the largest burden typically felt at the local level. Thus, communities often are expected to attend to much broader international forest conservation objectives while concurrently addressing their own livelihood needs. And although there is little concrete evidence to suggest that local communities are optimal stewards of tropical forests, it is also unlikely that large tracts of tropical forest will be conserved without engaging local people who depend upon them daily for their survival. The implication of these livelihood realities and ownership trends is that in many parts of the tropical world, local peoples who have resided in the forest for generations increasingly aspire to, and are expected to, manage their forest ecosystems and the resources obtained from them with greater economic and ecological sophistication. However, often lacking are management strategies and even basic ecological data to inform this transition from general exploitation of forest resources by local people to more conscious management of the ecosystem and its resources. Although global in perspective, geographic focus of this research project is on the two largest contiguous tracts of neotropical forests: the Amazon (with emphasis on Brazil) and Maya forests (with emphasis on Mexico). Institutions of higher education can play a critical role to advance the intertwined goals of tropical conservation and human well-being. Thus, this project also investigates how higher education can better prepare graduate students to take on complex leadership roles required to bridge theory and practice to advance biodiversity conservation, sustainable resource use, and human well-being in the tropics.
RESEARCH DIRECTIONS IN TROPICAL FOREST RESTORATION			In the past few years, numerous global, national, and regional targets have been set to restore millions of hectares of tropical forest to achieve multiple goals, including carbon sequestration, biodiversity conservation, improvements in the quality and supply of water, and support of human livelihoods. To achieve these ambitious goals, restoration decision makers need guiding principles regarding how to invest limited resources for large-scale forest restoration. Research over the past two decades has shown that a host of abiotic and biotic factors can slow tropical forest recovery, but that the specific barriers to and rate of recovery are site specific. Hence, restoration strategies must be carefully selected considering the natural resilience of a given site, localized harriers to recovery, and the ecological and human goals of the project. Despite the substantial advances in our understanding of tropical forest regeneration and restoration, to date neither the scale of scientific studies nor the restoration projects being implemented have matched the ambitious forest landscape restoration plans that are being proposed. I discuss key ways to enhance the success of tropical forest restoration efforts, citing a range of examples to illustrate each point. Specifically, restoration projects need to be planned and evaluated at larger spatial scales and over longer time periods, which requires better integration of the science and practice of forest restoration. Ultimately, forest restoration success hinges on including multiple stakeholders, such as farmers, local communities, local government leaders, regional and national policymakers, and scientists, in the planning, implementation, and evaluation processes. Finally, efforts to improve knowledge sharing across restoration projects in different regions will enhance the likelihood of implementing successful tropical forest restoration projects at the desired scale.
Residue removal and tillage interaction effects on soil properties under rain-fed corn production in Central Mexico			Determining the effects of residue removal and tillage systems on surface crop residue accumulation, organic carbon sequestration and nutrient cycling is essential for sustainable land management. This study evaluated the effects of 6 years of conventional and conservation tillage with different amounts of crop residues left on the soil surface on selected soil properties of a Vertisol and an Andisol used for rain-fed corn (Zea mays L.) production in Central Mexico (Apatzingan and Casas Blancas, Mich.). The results showed that conservation tillage. i.e. no tillage (NT) with 100, 66 and 33% of crop residues left on the field, and minimum tillage (MT), significantly increased surface crop residue accumulation on the soil surface. In the 0-50 mm surface layer. organic C, microbial biomass C and N, inorganic and total N. and extractable P were approximately twice higher with NT/100%, NT/66%, NT/33%. and MT than with conventional tillage (CT) and NT/0% treatments. Higher levels of soil organic C, microbial biomass C and N, inorganic and total N, and extractable P were directly related to surface accumulation of crop residues promoted by conservation tillage management. Removal of surface crop residues can seriously reduce production sustainability in climates where stressful conditions occur. In general, the mid-term (6 years) sustainability of Vertisol and Andisol for rain-fed corn production seemed to be enhanced by conservation tillage management. To obtain the benefits of conservation tillage in the sub-humid tropical region of Apatzingan (Vertisols), where organic matter is rapidly oxidized, it is necessary to leave at least 60% of the crop residue on the soil surface, while in the sub-humid temperate region of Casas Blancas (Andisol), where organic matter is oxidized slower, leaving 30% of crop residue is sufficient. (C) 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Resilience of a peatland in Central Sumatra, Indonesia to past anthropogenic disturbance: Improving conservation and restoration designs using palaeoecology			Tropical peatlands, which provide important functions such as biodiversity provisioning and carbon (C) storage, are currently threatened by land-use conversions. Thus, conservation and restoration efforts are needed to maintain their functions. Conservation concepts aiming to separate human from ecosystems are no longer conceivable. Therefore, understanding peatland resilience to human disturbance, that is the ability of peatland ecosystems to maintain their structure and function despite perturbations and to return to their predisturbance states, can assist with integrating human needs into conservation strategies and improving restoration effectiveness. Understanding ecosystem resilience is often impeded by a lack of long-term data, which can be obtained from palaeoecological studies. Located close to the archaeological remains of the Malayu Empire, the Sungai Buluh peatland in Sumatra, Indonesia provides an opportunity to study the resilience of a tropical peatland to past human disturbance. We subjected a 250-cm-long peat core to palynological, charcoal and C content analyses to delineate the anthropogenic impact on the peatland and the ecosystem's response. The results revealed that extensive human activities in Sungai Buluh such as logging, grazing/cut-and-carry, and wild-harvesting started soon after humans occupied the vicinity of the peatland c. 1,000cal yr bp. Even without fire use and cultivation, these activities were able to alter vegetation composition and decrease the peatland's C sequestration capacity. Following site abandonment after the demise of the Malayu Empire at c. 600cal yr bp, the palaeoecological record suggests that the Sungai Buluh peatland recovered in terms of both floristic composition and C sink function, with the latter recovering faster (c. 60years) than the former (c. 170years).Synthesis. The palaeoecological record from Sungai Buluh provides the first evidence of tropical peatland recovery following human disturbance, which can help improve present peatland conservation/restoration strategies. The design of peatland wise-use strategies can mimic the resilience-friendly human activities identified in this study. Consideration should also be given to selecting rapidly regenerating taxa for cost-and-effort-efficient restoration strategies. Additionally, the 170-year recovery time of the Sungai Buluh peatland suggests that the 60-year timeframe currently allocated in most tropical peatland restoration projects may be insufficient.
Resilience of soil aggregation and exocellular enzymatic functions associated with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal communities along a successional gradient in a tropical dry forest			Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi are well-known contributors to soil aggregation and nutrient cycling functions, but we still know little about their capacity to resist or recover from persistent disturbance. Rangeland management may deteriorate these functions by affecting the activity of soil biota, including AM fungi, among other consequences. If affected, some soil properties show recovery when management stops and natural regeneration is allowed. We conducted an experiment to evaluate if the functions related to soil aggregation and promotion of exocellular enzymatic activities associated with AM fungal communities had been affected by rangeland management and, if they had, whether they recovered with successional time when management stopped. AM fungal communities from ten sites with different successional ages in a tropical dry forest region were inoculated to the same host growing in pots divided by mesh into a plant compartment and an AM mycelium compartment. We examined soil stable aggregates fractions and enzymatic activities produced or promoted by AM fungi. Soil aggregation changed significantly only after the study had run for 3 years, was higher in the hyphosphere than in the root compartment, and showed a low but positive relation with the successional age of the communities. The activity of phosphatase, but not casein-protease and beta-glucosidase, increased with successional age. Therefore, soil aggregation and enzyme activities associated with AM fungal communities seemed resilient because casein-protease and beta-glucosidase were unchanged, and aggregation and phosphatase were reduced by rangeland management but recovered with successional time.
Responding to climate change and the global land crisis: REDD+, market transformation and low-emissions rural development			Climate change and rapidly escalating global demand for food, fuel, fibre and feed present seemingly contradictory challenges to humanity. Can greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from land-use, more than one-fourth of the global total, decline as growth in land-based production accelerates? This review examines the status of two major international initiatives that are designed to address different aspects of this challenge. REDD+ is an emerging policy framework for providing incentives to tropical nations and states that reduce their GHG emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. Market transformation, best represented by agricultural commodity roundtables, seeks to exclude unsustainable farmers from commodity markets through international social and environmental standards for farmers and processors. These global initiatives could potentially become synergistically integrated through (i) a shared approach for measuring and favouring high environmental and social performance of land use across entire jurisdictions and (ii) stronger links with the domestic policies, finance and laws in the jurisdictions where agricultural expansion is moving into forests. To achieve scale, the principles of REDD+ and sustainable farming systems must be embedded in domestic low-emission rural development models capable of garnering support across multiple constituencies. We illustrate this potential with the case of Mato Grosso State in the Brazilian Amazon. © 2013 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.
Response of Ants and Their Seed Removal in Rehabilitation Areas and Forests at El Cerrejon Coal Mine in Colombia			Open-pit coal mining causes strong negative impacts on biodiversity because this activity completely removes thick layers of soil. Focusing on ants as functional agents responding to mine site rehabilitation has proven useful in improving restoration practices. This study sought to evaluate the success of the 20-year-old ecological rehabilitation program at El Cerrejon, one of the world's largest open-pit coal mining operation located in a vulnerable dry tropical forest region of Colombia. This study compared ant assemblages in 13 sites classified along a gradient of rehabilitation sites aged 0-14 years, as well as in three forest reference areas. Two sampling methods (pitfall traps and visual search) were conducted during three sampling periods. Seed removal by ants was also quantified at seven of the 13 sites using seed bait from native plants. Eighty-two ant species, belonging to 29 genera, were found. The highest number of ant species were found inside the forests. Ant species richness increased with rehabilitation age of sites, along with higher canopy cover and milder soil temperature. Rehabilitation actions enhancing these ecological factors might, therefore, favor the presence of wild fauna such as ants. The oldest area (14 years) was the most similar to the forests, both in terms of functional ant groups (guilds) and dominant species. Seed movement was highest in the 14-year-old restored area and was similar to that of the forests, suggesting that this ecological function has been partially restored and that the movement of seed dispersal agents across the landscape would be enhanced.
Response of phyllostomid bat diversity to tree cover types in North-western Ecuador			Agricultural activities affect tropical forest biodiversity; however, some bat species can survive under these anthropogenic changes. We described the characteristics of phyllostomid bat assemblages in tree covers located in 48 plots among four agricultural landscapes of North-western Ecuador. Bats were captured with mist nets installed at a ground level reaching three meters' height. For each of the plots, we installed a mist net in four types of tree cover (polyspecific live fences, monospecific live fences, cacao plantations, and isolated trees in pastures). We captured 250 phyllostomid bats belonging to 16 species with a trapping effort of 19,200 m2 of net coverage. Polyspecific live fences showed significant differences in relative abundance, richness, and diversity of phyllostomid bats compared to the other three. Frugivorous and nectarivorous guilds were the most abundant, and also exhibited the highest richness among other guilds present in agricultural landscapes. In addition, frugivorous, and nectarivorous guilds increase their abundance and richness in agricultural landscapes, while the animalivorous guild is negatively affected. We recommend installing polyspecific live fences in tropical production systems to support the conservation of phyllostomid bats. We conclude that living fences composed of various plant species favour the abundance, richness, and diversity of phyllostomid bats.
Response of soil microbial biomass and activity in early restored lands in the northeastern Brazilian Atlantic Forest			Intensive land use of the Brazilian Atlantic Forest accelerated with the rise of sugar cane plantations in the northeastern part of Brazil. Consequently, many ecosystems were destroyed, including riparian forests. The number of studies of riparian restoration has increased but comparative studies on the belowground effects of common reforestation strategies are rare. Here, we compared soil microbial properties among four different land use types: native rainforest, sugar cane plantation, single species reforestation, and mixed species reforestation, each replicated at two spatially independent sites. Soil samples were taken in 2013 and 2014, that is 2 and 3 years after reforestation, respectively. In both years, land use types had a significant effect on basal respiration, microbial biomass, and specific respiration (whereas specific respiration was marginally affected in 2014). In 2013, basal respiration in sugar cane plantations was significantly lower (-65%) when compared to native forests. In 2014, basal respiration (+60%) and soil microbial biomass (+90%) were significantly higher in mixed species reforestation compared to sugar cane, whereas single species reforestation had comparable values as in sugar cane plantations. Our results indicate that soil microbial biomass and activity respond rapidly to land use change when mixed species reforestation is used. Thus, using mixed species reforestation may enhance the provisioning of ecosystem services already in the short term.
Response of soil respiration to simulated N deposition in a disturbed and a rehabilitated tropical forest in southern China			Responses of soil respiration (CO2 emission) to simulated N deposition were studied in a disturbed (reforested forest with previous understory and litter harvesting) and a rehabilitated (reforested forest with no understory and litter harvesting) tropical forest in southern China from October 2005 to September 2006. The objectives of the study were to test the following hypotheses: (1) soil respiration is higher in rehabilitated forest than in disturbed forest; (2) soil respiration in both rehabilitated and disturbed tropical forests is stimulated by N additions; and (3) soil respiration is more sensitive to N addition in disturbed forest than in rehabilitated forest due to relatively low soil nutrient status in the former, resulting from different previous human disturbance. Static chamber and gas chromatography techniques were employed to quantify the soil respiration, following different N treatments (Control, no N addition; Low-N, 5 g N m -2 year-1; Medium-N, 10 g N m-2 year -1), which had been applied continuously for 26 months before the respiration measurement. Results showed that soil respiration exhibited a strong seasonal pattern, with the highest rates observed in the hot and wet growing season (April-September) and the lowest rates in winter (December-February) in both rehabilitated and disturbed forests. Soil respiration rates exhibited significant positive exponential relationship with soil temperature and significant positive linear relationship with soil moisture. Soil respiration was also significantly higher in the rehabilitated forest than in the disturbed forest. Annual mean soil respiration rate in the rehabilitated forest was 20% lower in low-N plots (71 ± 4 mg CO2-C m-2 h -1) and 10% lower in medium-N plots (80 ± 4 mg CO 2-C m-2 h-1) than in the control plots (89 ± 5 mg CO2-C m-2 h-1), and the differences between the control and low-N or medium-N treatments were statistically significant. In disturbed forest, annual mean soil respiration rate was 5% lower in low-N plots (63 ± 3 mg CO2-C m -2 h-1) and 8% lower in medium-N plots (61 ± 3 mg CO2-C m-2 h-1) than in the control plots (66 ± 4 mg CO2-C m-2 h-1), but the differences among treatments were not significant. The depressed effects of experimental N deposition occurred mostly in the hot and wet growing season. Our results suggest that response of soil respiration to elevated N deposition in the reforested tropical forests may vary depending on the status of human disturbance. © 2007 Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
Response of the copro-necrophagous beetle (Coleoptera: Scarabaeinae) assemblage to a range of soil characteristics and livestock management in a tropical landscape			Understanding changes in copro-necrophagous beetle diversity related to characteristics of habitat and soil associated with livestock management systems can provide a tool for the conservation of edaphic fauna and improved use of natural resources. We evaluated changes in species diversity and assemblage structure in copro-necrophagous beetles under different livestock management systems in an anthropized tropical dry forest landscape in Mexico. We used a standard sampling protocol to capture copro-necrophagous beetles in three livestock management systems: silvopastoral systems with Guazuma ulmifolia Lam. (SPS) associated with grasses, treeless pastures (monocultures) and managed tree fallows of tropical dry forest with livestock. We characterized the habitat structure, management practices and physico-chemical parameters of the soil in each system. We recorded a total of 1423 specimens belonging to 15 species. The results show a greater beetle species richness in the SPS with G. ulmifolia, which declines with reduced site complexity and soil quality and increased management practice intensity. There was a positive relationship between beetle species abundance and the soil physico-chemical characteristics such as moisture and nutrient content, as well as with the density of plants. A negative effect of management practices (use of insecticides, anti-parasite treatments and burning) was observed on beetle abundance; when the analyzed variables were related to each individual species, only four species responded to differences in levels of nitrogen and magnesium, as well as to the management practice and density of plants. Systems where perennial woody plants (trees and/or shrubs) interact with traditional components (animals and herbaceous forage plants) under integrated management can provide favorable conditions for the maintenance of a relatively high diversity of beetle species as well as a refuge for species with different habitat requirements.
Responses and adaptation strategies of terrestrial ecosystems to climate change			0
Responses of a semi-natural grassland community of tropical region to elevated ozone: An assessment of soil dynamics and biomass accumulation			Despite knowing the phytotoxic effects of tropospheric ozone (O3), which is of global concern, there is no study so far reported about its impacts on grassland community of tropical regions. Therefore, we assessed the responses of a semi-natural grassland community of Indo-Gangetic plains to elevated O3 exposure (Ambient + 20 ppb) compared to ambient after three years of exposure using open-top chambers. Percent decreases were found in above (26%; p ≤ 0.002) and belowground (30%; p ≤ 0.003) biomass under elevated compared to ambient O3 exposure. Percent decrements in total organic carbon (TOC; 24%; p ≤ 0.001), total nitrogen (29%; p ≤ 0.001) and available phosphorus (11%; p ≤ 0.002) in the soil were also observed under elevated O3 exposure. Exposure at elevated O3 reduced soil microbial biomass and activities of β-glucosidase, amylase, urease and phosphatase, while polyphenol oxidase and peroxidase showed enhancement in their activities, showing negative effects on belowground soil health. Percent reduction in root shoot ratio (10%; p ≤ 0.05) depicts that less C-allocation towards root system led to a reduction in TOC in the soil, which could affect C-sequestration under elevated O3 condition in the semi-natural grasslands. Elevated O3 also affected enzymes participating in N and P-cycles, causing reductions in total nitrogen and phosphorus. The study concludes that projected O3 concentrations have serious implications for aboveground biomass as well as belowground soil health in tropical areas, identified as hotspots of O3 in the world. © 2018 Elsevier B.V.
Responses of soil carbon component accumulation and allocation to tropical forest restoration			In order to explore the response process and mechanism of soil organic carbon sequestration to tropical forest restoration, three forest types, i. e, Mallotus paniculatus community (early restoration stage), Mellettia leptobotrya community (middle restoration stage), and Syzygium oblatum community (late restoration stage), were selected to identify the spatio-temporal variations in soil organic carbon component accumulation and allocation (i. e., microbial biomass carbon / total organic carbon, easily oxidizable organic carbon / total organic carbon, and resistant organic carbonin / total organic carbon) in Xishuangbanna tropical forests. We also analyzed the effects of species richness and diversity of tree and understory pants, soil temperature and humidity, bulk density, pH and nitrogen pool (i. e., total, hydrolyzable, ammonium, and nitrate nitrogen) on component accumulation and allocation of soil organic carbon in the tropical forests. The results were as follows. (1) The tropical forest restoration significantly accelerated the accumulation of soil organic carbon components (P<0.05). The stocks of total, microbial, easily oxidizable, and resistant organic carbon at the middle and late restoration stages increased by 9. 25%—50. 84%, compared with early restoration stage. The forest restoration promoted the allocation of soil microbial and oxidizable organic carbon stocks by 8.98%—25.36%, but it had no significant effect on the allocation of resistant organic carbon (P<0.05). (2) Soil carbon component accumulation and allocation had spatiotemporal changes in the three restoration stages of tropical forests. The maximum accumulation of the above four carbon components was in June and they decreased along the soil layer. The maximum allocation of soil easily oxidized and microbial biomass carbon occurred in June, while that of resistant organic carbon was in December. The allocation of microbial and easily oxidized organic carbon decreased along the soil layer, while that of resistant organic carbon had no significant vertical change. (3) The component allocation of soil organic carbon stocks was ranked as microbial biomass carbon stock (83.71%) >resistant organic carbon (82.17%) >easily oxidized organic carbon stock (78.54%) (P <0.05). The explanation percentages of microbial, easily oxidizable, and resistant organic carbon to total organic carbon in the three restoration stages were 2.40%—5.00%, 18.22%—39.34%, and 18.50—26.55%, respectively. (4) In contrast to early restoration stage, species richness and Shannon diversity of tree and understory plants increased by 42.78%—490.82%, and nitrogen pool (i.e., total, hydrolyzed, ammonium, and nitrate nitrogen) only increased by 12.73%—25.51% at the late restoration stage. (5) Redundancy analysis showed that understory species richness, temperature, humidity, hydrolyzed were the main driving factors affecting carbon component accumulation, while tree Shannon diversity, humidity, and bulk density were the main controlling factors of carbon component allocation. Therefore, Xishuangbanna tropical forests restoration significantly promoted the component accumulation and allocation of soil organic carbon, which was determined by understory species richness and tree Shannon diversity, as well as soil temperature, humidity, bulk density, and hydrolyzed nitrogen. © 2023 Science Press. All rights reserved.
Responses of Soil Organic Carbon Fractions and Stability to Forest Conversion in the Nanling Nature Reserve, China			Studying the impact of typical vegetation types in forest conversion zones on soil organic carbon (SOC) structure and stability is crucial for developing terrestrial ecosystem carbon sequestration strategies. In this study, we selected three typical forest stands in the Nanling National Nature Reserve: a primary evergreen broad-leaved forest (BL), a secondary mixed coniferous and broad-leaved forest (ML), and a Chinese fir plantation (CL). Soil samples were collected to examine the SOC fractions and carbon pool management index (CPMI) in three forest stands. The influence of soil property factors on SOC fractions was also analyzed. The results showed that the transformation process from a BL to an ML or a CL changed the structure and stability of organic carbon by reducing the labile SOC fractions and increasing the recalcitrant carbon fraction in the soil. The higher lability index (LI) and CPMI of soils in the BL indicated better carbon accumulation and activity, making this treatment more advantageous for management strategies aimed at promoting natural forest renewal and ecological restoration. Correlation and RDA analysis revealed that the availability of soil P was a key factor limiting the variation in organic C fractions in the acidic soils of tropical forests in South China.
Responses of soil organic carbon to conservation practices including climate-smart agriculture in tropical and subtropical regions: A meta-analysis			Considering the current threatening conditions of climate change, Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) aims to improve the soil health and its organic carbon stocks by encouraging soil carbon sequestration through conservation practices in agricultural lands. However, the effects of these practices differ due to diverse climatic scenario, soil characteristics and management system. To identify the suitable practices that can be effective under tropical and subtropical conditions, a systematic evaluation in the form of a meta-analysis of these practices and their outcomes was performed over those regions. In this work we have included 516 observations from 84 articles published from 2000 to 2021 to analyse the influence of three CSA practices (conservation tillage, cover crop and biochar application) on the SOC (soil organic carbon) stocks over varying periods of experimentation. In addition to this, the combined effect of CSA and other conservation agronomic practices such as agroforestry has also been considered in the analysis. The results showed that biochar application had the most influence upon SOC stocks in the agricultural lands (25.38%) followed by conservation tillage (18.81%) and cover crop (15.8%). Medium term experiments (6–20 years) of these conservation practices showed about 31.00–96.15%improvement in SOC while the effects gradually diminished in long term experiments (>20 years). The combinations of these practices have been observed to have an evidently positive impact upon the SOC stocks in general. This work provides a systematic evaluation of all the widely performed CSA and other conservation practices and their effects on SOC dynamics under differing management settings. © 2021 Elsevier B.V.
Responses of transplanted native tree species to invasive alien grass removals in an abandoned cattle pasture in the Lacandon region, Mexico			We tested the early performance of 16 native early-, mid-, and late-successional tree species in response to four intensities of grass removal in an abandoned cattle pasture dominated by the introduced, invasive African grass, Cynodon plectostachyus, within the Lacandon rainforest region, southeast Mexico. The increase in grass removals significantly improved the performance of many species, especially of early-and mid-successional species, while performance of late-successional species was relatively poor and did not differ significantly among treatments. Good site preparation and at least one additional grass removal four months after seedling transplant were found to be essential; additional grass removals led to improved significantly performance of saplings in most cases. In order to evaluate the potential of transplanting tree seedlings successfully in abandoned tropical pastures, we developed a "planting risk index", combining field performance measurements and plantation cost estimations. Our results showed a great potential for establishing restoration plantings with many early-and mid-successional species. Although planting risk of late-successional species was considered high, certain species showed some possibilities of acclimation after 18 months and should be considered in future plantation arrangements in view of their long-term contributions to biodiversity maintenance and also to human welfare through delivery of ecosystem services. Conducting a planting risk analysis can help avoid failure of restoration strategies involving simultaneous planting of early-, mid-, and late-successional tree species. This in turn will improve cost-effectiveness of initial interventions in large-scale, long-term restoration programs.
Responses of tree growth and biomass production to nutrient addition in a semi-deciduous tropical forest in Africa			Experimental evidence of nutrient limitations on primary productivity in Afrotropical forests is rare and globally underrepresented yet are crucial for understanding constraints to terrestrial carbon uptake. In an ecosystem-scale nutrient manipulation experiment, we assessed the early responses of tree growth rates among different tree sizes, taxonomic species, and at a community level in a humid tropical forest in Uganda. Following a full factorial design, we established 32 (eight treatments × four replicates) experimental plots of 40 × 40 m each. We added nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), their combinations (NP, NK, PK, and NPK), and control at the rates of 125 kg N ha−1 year−1, 50 kg P ha−1 year−1 and 50 kg K ha−1 year−1, split into four equal applications, and measured stem growth of more than 15,000 trees with diameter at breast height (dbh) ≥1 cm. After 2 years, the response of tree stem growth to nutrient additions was dependent on tree sizes, species and leaf habit but not community wide. First, tree stem growth increased under N additions, primarily among medium-sized trees (10–30 cm dbh), and in trees of Lasiodiscus mildbraedii in the second year of the experiment. Second, K limitation was evident in semi-deciduous trees, which increased stem growth by 46% in +K than –K treatments, following a strong, prolonged dry season during the first year of the experiment. This highlights the key role of K in stomatal regulation and maintenance of water balance in trees, particularly under water-stressed conditions. Third, the role of P in promoting tree growth and carbon accumulation rates in this forest on highly weathered soils was rather not pronounced; nonetheless, mortality among saplings (1–5 cm dbh) was reduced by 30% in +P than in –P treatments. Although stem growth responses to nutrient interaction effects were positive or negative (likely depending on nutrient combinations and climate variability), our results underscore the fact that, in a highly diverse forest ecosystem, multiple nutrients and not one single nutrient regulate tree growth and aboveground carbon uptake due to varying nutrient requirements and acquisition strategies of different tree sizes, species, and leaf habits. © 2022 The Authors. Ecology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of The Ecological Society of America.
Responses of understory plant physiological traits to a decade of nitrogen addition in a tropical reforested ecosystem			Reforested ecosystems are becoming a dominant forest cover type in the tropics where anthropogenic nitrogen (N) deposition has been increasing greatly. Although understory plants play an important role in ecosystem structure and functioning, it remains unclear how long-term N deposition affects eco-physiological traits of understory species. To address this question, we expanded a ten-year simulated N deposition experiment in a tropical reforested ecosystem, with variable N addition levels as Control (no addition, N0), 50 kg N ha−1 yr−1 (N50), and 100 kg N ha−1 yr−1 (N100). Leaf physiological traits associated with photosynthetic capacity, foliar elements and N storage of seven dominant understory species were measured. Results showed that both medium-light species and shade-tolerant species had little physiological responses to N addition. However, one high-light species (Alchornea trewioides) responded significantly to N addition, showing decreases foliar N and Pmax. We further found that Pmax of Alchornea trewioides was negatively correlated with the canopy closure which increased under long-term N addition. Our findings suggest that understory plant growth may be more limited by light rather than N availability, particularly under chronic high N deposition; and N deposition can suppress understory high-light species through accelerating canopy closure in some tropical reforested ecosystems. © 2017 Elsevier B.V.
Resprouting drives successional pathways and the resilience of Caatinga dry forest in human-modified landscapes			Tropical forest regeneration has gained renewed interest in recent years as secondary forests have being considered biodiversity repositories and a key source for globally relevant ecosystem services as climate regulation and carbon sequestration and storage. Here, we address the regeneration of a Caatinga dry forest in the context of slash-and-burn agriculture and chronic anthropogenic disturbance by examining forest regeneration mechanisms and a comprehensive set of community-level plant diversity measures (i.e., taxonomic, functional, and phylogenetic) in regenerating (4 to 70-yr old) and old-growth forest stands. Resprouting from root suckers was the predominant regeneration mechanism across recently abandoned crop fields. Overall, regenerating forests were similar to old-growth forests in terms of taxonomic and functional composition, and functional and phylogenetic diversity. Moreover, except for the taxonomic diversity, community-level plant diversity measures were not related to forest age or soil properties. Our results suggest that Caatinga dry forest covering sandy soils is particularly resilient due to regeneration driven by resprouting. The same set of plant species dominates the entire regeneration process, including old-growth forest stands. Accordingly, Caatinga dry forest regeneration may follow an initial composition model, rather than following a directional and deterministic trajectory associated with species replacements. This initial composition model probably results from a combination of three factors: (1) early regeneration driven by resprouting rather than seed arrival and seedling recruitment; (2) biomass accumulation mostly due to growth by early colonizers and by those species able to resprout after chronic anthropogenic disturbance and during forest regeneration; and (3) the co-occurrence of functionally distinct plant species. Accordingly, resprouting can guarantee some level of resilience, and hence, the services provided by secondary forests. Nevertheless, forest dynamics in landscapes inhabited by forest-dependent people are affected to a great extent by the nature of the imposed pressures and the ecological profile of the remaining flora.
Restoration and repair of Earth's damaged ecosystems			Given that few ecosystems on the Earth have been unaffected by humans, restoring them holds great promise for stemming the biodiversity crisis and ensuring ecosystem services are provided to humanity. Nonetheless, few studies have documented the recovery of ecosystems globally or the rates at which ecosystems recover. Even fewer have addressed the added benefit of actively restoring ecosystems versus allowing them to recover without human intervention following the cessation of a disturbance. Our meta-analysis of 400 studies worldwide that document recovery from large-scale disturbances, such as oil spills, agriculture and logging, suggests that though ecosystems are progressing towards recovery following disturbances, they rarely recover completely. This result reinforces conservation of intact ecosystems as a key strategy for protecting biodiversity. Recovery rates slowed down with time since the disturbance ended, suggesting that the final stages of recovery are the most challenging to achieve. Active restoration did not result in faster or more complete recovery than simply ending the disturbances ecosystems face. Our results on the added benefit of restoration must be interpreted cautiously, because few studies directly compared different restoration actions in the same location after the same disturbance. The lack of consistent value added of active restoration following disturbance suggests that passive recovery should be considered as a first option; if recovery is slow, then active restoration actions should be better tailored to overcome specific obstacles to recovery and achieve restoration goals. We call for a more strategic investment of limited restoration resources into innovative collaborative efforts between scientists, local communities and practitioners to develop restoration techniques that are ecologically, economically and socially viable.
Restoration governance: An integrated approach towards sustainably restoring degraded ecosystems			Global ecosystems are increasingly threatened and altered by anthropogenic pressures and multiscale environmental disturbances. These disturbed ecosystems need to be restored to maintain vital ecosystem services. Strategies which do not consider integrated approach of restoration interventions may shift the ecosystems to more degraded states. In this study, we reviewed previously published primary articles to determine and describe the importance of ecosystem restoration governance components, viz. legal, financial, social and technological, and proposed an integrated framework of ecological restoration. We determined that without tracking restoration practices into restoration governance framework, the short-term restoration efforts are less likely to drive the ecosystem towards desired reference site conditions. Success of restoration can typically be observed only after years or decades (depending on the scale of the project and environment), so there should be an accountable institution overseeing the project for this period of time. We recommend integrating governance components from project planning to monitoring and evaluation phase. Further, we propose implementing restoration activities through a stable institutional entity that can foster collaboration and coordination with partners and stakeholders. Integrating components of restoration governance increase the likelihood of the restoration programs to be successful and sustainable, and provides opportunities to learn from the experiences.
Restoration of a degraded tropical dry forest in Macanao, Venezuela			Tropical forests appear to take longer to recover in dry than in humid areas, thus water has been recognized as a key structuring factor in tropical dry forests (TDF). We examine this hypothesis in arid ecosystems of the Macanao Peninsula, Venezuela. Opencast sand mining is one of the primary economic activities in the region, modifying the soil, degrading biodiversity and ecosystem services, and affecting key plant and animal species. We quantified growth and survival of five native trees (Tecoma stans, Bulnesia arborea, Piscidia carthagenensis, Prosopis juliflora and Cercidium praecox) under eight treatments, combining hydrogel, fertilizer and water. After six months in a nursery, 640 seedlings were planted in 16 field plots of 100 m(2) each, two for each treatment. Eight months later, the treatment with the greatest impact on plant growth was hydrogel only; also the most cost-effective option. Our results support the water-limitation hypothesis, and show that improving water supply to seedlings greatly increases their growth and survival. Our experimental design is applicable to the restoration of any TDF where human disturbance has caused a large-scale modification to the ecosystem, preventing the progression of natural succession. (c) 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Restoration of ecosystem services in tropical forests: A global meta-analysis			To reverse the effects of deforestation, tropical areas have expanded restoration efforts in recent years. As ecological restoration positively affects the structure and function of degraded ecosystems, understanding to what extent restoration recovers ecosystem services (ES) is an important step in directing large-scale restoration actions. We evaluated the effect of restoration in increasing the provision of ES in tropical forests. We performed a global meta-analysis of ecological indicators of the ES provided in restored areas, degraded areas and reference ecosystems. We tested for the effects of different restoration strategies, different types of degradation and for the effects of restoration over time. Overall, restoration actions contributed to a significant increase in levels of ecological indicators of ES (carbon pool, soil attributes and biodiversity protection) compared to disturbed areas. Among the restoration strategies, the natural regeneration was the most effective. Biodiversity protection and carbon recovered better than soil attributes. All other restoration strategies recovered ES to a substantially lesser degree, and reforestation with exotics decreased the ES of areas degraded by agriculture. In areas degraded by pasture, restoration was more effective in recovering the biodiversity protection, whereas in areas degraded by agriculture, the restoration recovered mainly the carbon pool. Our results show that by choosing the correct strategy, restoration can recover much of the ES lost by the degradation of tropical forests. These results should be considered for large-scale conservation and management efforts for this biome.
Restoration of logged humid tropical forests: An experimental programme at Harapan Rainforest, Indonesia			Restoration of degraded tropical forests can enhance ecosystem service provisioning, improve habitat quality for tropical forest biota and generate income from timber and NTFPs. In Indonesia alone, an estimated 25 million ha of former logging concessions are without current management, representing a huge opportunity for biodiversity conservation. However, currently such forests are typically converted to plantations. Realising the restoration potential of these forests will require viable business models that couple restoration goals with income generation. Unfortunately, understanding of natural succession trajectories and cost-effectiveness of restoration interventions remains poor. We present an overview of research, including three planned experiments designed to test the economic viability of large-scale restoration treatments, in a former logging concession at Harapan Rainforest (98,455 ha), Indonesia. These experiments will address the following questions: (1) Can the selective removal of pioneer trees, including an invasive species, be used to accelerate succession; (2) how does the functional diversity of the planted matrix affect growth and survival of a high value target species; and (3) how does seed density affect recruitment success in direct seeding treatments? Treatments will be applied to large compartments (4 similar to 8 ha) to reduce edge effects and simplify management. Monitoring plots (20 x 20 m x 5 reps) within each compartment will be used to assess silvicultural responses, while changes in biodiversity and carbon storage will be monitored at the compartment level. The large spatial scale and high replication of the treatments will establish an experimental platform that will inform many different aspects of tropical forest ecology.
Restoration of Mine Spoil in a Dry Tropical Region: A Review			Surface mining extensively alters the physical, chemical and biological characteristics of the soil, and therefore, the revegetation of mine spoil through natural process takes a very long time and poses a major problem because nutritionally it is a recalcitrant medium for plant growth. We review important studies on the restoration of mine spoils in the tropical dry region of India. Through this communication, we suggest that the microbial biomass of soil is a critical factor in the recovery of mine spoils because it plays a major role in the re-establishment of nutrient cycling. The levels of microbial biomass C, N and P can be treated as functional indexes for soil re-development. Tree plantations have been reported to significantly accelerate the re-development process. Ground seeding of the mine spoils with suitable tree and grass species together with NPK fertilization has been reported to promote growth, and consequently leads to increase in biomass production. Species-specific variations are reported to occur in the response to fertilization. Relatively, greater variation has been reported for non-leguminous, rather than for leguminous species. Furthermore, leguminous species exhibit higher growth rates as compared to non-leguminous species. Our review also suggests that the microsite conditions on the mine spoils exhibit differences and should be given more consideration for accelerating the process of re-vegetation and fulfilling the post-mining land use objectives.
Restoration of Pasture to Forest in Brazil's Mata Atlantica: The Roles of Herbivory, Seedling Defenses, and Plot Design in Reforestation			In this study, seedling growth and herbivory were monitored during the first 4 years of plot development in a large-scale reforestation experiment in Brazil's Atlantic Rainforest (Mata Atlantica). Seedlings were planted in a factorial design testing two levels of density, three levels of diversity, and the presence or absence of pioneer species at the Reserva Natural Vale in the Brazilian state of Espirito Santo. In addition, we studied the effect of herbivory on seedling growth and the potential for plant defenses to limit herbivory. Seedling growth was higher in the low-density plantings, and seedlings attained the greatest height in the low-diversity plots, which had a higher density of fast-growing species. The inclusion of pioneer species resulted in a significant decrease in the growth of neighboring seedlings. Interactions between herbivory, plant defenses, and seedling growth were complex. In general, defenses such as saponins and leaf toughness reduced herbivory, but when herbivory was high, seedling growth was reduced. Across treatments, mean height without herbivore damage was 240.8 cm, and with 50% herbivory mean height was 101.5 cm. Overall, to limit insect damage and promote seedling success, plant defense characteristics and ecological interactions should be carefully considered in reforestation projects.
Restoration of Tropical Forests			0
Restoration opportunities beyond highly degraded tropical forests: Insights from India's Western Ghats			Tropical rainforest remnants in human-modified landscapes exhibit varying levels of degradation, from highly degraded open-canopied and invasive plant-invaded forests to closed-canopy forests that appear structurally intact. The former are frequently identified as being in a state of arrested recovery, and targeted for restoration, but restoration needs and opportunities in the latter remain underexplored. Using tree and seedling data from 105 plots spanning a canopy cover gradient in rainforest fragments and 19 plots in relatively-intact “reference” rainforests in India's Western Ghats mountains, we show that the floristic composition, conservation significance, and carbon stocks of closed-canopy fragments (CC) more closely resemble open-canopy fragments (OC) than reference rainforests (RR). For example, densities of old-growth forest species, endemic/threatened species, and carbon stocks, increased from 15 %, 28 %, and 22 % of reference values in OC to 32 %, 46 %, and 35 % in CC, respectively, while tree community similarity to RR showed no increase from OC to CC (15 %). Seedlings mirrored this pattern, offering little indication of natural recovery in closed-canopy fragments. Further, we show using simulations that seedling enrichment in closed-canopy fragments can initiate varying levels of floristic and functional recovery towards reference targets. Our findings illustrate that seemingly structurally-intact tropical rainforest fragments can remain arrested in a floristically degraded condition, and represent worthwhile targets for ecological restoration. Such forests expand opportunities for restoring conservation-priority and high carbon-storing species using relatively low-cost methods (e.g., enrichment planting), which can complement intensive restoration of highly degraded forests and minimally-assisted natural recovery of less-fragmented forests. © 2024 Elsevier Ltd
Restoration plantations accelerate dead wood accumulation in tropical premontane forests			Dead wood stores 10-20% of global forest carbon stocks, but its recovery and restoration in secondary tropical forests are poorly documented. In this study, we evaluated (1) the recovery pattern of dead wood volumes across a chronosequence of secondary tropical forests that used to be former coffee plantations, and (2) the efficiency of two common restoration strategies to recover dead wood volumes similar to those found in old-growth forests, all in a tropical premontane landscape in southern Costa Rica. Restoration strategies consisted of plantations and natural regeneration. Plantations consist of plots where two endemic (Terminalia amazonia and Vochysia guatemalensis) and two naturalized (Inga edulis and Ertyhrina poeppegiana) species were planted in rows. Natural regeneration consists of plots where no trees were planted, but where agriculture or cattle are excluded though fencing and vegetation is allowed to regenerate naturally. We hypothesized that (1) dead wood volumes increase with forest age following a logistic shape, and that (2) restoration plantations recover dead wood volumes more quickly compared to naturally regenerated forests. We measured dead wood volumes in a total of 35 forest fragments that were former coffee plantations or are currently old-growth forests and 10 restoration plots containing either natural regeneration or restoration plantations that were former fallow or pasture using strip transects. Dead wood volumes significantly increased with forest age following a logistic shape, starting with very low values in early ages (3-5 years), increasing rapidly (6-50 years), and ending with high and relatively stable values after 50 years of age. In addition, plantations (16 to 17 years old) recovered 41% of dead wood volumes found in old-growth forests > 100 years old, whereas naturally regenerated forests of the same age only recovered 1.7% of dead wood volumes found in old-growth forests. Our study shows that restoration plantations not only accelerate the recovery of above ground biomass, but also accelerate the recovery of dead wood in premontane Neotropical ecosystems. This indicates that tree planting positively affects carbon storage, and potentially the preservation of dead wood-associated biodiversity.
Restoration priorities for Caatinga dry forests: Landscape resilience, connectivity and biodiversity value			Restoration actions can halt biodiversity loss and rescue its services. However, in order to be effective, priority areas for restoration should be chosen based on objective large-scale restoration planning. Here, a multicriteria graph theory framework was used to propose restoration priority areas for the Brazilian Caatinga, the largest seasonally dry tropical forest of the New World, based on landscape resilience, landscape connectivity and biodiversity conservation value, focusing on threatened endemic plant species. We applied this graph theory framework to 10,406 Caatinga catchment basins. Vegetation cover and within-catchment connectivity were used to select catchments of intermediate landscape resilience, which in principle offer more effective opportunities for restoration. Then, such catchments were independently classified into (a) three classes according their contribution for between-catchment connectivity and (b) three classes according their value for biodiversity conservation, estimated by the richness of threatened, endemic plant species. By the integration of landscape resilience, landscape connectivity and biodiversity conservation values, three priority classes for restoration were generated. The multicriteria framework generated several restoration priority cut-offs. Prioritization based on landscape resilience selected 36% of the Caatinga catchments as high priority for restoration. By independently adding landscape connectivity and biodiversity conservation value, only 12% and 3% of the catchments, respectively, were considered as high priority. By combining all three criteria, 9% of the catchments were selected as high priority and Synthesis and applications. Restoration of drylands can contribute immensely to the conservation of its threatened biodiversity but large-scale planning is quintessential. Here, a multicriteria graph theory framework was applied to indicate priority areas for restoration, which maximizes the effectiveness of restoration actions, landscape connectivity for climate change adaptation and conservation of threatened species. The framework was applied to the Caatinga, the largest seasonally dry tropical forest of the new world, but it can be applied world-wide under different budged limitations and spatial scales, being useful for private, state and federal initiatives.
Restoration Strategies to Improve Connectivity for Golden-Headed Lion Tamarins (Leontopithecus chrysomelas) in the Bahian Atlantic Forest, Brazil			Habitat loss and fragmentation are the leading causes of biodiversity decline world-wide. Animals sensitive to fragmentation experience reduced dispersal, breeding opportunities, and genetic diversity, making them vulnerable to local extinction. Over the last few decades the Atlantic Forest of Brazil has been extremely fragmented, with only 11-16% of forest remaining. The Brazilian government and nongovernmental organizations have taken actions through legislation and conservation initiatives to restore forest. Using computer modeling, we compared how alternative forest restoration strategies could improve functional connectivity for golden-headed lion tamarins (Leontopithecus chrysomelas) in Southern Bahia, Brazil. Strategies differed by restoration configuration, including Within-and Across-Property approaches, and restoration amount (0-20% restoration). Increasing restoration amounts resulted in greater species functional connectivity, and Within-Property and Across-Property strategies both had significantly more connectivity than the Random strategy. We suggest restoration management consider the size and placement of restored forest, and that riparian forest be restored first to create dispersal corridors and reestablish essential ecosystem services. We further suggest the importance of forming canopy bridges across narrow sections of rivers during the early stages of the restoration process to promote increased connectivity of these newly restored areas. Our findings can aid managers and landowners in understanding the implications of different restoration strategies for highly arboreal, matrix-sensitive species.
Restoration Success Of Tropical Forests: The Search For Indicators			0
Restoring a dry tropical forest through assisted natural regeneration: enhancing tree diversity, structure, and carbon stock			Deforestation is a key factor in global climate change, severely impacting ecosystem services. Effective implementation of reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) +) initiatives is essential for mitigating this change. Reforestation is a sustainable way to mitigate deforestation effects. We studied the impact of assisted natural regeneration (ANR) on restoring dry forest land, increasing biodiversity, structure, and carbon stock. Reforestation units were established at a multiple row planting system in a dry tropic region. We selected 63 plots, each 20 m x 20 m, categorized into multiple row-mixed plantation (MRMP) and multiple row-unmixed plantation (MRUP). We measured tree height and diameter at breast height (DBH) and evaluated biodiversity indices, including the Shannon-Weiner Index (SWI), species richness, evenness, and Important Value Index (IVI). Carbon stock was estimated using allometric equations. We identified 931 individual trees representing 27 species, 24 genera, and 14 families. MRMP showed significantly higher biodiversity, species richness, and evenness than MRUP. Terminalia arjuna was the most dominant species (IVI=124.45), =124.45), followed by Khaya senegalensis (53.84). Survival rates exceeded 90 % for T. arjuna, K. senegalensis, Madhuca longifolia, , and Pongamia pinnata (p<0.001). < 0.001). No significant differences were observed in tree DBH, tree height, tree density, basal area, and carbon stock among the plantation categories. The species Albizia saman exhibited a high diameter increment rate (4.07 +/- 1.55 cm/year), followed by K. senegalensis (3.83 +/- 0.43 cm/year). A mean value of 5.63 +/- 1.13 MgC/ha of carbon stock was stored, while 20.66 +/- 4.13 Mg/ha of atmospheric CO2 2 was sequestered. The results highlight that promoting mixed tree species in multiple rows to enhance biodiversity and optimize carbon regulation. This technique should be popularized to restore the dry forest landscape across the region.
Restoring degraded riparian forest ecosystems of the Western Ghats for ecological sustainability			The riparian ecosystems of the Western Ghats are highly diversified tropical forest ecosystems. The synergic effect of various threats may adversely affect and reduce the capacity of these riparian ecosystems to resilience, even though they have specific adaptations for living in extreme conditions. These diversity-rich riparian ecosystems provide critical ecological services such as influencing environmental processes, acting as habitats for both terrestrial and aquatic biota, and supporting the livelihood of the surrounding community. Hence the restoration of such damaged ecosystems is highly significant. This article presents a scheme for sustainable restoration of the disturbed riparian ecosystems with the involvement of multi-stakeholders. The three-stage scheme ensures the support and livelihood of the local community, along with the ecological restoration of riparian ecosystems using nature-based solutions with a scientific approach. The restoration will enhance the ecosystem services, climate change adaptations, and resilience, as well as the carbon sequestration capacity of the tropical region.
Restoring degraded tropical forests for carbon and biodiversity			The extensive deforestation and degradation of tropical forests is a significant contributor to the loss of biodiversity and to global warming. Restoration could potentially mitigate the impacts of deforestation, yet knowledge on how to efficiently allocate funding for restoration is still in its infancy. We systematically prioritize investments in restoration in the tropical landscape of East Kalimantan, Indonesia, and through this application demonstrate the capacity to account for a diverse suite of restoration techniques and forests of varying condition. To achieve this we develop a map of forest degradation for the region, characterized on the basis of aboveground biomass and differentiated by broad forest types. We estimate the costs of restoration as well as the benefits in terms of carbon sequestration and improving the suitability of habitat for threatened mammals through time. When the objective is solely to enhance carbon stocks, then restoration of highly degraded lowland forest is the most cost-effective activity. However, if the objective is to improve the habitat of threatened species, multiple forest types should be restored and this reduces the accumulated carbon by up to 24%. Our analysis framework provides a transparent method for prioritizing where and how restoration should occur in heterogeneous landscapes in order to maximize the benefits for carbon and biodiversity.
Restoring fire-degraded social forests via biocultural approaches: a key strategy to safeguard the Amazon legacy			Wildfires have emerged as an escalating source of tropical forest degradation with a cascade of negative consequences for the sustainable development of tropical regions. This is particularly the case in the Amazon forest region as wildfires have already degraded a considerable extension of both secondary and old-growth forests, including "social forests" managed by traditional communities into protected areas. Here, we advocate in favor of a neglected perspective recognizing wildfires as an escalating threat of unanticipated but certainly devasting impacts on social forests, communal territories, the social reproduction of local/traditional forest-based communities, and the network of protected areas devoted to safeguard the Amazon forest legacy, including ecosystem services of global relevance such as climate regulation. In response to this prognosis, we call for a research agenda focused on fire drivers, impacts, management, and mitigation, including the establishment of biocultural restoration initiatives/pilot programs in communal territories. Initiatives should integrate co-produced goals, approaches, and technology to economically, socially, and politically empower those stakeholders with an effective interest in forest persistence although they are already vulnerable. Finally, we propose a governance model connecting key stakeholders to scale up fire-related biocultural restoration in the Amazon region with the potential to produce timely and globally relevant knowledge and lessons. We hope our ideas stimulate key stakeholders to promote biocultural initiatives able to guarantee the emergence of sustainable territories and thus safeguard the climate-buffering Amazon forest and its legacy for the sake of both local and global society.
Restoring soil carbon and chemical properties through silvopastoral adoption in the Colombian Amazon region			Silvopastoral systems (SPS) have been widely implemented in the Colombian Amazon region to improve pastures involving a greater diversity of species, soil tillage, fertilization, and higher stocking rate, which can induce changes in soil properties and functions. This study aimed to evaluate soil chemical properties and carbon sequestration changes due to the transition from traditional pastures to silvopastoral systems. The study was conducted in the Colombian Amazon region, specifically in La Montanita and El Doncello Counties, in Caqueta, the second most important hotspot of deforestation in the entire Amazon basin. In each study site, we established a chronosequence consisting of three areas following the typical land-use change at the region: (i) native vegetation, (ii) traditional pasture, and (iii) silvopastoral system. We found that agricultural practices involving liming and tillage, performed under the silvopastoral management, contributed to reducing soil active acidity and exchangeable acidity with soil pH increasing from 3.8 to 4.3 and H++Al3+ decreasing from 5.8 to 2.3 cmol(c) kg(-1). These alterations favored increases in Ca2+ and Mg2+ contents mainly, increasing the base saturation from 17% in traditional pastures to 55% under silvopastoral systems. The synergic effect of the mix of grasses and trees under silvopastoral management improved soil micronutrient contents and modified soil C stocks in 20-30 cm layer. A rate of soil C accretion of 0.26 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1) for the 0-30 cm detected in silvopastoral systems suggests that its implementation could be a promising tool for C sequestration in tropical regions, capable of restoring soil functioning of degraded areas.
Restoring tropical forest based on strangle            phenomenon comprises e.g. establishing ecological            restoration area, stretching root system when planting,            carrying out ecological monitoring in area, analyzing            impact of restoring biodiversity on ecosystem    ...			#VALUE!
Restoring tropical forest composition is more difficult, but recovering tree-cover is faster, when neighbouring forests are young			Context Neighbouring forests constitute biological sources that enable the succession from species-poor systems, such as tree-plantings, to highly diverse forests. However, old forest patches are becoming rare in tropical agricultural landscapes. Objective We were interested in if, and how, spontaneous regeneration under tree-plantings reflects the age and the amount of the neighbouring forest cover. We anticipated that older forests promote a compositionally broader recovery in neighbouring tree-plantings, because older forests likely include disturbance-sensitive species, particularly within least deforested landscapes. Methods We studied twenty-seven restoration sites implemented as tree-plantings in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. We quantified the effects of age and amount of neighbouring forest cover on structural and compositional characteristics of the regeneration community (dbh < 5 cm). We used two landscape groups (presence, or absence, of forests older than 30 years.) with a similar areal range of forest cover, enabling the disentanglement of forest age from forest amount effects on regeneration community responses. Results Surprisingly, we found that greater forest cover correlated with denser and more species-rich regeneration communities only when neighbouring forests were young. This pattern was promoted by non-vertebrate dispersed species. Regeneration communities in tree-plantings near to young forests had lower seed-mass and relative abundances of forest-specialists, compared to communities found near old forest patches. Conclusion Regeneration is likely denser in landscapes of vast young-forest coverage. However, small-seeded and habitat-generalist species, frequently related to disturbance tolerance, tend to be dominant if old-growth forests are far away. This biased seed source appears to preclude the restoration of typical historic tropical forest composition.
Restoring tropical forest-grassland mosaics invaded by woody exotics			Although important for biological conservation and provisioning of several ecosystem services, tropical forest-grassland mosaics face several threats, one of which is woody invasion in grasslands of these mosaics-an issue proving to be challenging to solve. We present a framework to guide grassland restoration in these mosaics that takes into account their unique ecology, outlines a general chronological sequence of restoration activities, and helps identify research priorities to guide restoration efforts. Specifically, we outline approaches to (1) increase the cost-effectiveness of restoration programs (e.g. selecting restoration targets and priority sites); (2) restore edaphic processes impacted by woody invasion; (3) maximize the establishment of native grass and forb species, and (4) maintain restored communities in the long-term by minimizing re-invasions. We apply this framework to montane southern Indian forest-grassland mosaics (locally called shola-grassland mosaics) invaded by nitrogen-fixing woody exotics to identify research priorities that can act as "game-changers" in the restoration of these ecosystems. These include (1) identifying invaded areas where passive restoration can be effective, (2) understanding the role of endogenous disturbances, particularly fire, in the spread and management of invasive species and the prevention of re-invasion, and (3) assessing the role of large-scale seed farming and emerging seed technologies for the use of seeds to effectively re-introduce native grassland species. Restoration frameworks that take into account unique ecologies are needed to make the most of the UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration, and we present such a framework for forest-grassland mosaics-an important ecosystem that is generally neglected.
Restoring tropical forests from the bottom up			0
Resurgence of specialized shade coffee cultivation: Effects on pollination services and quality of coffee production			Since the early 2000s, there has been a resurgence in shade coffee production on the island of Puerto Rico. The newly restored specialized shade canopy consists of four native tree species, three of which are nitrogen fixers, and is intended to provide 30% shade cover once the trees are matured. Though much is known about the benefits of rustic and traditional shade plantations to coffee production, there is little information available for specialized shade plantations. Here, we investigate the ways in which fruit set, seed predation, bean weight, proportion of peaberries (i.e., malformed fruits), and beverage quality differ between sun and specialized shade plantations of Coffea arabica and Coffea canephora. Additionally, to assess whether coffee plants were pollen limited, we conducted a pollen supplementation experiment in which we compared pollen deposition and berry production on hand-pollinated branches to those of naturally, open-pollinated ones. We found that there was no evidence of pollen limitation on fruit set between sun and specialized shade plantations of C. arabica or C. canephora. We found that specialized shade benefits the proportion of C. arabica fruit set, without compromising bean weight or the proportion of peaberries produced. In comparison, C. canephora showed no improvement in the proportion of fruits set with specialized shade; however, beans from open-pollinated flowers weighed more in specialized shade than sun. Beverage quality was marginally better under shade, and for hand-pollinated flowers. Our results add to the limited body of work investigating the benefits of specialized shade coffee plantations on ecosystem services.
Rethinking Synergies and Trade-Offs at the Forest-Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) Nexus-A Systematic Review			Forests play a critical role in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), yet their contributions are often misunderstood and inadequately addressed in the scientific discourse. This study clarifies the intricate relationships between forests and the SDGs by examining the contextual factors that influence this interplay. Through a systematic literature review, we adopt a mixed-methods approach that integrates quantitative mapping of themes with qualitative analysis of key forest-SDG nexuses. Our analysis reveals that forests' contributions to specific SDGs, particularly SDGs 2 (Zero Hunger), 13 (Climate Action) and 15 (Life on Land), are not uniform but vary significantly based on forest type, condition, and management practices. These contributions are also linked to the degree of success in realizing these goals over time. Key findings indicate that previous studies have often treated forests as static entities, overlooking the complexity of their relationships with SDGs. For instance, in the case of SDG 13 ("Climate Action"), forests are frequently lauded for their synergetic contributions, while potential trade-offs and evolving dynamics are neglected. Similarly, earlier studies have treated the SDGs as homogeneous entities, generalizing their impacts on forests. However, distinct facets within each SDG can influence the forest relationship in nuanced ways. Our findings reveal that even within specific SDG targets, such as SDG target 2.3, the connection to forests can be interpreted differently. This review contributes to a deeper understanding of the socio-ecological systems shaping forest-SDG outcomes, advocating for a nuanced perspective to foster informed policy-making and sustainable forest management.
Rethinking the Ecosystem Functions of Dicranopteris, a Widespread Genus of Ferns			Dicranopteris is an ancient and widespread genus of ferns in pantropical regions. Some species of the genus can form dense thickets, and dominate the understory, which are common and key species in tropical and subtropical ecosystems. However, they were mostly cut or burned in forest management because of forming dense thickets which were considered to interfere with forest regeneration and succession. In the current review, we argue that the Dicranopteris species which are able to rapidly colonize barren areas may contribute to ecosystem recovery, resistance to environmental stress, and succession control. Rapid colonization involves prolific spore production, rapid clonal growth, the generation of high surface cover, and the ability to fill gaps; stress resistance includes resistance to abiotic stress, and the ability to reduce soil erosion from rainfall, alien species invasion, and soil contamination and toxicity; and succession facilitation consists of carbon and nutrient sequestration in soil, moderation of the microclimate, alteration of the soil microbial and faunal communities, and determination of which plant species to be established in the next successional stage. All of these ecosystem functions may be beneficial to ecosystem resilience. We expect that the distribution of Dicranopteris will expand in response to global warming, changes in precipitation patterns, increases in soil pollution, deforestation, and land degradation. We recommend that Dicranopteris, as a pioneer fern and a valuable component of tropical and subtropical ecosystems, needs more attention in future research and better management practices to promote forest regeneration and succession.
Revealing the spatial variation in biomass uptake rates of Brazil's secondary forests			Monitoring forest aboveground biomass (AGB) is essential for quantifying the carbon cycle and mitigating climate change. Tropical secondary forests are significant carbon sinks that sequester large amounts of carbon dioxide. While recent studies have attempted to estimate the AGB recovery rates in tropical forests, considerable uncertainty remains in the estimation of AGB recovery of secondary forests and the spatial variability of the effects that different environmental conditions and degrees of human use may have on AGB recovery. These knowledge gaps hinder further understanding of climate change mitigation potential of secondary forests. Remote sensing products provide spatially and temporally explicit information for understanding and monitoring secondary forest dynamics. To explore the local effects of different factors on AGB of secondary forests in Brazil, we used geographically weighted regression (GWR) models that account for spatial heterogeneity in geospatial data to estimate the AGB of secondary forests in Brazil. Secondary forest areas (29142 polygons) were extracted from Brazil's forest age maps between 1984 and 2019. The AGB of these areas was derived from the Climate Change Initiative Biomass maps. The effects of selected predictors such as forest age, climatic water deficit, the cation exchange capacity of soil and surrounding tree cover were analyzed. The two most influential factors, forest age and surrounding tree cover were utilized to estimate the AGB and the recovery rates per year. Our results show the high spatial variation of different predictors' effects on the AGB of secondary forests. Also, the GWR model (with an adjusted R2 of 0.74) showed considerable improvements regarding "goodness of fit" of models compared with the Ordinary Least Squares (with an adjusted R2 of 0.53). Our estimated average AGB recovery rate across all Brazil's biomes is 7.5 Mg ha -1 yr- 1 (using forest age) for the first 20 years. We presented the map of the spatial variation of AGB recovery rates in Brazil. The estimated AGB recovery rates range using forest age is 28.9 Mg ha -1 yr- 1. Our estimated mean AGB recovery rates of different biomes are 17.7 % on average higher than IPCC default rates. Our results provide baseline information for reducing uncertainties related to carbon sink estimation of secondary forests in Brazil, hence assisting in developing sustainable forest management and ecosystem restoration strategies.
Revegetation modifies patterns of temporal soil respiration responses to extreme-drying-and-rewetting in a semiarid ecosystem			Background and aims Changes in climate and land-use are altering soil respiration patterns and thus affecting C sequestration rates globally. This study aims to understand the effect of revegetation induced land-use change on the response of soil respiration to precipitation pulses during an extreme-drying-and-rewetting period.Methods Soil respiration (SR) in cropland, grassland, shrubland, and orchard were intensively monitored along with environmental variables during an extreme drought period with precipitation pulse on China's Loess Plateau.Results SR was strongly correlated to soil water content for all land-uses. However, the relationship was highly dependent on land-use types: SR was only strongly suppressed in cropland and orchard when moisture content exceeded 10.8 and 13.7%, respectively, whereas no clear suppression was observed under other land-uses. As a result, the C loss in grassland and shrubland was 49.1-78.9% higher than in cropland following significant precipitation events. In addition, SR was negatively and weakly correlated with soil temperature, indicating the change in the dominant control on SR due to extreme drought.Conclusions Land-use change alters the response of soil respiration to soil moisture during extreme-drying-and-rewetting periods in this revegetated ecosystem. Its effect on respiration pulses will amplify as extreme climate events increase in the future, which may potentially alter the existing C balance.
Reversals of Reforestation Across Latin America Limit Climate Mitigation Potential of Tropical Forests			Carbon sequestration through tropical reforestation and natural regeneration could make an important contribution to climate change mitigation, given that forest cover in many tropical regions increased during the early part of the 21st century. The size of this carbon sink will depend on the degree to which second-growth forests are permanent and protected from re-clearing. Yet few studies have assessed permanence of reforestation, especially not at a large spatial scale. Here, we analyzed a 14-year time series (2001-2014) of remotely sensed land-cover data, covering all tropical Latin America and the Caribbean, to quantify the extent of second-growth forest permanence. Our results show that in many cases, reforestation in Latin America and the Caribbean during the early 21st century reversed by 2014, limiting carbon sequestration. In fact, reversals of reforestation, in which some or all gains in forest cover in the early 2000s were subsequently lost, were ten times more common than sustained increases in forest cover. Had reversals of reforestation been avoided, forests could have sequestered 0.58 Pg C, over four times more carbon than we estimate was sequestered after accounting for impermanence (0.14 Pg), representing a loss of 75% of carbon sequestration potential. Differences in the prevalence of reforestation reversals across countries suggest an important role for socio-economic, political, and ecological context, with political transitions and instability increasing the likelihood of reversals. These findings suggest that national commitments to reforestation may fall short of their carbon sequestration goals without provisions to ensure long-term permanence of new forests.
Review New Aspects in Tropical Silviculture			During recent decades many environmental, social and legal conditions for sustainable management of forest resources have changed. Against this background, traditional and well-established silvicultural practices have to be reevaluated concerning their impact on conservation, biodiversity and environmental services and functions but also concerning their capability to ensure the ability of forest ecosystems to adapt to global environmental changes and to deliver the products and services that are requested by society. This chapter reviews exemplarily some of these new aspects, such as climate change, increased importance of goods and services other than timber and increased requirements for inventory, monitoring and planning as well as the consequences for silvicultural science and practice.
Review of allometric equations for major land covers in SE Asia: Uncertainty and implications for above- and below-ground carbon estimates			Our review of biomass studies conducted for 11 Southeast Asian countries, Papua New Guinea, and southern China uncovered 402 above-ground and 138 below-ground biomass allometric equations for the following major land covers: forest, peat swamp forest, mangrove forest, logged over forest, orchard and tree plantation, rubber plantation, oil palm plantation, bamboo, swidden fallow, and grassland/pasture/shrub land. No equations existed for non-swidden agroforest and permanent croplands, two other important land covers involved in current and projected land-cover transitions. We also found 245 stem-volume equations and 50 height-diameter equations. Applying existing allometric equations out of convenience is potentially a key source of uncertainty in above- and below-ground carbon stock estimates in many SE Asian landscapes. Differences in environmental conditions and vegetation characteristics should preclude the use of many pre-existing equations at locations outside of the geographical location where they were developed, without first verifying their applicability. While use of site-specific equations is preferred to reduce uncertainty in estimates, there are few in existence for many land covers and many geographical areas of the region. For example, few or no equations exist for Brunei, Cambodia, Laos, Papua New Guinea, Singapore, and Timor Leste. Ten or fewer above-ground biomass equations exist for rubber plantation, oil palm plantation, non-swidden agroforest, grassland/pasture/shrublands, and permanent croplands for the entire region. Even site-specific equations can introduce uncertainties to biomass estimates if they were determined from an insufficient sample size. Difficulties associated with sampling below-ground root biomass accurately often leads to allometric equations that potentially under-estimate below-ground biomass. In addition, substantial errors may be present if these below-ground equations are conveniently used by researchers in lieu of site-specific measurements. Although the importance of including wood density in allometry is increasingly recognized, only 26 of the reviewed studies did so. Ideally, when wood density values are used to estimate biomass, new on-site measurements should be taken, rather than relying on pre-existing values. This review demonstrates that more research in SE Asia is needed on biomass in general, specifically for several land covers including peat swamp forest, rubber and oil palm plantations, bamboo, swidden fallow, non-swidden agroforest, and permanent cropland. Importantly, for the purpose of informing the development and implementation of policies and programs such as REDD+, our meta-analysis highlights the pressing need to address the insufficient number of allometric equations and the possible inappropriate use of some when estimating vegetation biomass related to current and potential land cover changes in the region. © 2015 Elsevier B.V.
Reviewing the evidence on the roles of forests and tree-based systems in poverty dynamics			The alleviation of global poverty is a major objective of the 2030 UN Sustainable Development Goals (notably SDG1 "to end poverty in all its forms everywhere"). Many rural people experiencing poverty often rely on forests and tree-based systems, such as agroforestry, suggesting the existence of links between such systems and poverty outcomes. This paper reviews the evidence of such links across multiple dimensions of poverty and well-being, based on an expert panel convened by the International Union of Forest Research Organizations (IUFRO) and an extensive literature search. We consider whether, how, where, when, and for whom forests and trees in the wider landscape influence poverty dynamics. We organize the evidence according to four pathways through which forests and trees influence household poverty dynamics: 1) helping households move out of poverty; 2) maintaining well-being levels through subsistence, food security, health, and cultural and spiritual values; 3) preventing declines by mitigating risks and stabilizing consumption; 4) decreasing well-being by generating negative externalities that could trap or move households into poverty. We found that local context matters considerably, with the roles of forests and trees strongly varying across geographical, social, economic, and political settings. Another key finding is that evidence of forests and trees providing livelihood diversification and benefits that help households move out of poverty remains limited, based primarily on a small number of case studies. Evidence on the impact of gender gaps in relation to forest landscapes and poverty pathways is also lacking. However, our findings do suggest that ecosystem services provided by forests and trees play critical roles in maintaining well-being and food security and have the potential to contribute more to helping households move out of poverty and mitigating risks amplified by climate change. This review also highlights cautionary findings related to negative forest externalities that can maintain or move households into poverty. Together, these findings call for policy efforts to support the conservation and sustainable management of forest landscapes and agroforestry systems that are more targeted towards meeting the diverse needs of the rural poor. Our results also point to a need for greater effort to address gender disparities, which have been largely overlooked yet provide a critical opportunity to not only enhance gender equality but also advance sustainable poverty reduction goals.
Rocketing restoration: enabling the upscaling of ecological restoration in the Anthropocene			In the 25 years during which the Society for Ecological Restoration (SER) has overseen the publication of Restoration Ecology, the field has witnessed conceptual and practical advances. These have become necessary due to the scale of environmental change wrought by the increasing global human population, and associated demands for food, fiber, energy, and water. As we look to the future, and attempt to fulfill global restoration commitments and meet sustainable development goals, there is a need to reverse land degradation and biodiversity loss through upscaling ecological restoration. Here, we argue that this upscaling requires an expanded vision for restoration that explicitly accounts for people and nature. This expansion can assess success in a future-focused way and as improvements relative to a degraded socio-ecological system. We suggest that upscaling requires addressing governance, legal and ethical challenges, investing in technological and educational capacity building, bolstering the practical science necessary for restoration, encouraging adoptable packages to ensure livelihoods of local stakeholders, and promoting investment opportunities for local actors and industry. Providing SER embraces this socio-ecological vision, it is ideally placed to aid the achievement of goals and remain globally relevant. SER needs to harness and coordinate three sources of potential energy (global political commitments, the green economy, and local community engagement) to rocket restoration into the Anthropocene. With principles that can embrace flexibility and context-dependency in minimum restoration standards, SER has the potential to guide socio-ecological restoration and help realize the ultimate goal of a sustainable Earth.
Rodent community responses to vegetation and landscape changes in early successional stages of tropical dry forest			The extent to which the array of land covers dominating anthropogenic landscapes impacts on biodiversity remains today an open question of great relevance. The characteristics of the animal communities inhabiting the forest early successional stages can determine, to a large extent, the course of secondary succession and natural regeneration. In this study, we evaluated the response of terrestrial rodents to variations in vegetation and landscape attributes, in early stages of tropical dry forest succession, at three integration levels: (1) communities, (2) populations, and (3) individuals. Our results reveal a rodent response to the variation in vegetation and landscape attributes, which indeed was largely modulated by seasonality, and determined by the focal spatial scale considered. In general, most of the species were favored by vegetation structure simplification and increase in understory density, probably due to the increase in refuge and trophic resources. Nevertheless, one species, Lyomis pictus, was sensitive to variation in vegetation composition and negatively affected by a reduction in vegetation structural complexity, which could be explained by the high number of trees included in their diet. We found a higher diversity of rodents in sites surrounded by a high coverage and connectivity of dry and riparian forest, probably because large forest patches act as sources of species and the forest connectivity favors the colonization process toward sites under regeneration. Our results showed that preserving remnants of the original vegetation and implementing management actions at different spatial scales in anthropogenic landscapes is critical for preventing: (1) an increase in generalist populations, (2) rapid faunal homogenization, (3) defaunation, and (4) the loss of specialist species; with profound implications for the ecology of forest, ecosystem services and human health. © 2018 Elsevier B.V.
Role of forest regrowth in global carbon sink dynamics			Although the existence of a large carbon sink in terrestrial ecosystems is well-established, the drivers of this sink remain uncertain. It has been suggested that perturbations to forest demography caused by past land-use change, management, and natural disturbances may be causing a large component of current carbon uptake. Here we use a global compilation of forest age observations, combined with a terrestrial biosphere model with explicit modeling of forest regrowth, to partition the global forest carbon sink between old-growth and regrowth stands over the period 1981-2010. For 2001-2010 we find a carbon sink of 0.85 (0.66-0.96) Pg year(-1) located in intact old-growth forest, primarily in the moist tropics and boreal Siberia, and 1.30 (1.03-1.96) Pg year(-1) located in stands regrowing after past disturbance. Approaching half of the sink in regrowth stands would have occurred from demographic changes alone, in the absence of other environmental changes. These age-constrained results show consistency with those simulated using an ensemble of demographically-enabled terrestrial biosphere models following an independent reconstruction of historical land use and management. We estimate that forests will accumulate an additional 69 (44-131) Pg C in live biomass from changes in demography alone if natural disturbances, wood harvest, and reforestation continue at rates comparable to those during 1981-2010. Our results confirm that it is not possible to understand the current global terrestrial carbon sink without accounting for the sizeable sink due to forest demography. They also imply that a large portion of the current terrestrial carbon sink is strictly transient in nature.
Role of root inputs from a dinitrogen-fixing tree in soil carbon and nitrogen sequestration in a tropical agroforestry system			Agroforestry is often mentioned as a suitable technology for land rehabilitation in the tropics and for mitigation of climate change because this land-use favours nutrient recycling and C sequestration. The aim of this work was to estimate soil C sequestration in a 12-year-old tropical silvopastoral system composed of a legume tree (Gliricidia sepium) and a C4 fodder grass (Dichanthium aristatum), and to link it with tree root biomass and N status in the soil. The site was under cut-and-carry management, i.e. tree pruning residues and cut grass were removed from the field and fed to stabled animals elsewhere. Thus, main sources for tree C and N inputs were root activity and turnover. Organic C derived from the trees and tree root biomass were determined based on natural C-13 abundance. For the 0-0.2 m soil layer, the biomass of tree roots <= 2 mm diameter was 2.4 Mg/ha when the trees were pruned every 6 months (SS6), and 0.6 Mg/ha when pruned every 2 months (SS2). Both C (R-2 = 0.39, P < 0.05) and N (R-2 = 0.82, P < 0.05) sequestration were correlated with tree root biomass. The trees and grass contributed 18 and 8 Mg C/ha to soil, respectively, over the 12-year experiment in SS6. The net increase of 2.5 Mg N/ha in soil, originating from the trees, contributed to the net soil C sequestration. In SS2, trees contributed 16 Mg C/ha to soil over 12 years, but grass-derived C was reduced by 2 Mg C/ha because of the small amount of grass litter. The increase of 1.7 Mg N/ha in soil, derived from the trees, was not large enough to avoid C loss in this plot. Differences in soil C and N sequestration between plots were due to differences in system management, which affected the amount and the C/N ratio of inputs and outputs.
Roles of forests in food security based on case studies in Yunnan, China			Agriculture faces enormous challenges with the new realities of climate risks, environmental sustainability, and,social changes, particularly in Mountainous Mainland Southeast Asia. It has been commonly viewed that agriculture is a threat to ecosystems, including forests, and this places developing countries in a dilemma.This article presents two case studies from Yunnan, China and discusses multifaceted roles of forests in sustainable food production and functioning of ecosystem services. The cases represent the survival of farming system for centuries, sustained by forests, ecosystem services, and traditional ecological knowledge. Forests play a vital role in food security while traditional ecological knowledge has maintained sustainable and longstanding production systems with forests.Food security involves context- and location-specific challenges. It necessitates to address the multifaceted food security issue with localized approaches for synergy between farming and forests, to build local resilience against climate variability and social changes.
Root and shoot interactions in a tropical integrated crop-livestock-forest system			Integrated crop-livestock-forest systems (ICLFS) have potential advantages compared to monoculture, but most studies quantifying plant biomass in integrated production systems, have quantified only the aboveground component rather than the total biomass. The objective of this study was to investigate the ecological interactions of Eucalyptus trees intercropped with palisade grass in a tropical region. The study was conducted in an 8-year-old ICLFS in which Eucalyptus trees were introduced into a palisade grass pasture [Urochloa brizantha (Hochst. Ex A. Rich.) R. Webster 'Marandu']. Samples were collected at four locations from the Eucalyptus trees: 0.0 (planting line), 2.0, 4.0, and 6.0 m (middle of the plots). A monoculture palisade grass pasture was included for comparison. The addition of Eucalyptus in the pasture reduced the forage yield, root length density, root density and root diameter of palisade grass close to the Eucalyptus trees. Eucalyptus roots were more abundant near the trees, and decreased with distance from the tree at soil depths up to 1.0 m. The total amount of roots decreased by 36 % with the addition of the forest component compared with the monoculture pasture, i.e., 11.6 Mg ha(-1) in the ICLFS compared with 18.4 Mg ha(-1) in the pasture. In the ICLFS, the proportion of palisade grass roots in the soil profile increased with distance from the tree line. However, the high degree of competition in root development in the ICLFS resulted in 20% lower root length and fine roots densities compared with monoculture pasture in the upper 0-0.20 m soil layer.
Ruminant Grazing Lands in the Tropics: Silvopastoral Systems and Tithonia diversifolia as Tools with Potential to Promote Sustainability			Food security, sustainability of food production, and greenhouse gas (GHG) production of ruminant livestock are topics that generate scrutiny and debates worldwide. In a scenario of increasing human population and concerns with climate change, it is necessary to increase animal-derived food in sustainable operations. Grazing systems are crucial for ruminant production worldwide, and in the tropics, well-managed grasslands can provide sustainable intensification of this activity. In these regions, production often relies on grass monoculture managed extensively, a practice that commonly has led to the occurrence of degraded soils, limited animal productivity, and increased intensity of GHG emissions. Silvopastoralism is a practice that promotes several ecosystem services, showing potential to maintain soil quality while reducing the environmental impacts of ruminant production. These systems also have the potential to improve animal productive performance and reduce GHG emissions. The review was guided by a search in the Web of Science database using population terms and refined by document type (Article) and language (English OR Portuguese) following PRISMA protocol. Infographics were created using the Bibliometrix package in R software (version 4.3.2), and a specific topic on Tithonia diversifolia (Hemsl.) A. Gray was explored to demonstrate the importance of this forage resource for tropical silvopastoral systems and its potential contribution to food security. The T. diversifolia shrub is widely distributed in Latin America and tropical regions and presents several characteristics that make it a good option for silvopastoral systems. Focusing on the tropics, our objectives were to present one literature review addressing the role of grazing ruminant production towards the current climate change and food security challenges. Additionally, we aimed to explore the state of knowledge on silvopastoral systems and the use of T. diversifolia, presenting their potential to cope with this scenario of increased concerns with the sustainability of human activities.
Rush for cash crops and forest protection: Neither land sparing nor land sharing			In many countries with large tracts of tropical forests, there is a dual focus on enhancing forest protection and increasing commercial agriculture for economic development. Laos is a case in point for this development as the Government of Laos (GoL) has a strong commitment to economic growth, which rural farmers in part help realize through a rush for cash crop production destined to be sold in neighboring countries. Maize cultivation, for example, is rapidly expanding and grown under a contract-farming system for Vietnamese markets. At the same time, GoL attempts to increase nationwide forest cover and prepares for REDD+ (reducing deforestation and forest degradation). This paper explores how the recent boom in cash crops is impacting land use and livelihoods of local communities, as well as affecting forest conservation in Hua Meuang District of Huaphan Province in northeastern Laos. We also examine how local authorities react to these changes and navigate the contradicting policies. Furthermore, the paper analyzes to what extent the land sparing intention of land- and forest-land allocation policies are fulfilled. We found that the production of maize has rapidly expanded in Hua Meuang District since the mid-2000s as a result of high demands for maize in Vietnam and because local authorities see the crop as a way to reduce rural poverty and reduce traditional subsistence shifting cultivation practices. Communities have increased the areas that they dedicate to maize cultivation and have achieved an increase in both income and household assets. Maize has replaced upland rice cultivation as well as primary and secondary forests. Although the government policies aim to spare land for forest conservation by intensifying agriculture, the result is rapid agricultural expansion and no spared forest. Moreover, the traditional land-sharing landscapes with forest, fallows, and fields are being transformed, creating landscapes that are increasingly dominated by agriculture. This may still be in line with economic development policies, but it is at odds with forest conservation policies, REDD+ policies, and the GoL target of increasing forest cover in the country. © 2016 Elsevier Ltd.
Såli (Micronesian starling - Aplonis opaca) as a key seed dispersal agent across a tropical archipelago			Seed dispersal is an important ecological process that structures plant communities and influences ecosystem functioning. Loss of animal dispersers therefore poses a serious threat to forest ecosystems, particularly in the tropics where zoochory predominates. A prominent example is the near-total extinction of seed dispersers on the tropical island of Guam following the accidental introduction of the invasive brown tree snake (Boiga irregularis), negatively impacting seedling recruitment and forest regeneration. We investigated frugivory by a remnant population of Såli (Micronesian starling - Aplonis opaca) on Guam and two other island populations (Rota, Saipan) to evaluate their ecological role as a seed disperser in the Mariana archipelago. Using a combination of behavioural observations, nest contents and fecal samples, we documented frugivory of 37 plant species. Native plants comprised the majority (66%) of all species and 90% of all seeds identified in fecal and nest contents. Diet was highly similar across age classes and sampling years. In addition, plant species consumed by Såli comprised 88% of bird-dispersed adult trees and 54% of all adult trees in long-term forest monitoring plots, demonstrating the Såli's broad diet and potential for restoring native forests. Overall, we provide the most comprehensive assessment to date of frugivory by the Såli and confirm its importance as a seed disperser on Guam and throughout the Marianas.  © The Author(s) 2020.
Sapling biomass allometry and carbon content in five afforestation species on marginal farmland in semi-arid Benin			Allometric equations are routinely used in the estimation of biomass stocks for carbon accounting within forest ecosystems. However, generic equations may not reflect the growth trajectories of afforestation species that are introduced to degraded farmland characterized by water and nutrient limitations. Using sequential measurements of the height, basal diameter, and above- and belowground biomass of juvenile trees, we developed allometric equations for five woody species (Moringa oleifera Lam., Leucaena leucocephala Lam., Jatropha curcas L., Anacardium occidentale L. and Parkia biglobosa Jacq.) subjected to a gradient of water and nutrient availability in an afforestation trial on degraded cropland in the semi-arid zone of Benin, West Africa. For three of the species studied, the allometric relationships between basal diameter and biomass components (i.e. leaves, stems and roots) were described best by a simple power-law model (R-2 > 0.93). The incorporation of species-specific height-diameter relationships and total height as additional predictors in the power-law function also produced reasonable estimates of biomass. Fifteen months after planting, roots accounted for 10-58% of the total biomass while the root-to-shoot ratio ranged between 0.16 and 0.73. The total biomass of the saplings ranged between 1.4 and 10.3 Mg ha(-1), yielding 0.6-4.3 Mg C ha(-1), far exceeding the biomass in the traditional fallow system. The rate of stem carbon sequestration measured ca. 0.62 Mg C ha(-1) year(-1). Overall, the allometric equations developed in this study are generally useful for assessing the standing shoot and root biomass of the five afforestation species during the juvenile growth stage and can help in reporting and verifying carbon stocks in young forests.
Satellite based integrated approaches to modelling spatial carbon stock and carbon sequestration potential of different land uses of Northeast India			The study aims to estimate and predict the aboveground biomass, carbon stock and carbon sequestration potential of different land uses of Northeast India and relate these estimates with the land use changes. Many applications such as carbon stock and sequestration monitoring, forest degradation monitoring, and climate change mitigation, require precise and timely estimation of forest biomass. Although traditional field inventory can reliably estimate forest biomass, remote sensing is emerging as an alternate and fast approach to cover larger area with relative precision for biomass estimation. In this study, a combined approach of field inventory and Landsat OLI derived vegetation indices were used in spatial modelling of aboveground biomass and carbon stock in different land uses. A stepwise multilinear regression algorithm was used to derive the model that used Landsat derived NDVI, SAVI and ARVI as predicators. The predicted AGB ranged from 14.32 to 185.95 Mg ha(-1) with an average of 148.78 Mg ha(-1). The developed model that used combined vegetation indices showed correlation of R-2 = 0.79 with an RMSE of 51.04 Mg ha(-1). The present study also applied the empirical model (CO2FIX) to simulate the future scenario of carbon stock and carbon sequestration potential of the different land uses. The carbon stock potential of different land uses were 182.31 Mg ha(-1), 158.91 Mg ha(-1), 134.98 Mg ha(-1), 169.26 Mg ha(-1), 133.84, 89.95 Mg ha(-1), 128.3 Mg ha(-1) and 61.36 Mg ha(-1) in Tropical forest, Subtropical forest, Temperate forest, Tropical plantation, Subtropical plantation, Temperate plantation, Shifting fallows and Agricultural land, respectively.
Scale issues in developing a deforestation baseline for the region of the Noel Kempff Mercado climate action project, Bolivia			Development in the tropics usually is associated with deforestation, and it is important to understand the dimensions of this development, its driving factors, and possible mitigation schemes. Global interest in tropical forests is more and more focused on their role in the global carbon cycle from the perspective of carbon emissions produced by deforestation (e.g., Detwiler and Hall 1988) and their potential role to store carbon (e.g. Brown et al. 1993), as well as concern for conservation of species and ecosystems. Climate Action Projects (CAPs) in the developing tropics, financed by the developed world, are put forth as one means to satisfy both carbon emission offsets and conservation of threatened ecosystems (Brown, Masera, and Sathaye 2000). Forest conservation, or averted deforesta-tion, CAPs currently are not eligible activities under the Kyoto Protocol mostly due to the perceived uncertainties in determining key elements of a project cycle, particularly the baseline or the business-as-usual deforestation rate and pattern. However, many developing countries, and investors, continue to be interested in developing forest conservation projects given the potential for such projects to slow or even reverse high rates of deforestation while at the same time generating credible greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions. For averted deforestation projects (and for all carbon sequestration projects) carbon credits can be earned only for that carbon that is in addition to a business-as-usual baseline. In an effort to develop reliable methods for projecting deforestation baselines at various scales, we have recently applied the land use-change model GEOMOD (Hall et al. 1995a; Pontius, Cornell, and Hall 2001) to a number of sites in Latin America (Brown 2002; Brown et al. 2006). Our approach is sensitive to larger regional patterns of change, and hence we were able to use it to analyze deforestation in six areas of Central and South America and to project what would happen to these landscapes if no measures to limit deforestation were implemented. For each analysis, we generally have worked with data sets provided to us by project partners and in the process have discovered that both map scale and scale of analysis play a significant role in identifying both spatial land-use pattern and rate drivers, depending on the degree of human development already occurring in a region. We found that it is often difficult to capture the trajectory of change fully if the scale of analysis is limited to the local or even regional scale of interest, because the factors that drive land-use change are often operative at a scale larger than the locality affected. In this chapter we explain how we developed a methodology to capture development pressure in the region of the Noel Kempff Mercado National Park (NKMNP), a frontier environment in northeastern Bolivia. We also show how the establishment of credible baselines in such locales will require analysis of both coarse- And fine-grained spatial data. © 2007 by the University of New Mexico Press. All rights reserved.
Scenario-modelling for the sustainable management of non-timber forest products in tropical ecosystems			Abstract Ecosystems degradation, and consequently biodiversity loss, has severe impacts on people around the world. The Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) is one of the international initiatives that have emerged to inform policy makers and aid decisions to prevent further global biodiversity loss, focusing on the interdependence between natural systems and human culture. IPBES promotes the use of scenarios and modelling approaches as a fundamental tool to advance the understanding of the relationships between drivers of change, Natures Contributions to People (NCP), and social systems. Local-scale case studies with a system approach demonstrating how current knowledge can be used to inform decision-making are still scarce. Here, we present a comprehensive conceptual model and a series of four scenarios under different policies for shea tree species management, as a case-study of applying systems thinking and the NCP concept to a local-scale socio-ecological system. We first characterized the central processes, NCP, drivers and pressures affecting the shea tree system, to investigate the impacts of the multiple uses of the shea tree species on the system as a whole. We then described potential policy options, developed four scenarios, and evaluated them by a Bayesian Belief Network (BBN). We predicted qualitative outcomes of the proposed scenarios: Business-as-usual (BAU), "Conservation and fair trade", "Agroforestry and fair trade" and "Industrial development". We found that the scenarios focussing on conservation, fair trade and agroforestry, can improve the conservation status of shea trees, and enhance wellbeing in the local communities. In this case study, we demonstrate that the development of a comprehensive conceptual model at a local scale can be a useful exercise to identify opportunities for effective policy strategies and social innovation. The shea tree case study can provide an example for modelling non-timber forest products in other regions around the world that face similar drivers and pressures. Species for which this model could be adapted include Central and South American species such as the Brazilian nut (Bertholletia excelsa), cocoa (Theobroma cacao), andiroba (Carapa guianensis), acai (Euterpe oleracea) and the wax palm (Ceroxylon quindiuense). The model and workflow applied here may thus be used to understand similar socio-ecological systems with local and international economic value across the Neotropical region. Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Seagrass meadow ecosystem and its restoration: A review			Seagrass meadows have long been recognized for the important ecosystem services they provide. Seagrass meadows not only play critical roles in near shore primary production and nutrient cycling, but also provide feeding, refuge and nursery habitat for a diverse array of marine organisms, and increase the stability of the seafloor. However, seagrass meadows have suffered great declines in the last century from anthropogenic effects, which in turn stimulated studies of seagrass ecosystems as well as development of restoration techniques. More recently, China has initiated restoration work on seagrass ecosystems in direct response to observed and anticipated loss of seagrass habitat. Here, four topics are reviewed that form the basis of the Chinese restoration effort:(1) Seagrass meadow ecosystem analysis, (2) Declines of seagrass meadows and its reasons, (3) Progress of seagrass restoration techniques abroad and in China, and (4) Actionable guidance. Under (1), seagrass species and their distribution, functions and ecosystem services will be inventoried. Although seagrasses globally have comparatively (to terrestrial systems) low taxonomic diversity they still have discernible niches whose ecological limits must be understood in order to forecast their response and resiliency when faced with local stressors. Because seagrasses have successfully colonized all but the most polar seas and thus have occupied wider latitudinal ranges as compared with the other major coastal marine habitats (mangroves and coral reefs in tropical regions, salt marshes in temperate regions), defining their ecological limits is a significant challenge. Moreover, although seagrasses indisputably provide important and extensive natural resource services, specifically identifying those services in the context of the near shore ecology and human needs are fundamental to establishing effective protection. Under (2), identification and mitigation of human stressors that impair or eliminate seagrasses in coastal waters is a fundamental step to creating a sustainable resource base. The impact of local, anthropogenic stressors (eutrophication, dredging and near shore engineering) needs also to be separated from far-field effects such as global warming, sea level change, natural diseases, and disturbance events such as typhoons in order to understand that which is manageable and that which is natural or beyond local boundaries and thus not practicable for intervention. Under (3), seagrass restoration has been practiced for decades, with the first documented attempt at seagrass restoration being carried out in the USA in 1947. However, it was not until the mid-1970s that development of seagrass restoration techniques began to move beyond the experimental stage. In the past 40 years there has been considerable development of restoration methodologies and techniques, and a significant increase in the number of locations and species involved. Nonetheless, because seagrass restoration typically takes place in open (uncontrolled or non-engineered) settings, the restoration process is widely recognized as being complex and expensive. The most common method has involved the transplantation of adult plants, because they result in an immediate presence of the seagrass community. Some of these methods have involved transplantation of seagrass and associated sediments, whilst with other methods only the seagrass plant is utilized. But in recent years, new seeding techniques for a few species have been developed and successfully employed. Regardless of the method, the general success of previous restoration attempts have been variable and unfortunately in many cases, have resulted in limited survival and coverage (average success has been 50%). In most cases the transplantation of seagrasses relies on harvest from otherwise healthy meadows, which for some species (but not many in China) have extremely slow recovery rates, making donor bed impacts a concern for those species. Nonetheless, there remains an urgent need for better understanding of the limiting factors for seagrass in a restoration context and to employ new advances in applied research and methodology to conduct seagrass restoration in a cost-effective manner over large spatial extents. Finally, under (4) we propose to provide actionable guidance for seagrass conservation and restoration efforts in China. China covers two geographic bioregions and has a vast (but poorly inventoried) expanse of seagrass meadows along its coast. But China has not yet developed a comprehensive study of seagrass meadow ecosystems and applied practices in restoration. As a consequence of limited studies and popular understanding of the importance of seagrass resources, seagrass meadows in China are widely vulnerable and threatened. Consequently, seagrass meadows in China have, like many other under-managed seagrass ecosystems worldwide, suffered great declines from excessive emission of nutrients and pollution of coastal waters. Although there have been some limited studies that have been highly focused on seagrass restoration, China's ability to incorporate restoration into a management strategy has been severely limited by knowledge gaps identified in the four topic areas defined here. Without a balance of studies involving inventories, functions and services, population ecology and disturbance responses in which to place seagrass restoration in context, it is likely that (as occurred in the U.S. during the 1960's and 1970's) seagrass restoration could be perceived as an inappropriate solution to many coastal development problems, resulting in failed projects and continued seagrass losses. We conclude that conservation and restoration of seagrass meadows should be integrated with coastal planning in China for sustainable seagrass ecosystem services.
Seasonal nitrous oxide emissions from different land uses and their controlling factors in a tropical riparian ecosystem			An important ecological service provided by tropical riparian ecosystems is the mitigation of nutrient pollution (e.g. nitrate) from surrounding agricultural areas. However, a negative impact of this nutrient remediation may be that the ecozone also functions as a major emitter of nitrous oxide (N2O). We hypothesized that the high inorganic nitrogen, organic carbon, and soil water content in tropical riparian ecosystems enhances N2O production through rapid nitrification and denitrification processes. This study was therefore designed to quantify the variability in N2O emissions in such an ecosystem in northern Thailand with specific emphasis on (1) different land uses (comparing replicate leguminous reforestation areas with conventional maize agriculture with high rates of nitrogen fertilizer addition), and (2) temporal aspects (comparing wet and dry seasons). Our aim was to quantify N2O emissions and to identify the major drivers controlling these emissions. Using in situ closed chambers the annual average emissions of N2O from the leguminous reforestation area (3.3 kg N2O-N ha(-1) y(-1)) was significantly higher than agricultural areas with maize (2.2 kg N2O-N ha(-1) y(-1))). The seasonal variation results indicated that the rate of N2O flux in the wet season was higher than in the dry season. The variations of N2O emission rates were strongly correlated with water filled pore space (WFPS), denitrification, and microbial biomass C, but not with nitrification. This study indicates that when inorganic N and soil organic C are sufficient, WFPS plays an important role in controlling N2O emissions from denitrification. Comparatively, annual N2O emissions from the tropical riparian reforestation were similar to that reported for temperate riparian forests and other ecosystems. Although the annual N2O emissions from the maize agricultural area were comparable to other crops cultivated in riparian ecosystems, it was higher than the N2O fluxes from crops grown in non-riparian zones. We conclude that agricultural lands located in tropical riparian zones do not represent a major hotspot of N2O emissions and that this does not diminish the positive benefits they provide in relation to other aspects of ecosystem service provision. (C) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Secondary forest fragments offer important carbon and biodiversity cobenefits			Tropical forests store large amounts of carbon and high biodiversity, but are being degraded at alarming rates. The emerging global Forest and Landscape Restoration (FLR) agenda seeks to limit global climate change by removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere through the growth of trees. In doing so, it may also protect biodiversity as a free cobenefit, which is vital given the massive shortfall in funding for biodiversity conservation. We investigated whether natural forest regeneration on abandoned pastureland offers such cobenefits, focusing for the first time on the recovery of taxonomic diversity (TD), phylogenetic diversity (PD) and functional diversity (FD) of trees, including the recovery of threatened and endemic species richness, within isolated secondary forest (SF) fragments. We focused on the globally threatened Brazilian Atlantic Forest, where commitments have been made to restore 1 million hectares under FLR. Three decades after land abandonment, regenerating forests had recovered ~20% (72 Mg/ha) of the above-ground carbon stocks of a primary forest (PF), with cattle pasture containing just 3% of stocks relative to PFs. Over this period, SF recovered ~76% of TD, 84% of PD and 96% of FD found within PFs. In addition, SFs had on average recovered 65% of threatened and ~30% of endemic species richness of primary Atlantic forest. Finally, we find positive relationships between carbon stock and tree diversity recovery. Our results emphasize that SF fragments offer cobenefits under FLR and other carbon-based payments for ecosystem service schemes (e.g. carbon enhancements under REDD+). They also indicate that even isolated patches of SF could help to mitigate climate change and the biodiversity extinction crisis by recovering species of high conservation concern and improving landscape connectivity.
Secondary forest growth deviation from chronosequence predictions in central Amazonia			Nearly all published rates of secondary forest (SF) regrowth for Amazonia are inferred from chronosequences. We examined SF regrowth on abandoned pastures over a 4-year period to determine if measured rates of forest recovery differ from chronosequence predictions. We studied the emergence, development and death of over 1300 stems in 10 SFs representing three age classes (< 1-5, 6-10 and 11-14 years old). Mean tree biomass accumulation in both the < 1-5 and 6-10 years old (4.4 and 5.7 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1), respectively) abandoned pastures was lower than predicted and deviated significantly (57% and 41%) from rates estimated from the chronosequence. The older SFs, with a mean growth rate of 9.9 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1) followed the rate predicted by the chronosequence. Understocking was the primary cause of low biomass recovery rates in the youngest forests; although the youngest stands had a diameter at breast height increment three times the oldest stands, the youngest stands lacked sufficient density to cumulatively produce high biomass accumulation rates. Four years of measurement indicated that the youngest stands had developed 59% of the stems measured in the older stands during the same time period. The 6-10-year-old stands were rapidly self-thinning and approached stem density values measured in the same aged stands at the onset of the study. Mortality was high for all stands, with 54% of the original stems remaining after 4 years in intermediate-aged stands. The forests were dominated by the tree Vismia, which represented 55-66% of the biomass in all stands. The Vismia share of the biomass was decreasing over time, with other genera replacing the pioneer. Our measured rates of regrowth indicate that generalized estimates of forest regrowth through chronosequence studies will overestimate forest regrowth for the youngest forests that were under land use for longer time-periods before abandonment. Certified Emission Reductions under the Clean Development Mechanism of the Kyoto protocol should consider these results when predicting and compensating for carbon sequestered under natural forest management.
Secondary forests as temporary carbon sinks?: The economic impact of accounting methods on reforestation projects in the tropics			Tropical forestry is often not competitive with agricultural land uses such as pasture for cattle ranching. Additional revenues from carbon sequestration generated by the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) of the Kyoto Protocol can change this situation. In three different zones of north-western Ecuador, minimum compensation payments for carbon sequestration were determined, which would make reforestation a feasible land-use alternative. Based on our findings that these minimum prices depend on the net benefit of the respective land-use alternatives, and on the accounting regimes for CDM sink projects, we applied the accounting rules for temporary and long-term Certified Emission Reductions (CER) to two reforestation projects: forest plantation and natural regrowth of secondary forest. A comparison of these alternatives showed that secondary forest is an attractive alternative under both accounting regimes because of its low establishment costs and relative early timber revenues. After identifying the zone most suitable for carbon sink projects, we calculated net benefits of land-use changes in the event that certain prices for emission reductions were actually paid. We found that secondary forest becomes economically attractive, if the price of permanent credits is above $4.5/tCO(2), whereas forest plantations require permanent CER prices of $7.0/tCO(2). In both cases, the results are within the price margins forecasted by various institutions for the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol. The presented methodology is meant to support the decision making process on the supply side of a future CER market. Opportunity costs of land-use changes have to be analyzed carefully before deciding in favor of long binding forestry projects. Assigning temporary credits to naturally regrown secondary forests could-although excluded from CDM during the first commitment period-combine the advantages of a flexible accounting regime with the positive economic and ecological effects of this competitive land use. (c) 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Secondary forests in Peru: differential provision of ecosystem services compared to other post-deforestation forest transitions			While tropical forests are undergoing rapid transformation as a result of direct human impacts, many deforested areas are reverting to forest through natural or human-assisted regeneration. This situation provides a window of opportunity to implement forest management strategies to achieve environmental objectives while promoting social development and contributing to local livelihoods. Successful forest management policy, however, depends on how well we can appraise environmental consequences as well as on the value of ecosystem services that these regrowing forests provide. Here, we review the published literature to synthesize the ecosystem services provided by three types of forest transitions: naturally-regenerated secondary forests, agroforestry systems, and tree plantations, in the coastal, Andean, and Amazonian regions of Peru. We then discuss the potential of these regrowing forests as nature-based solutions that can help in the adoption of policies that promote their sustainable use and conservation. Our literature analysis reveals that forest transitions provide significant services in offsetting carbon emissions, providing habitats for biodiversity, and regulating hydrological services. However, the amount and importance of ecosystem services vary depending on the forest transition type. Secondary forests offer multiple services, representing a low-cost, immediate, and highly effective strategy in mitigating the climate and biodiversity crises and ultimately providing vital ecosystem services to society, such as water provision. In contrast, exotic tree plantations have negative effects on water regulation services. We highlight the potential of secondary forests for land management that supports multiple and integrated environmental initiatives. This framework can guide policy decisions to choose appropriate options on forest transition types most suitable to achieve specific end goals at local and regional scales, considering both ecosystem services and disservices to avoid trade-offs in which the achievement of one goal is detrimental to another.
Secondary forests offset less than 10% of deforestation-mediated carbon emissions in the Brazilian Amazon			Secondary forests are increasing in the Brazilian Amazon and have been cited as an important mechanism for reducing net carbon emissions. However, our understanding of the contribution of secondary forests to the Amazonian carbon balance is incomplete, and it is unclear to what extent emissions from old-growth deforestation have been offset by secondary forest growth. Using MapBiomas 3.1 and recently refined IPCC carbon sequestration estimates, we mapped the age and extent of secondary forests in the Brazilian Amazon and estimated their role in offsetting old-growth deforestation emissions since 1985. We also assessed whether secondary forests in the Brazilian Amazon are growing in conditions favourable for carbon accumulation in relation to a suite of climatic, landscape and local factors. In 2017, the 129,361 km(2)of secondary forest in the Brazilian Amazon stored 0.33 +/- 0.05 billion Mg of above-ground carbon but had offset just 9.37% of old-growth emissions since 1985. However, we find that the majority of Brazilian secondary forests are situated in contexts that are less favourable for carbon accumulation than the biome average. Our results demonstrate that old-growth forest loss remains the most important factor determining the carbon balance in the Brazilian Amazon. Understanding the implications of these findings will be essential for improving estimates of secondary forest carbon sequestration potential. More accurate quantification of secondary forest carbon stocks will support the production of appropriate management proposals that can efficiently harness the potential of secondary forests as a low-cost, nature-based tool for mitigating climate change.
Secondary Succession under a Slash-and-burn Regime in a Tropical Montane Cloud Forest: Soil and Vegetation Characteristics			Tropical montane cloud forest (TMCF) areas in southern Mexico are commonly used for growing maize and companion crops under slash-and-burn agriculture. As a result, the landscape is being transformed into a mosaic of crop fields, secondary forest and primary forests. Despite being a widespread process, very little is known about forest regeneration in TMCF areas. This chapter describes secondary succession in the TMCF of El Rincon Alto, Oaxaca, Mexico, with particular reference to soil and vegetation characteristics, taking advantage of successional chronosequences spanning a century of forest development. Cultivation practices cause severe losses of soil and carbon; the original vegetation and soil organic horizons vanish. Such effects are reversed, in part, during earlier stages of secondary succession. Soil layers, including those with organic horizons, begin to accumulate. Epiphytes, low-stature plants and shrubs begin to colonize very early during succession. Species richness of shrubs, geophytes and low-stature plants peak within the first 15 years after abandonment. The largest recorded decline in concentration of soil cations, and the highest annual rates of soil carbon sequestration also characterize this period. A pine-dominated community characterizes the first 10-75 years. Early successional species do not prosper under this forest canopy and an emergent stratum of broadleaf trees eventually replaces the former pine forest. Colonization of trees, lianas and climbing plants exceeds local extinction rates during the first century of forest development. The dominant groups of terrestrial and epiphytic plants are trees and liverworts, respectively, during all studied stages of forest development. Self-thinning of the first colonizing trees took place between 45 and 75 years after abandonment and coincided with a second increase in abundance of shrubs and other low-stature plants, but tree basal area did not decline significantly. Species of terrestrial plants typical of early stages are rare or absent in late successional stages. Thus, disturbances generated by autogenic processes such as natural tree fall are different from allogenic disturbances such as fires and landslides. Soil becomes increasingly acidic and infertile during forest development, a problem that is aggravated by the presence of soluble aluminium. Such acidity fosters mineral hydrolysis, releasing cations to the soil. Soil N/P ratios steadily decrease during forest development. We conclude that environmental changes derived from slash-and-burn processes increase landscape and species diversity under the long fallow regimes observed.
Secondary tropical forests recover dung beetle functional diversity and trait composition			Secondary forests dominate some human-modified tropical biomes, and this is expected to increase via both abandonment of marginal agricultural land as well as forest and landscape restoration programmes. A key question is whether promoting the recovery and protection of secondary tropical forests will return invertebrate functional diversity and associated functional traits. Dung beetles are ideal for assessing functional diversity as they play vital roles in several ecosystem functions, including seed dispersal, nutrient cycling and bioturbation. We examined how taxonomic and functional diversity, and the functional trait composition of native dung beetle species recovers in naturally regenerating secondary forests in comparison to both cattle pastures and primary forest in the Colombian Choco-Andes, a global hotspot of threatened biodiversity. Using a space-for-time approach, we found that taxonomic and functional diversity recovered to levels comparable to primary forest within approximately 30 years of secondary forest regrowth. Functional richness and FD, measures of the diversity of traits present in a community, were similar in secondary and primary forest, but significantly lower in pasture. Rolling dung beetle species were positively associated with forest habitats, particularly primary, while dwelling species were more common in pasture. Thus, the functional trait composition of secondary forests was more similar to primary forest than to pasture. The ability of secondary forests to rapidly accumulate primary-forest dung beetle functional diversity, and a representative suite of functional traits, provides an opportunity to protect biodiversity and ecosystem functioning, especially in regions where marginal agricultural land allows cost-effective conservation actions.
Sedimentary blue carbon dynamics based on chronosequential observations in a tropical restored mangrove forest			Among the many ecosystem services provided by mangroves, the sequestration of large amounts of organic carbon (OC) in marine ecosystems (also known as "blue carbon") has given these unique ecological environments enormous global attention. While there are many studies on the blue carbon potential of intact mangroves (i.e., naturally growing), there have been very few studies on restored mangroves (i.e., planted). This study aims to address this knowledge gap by examining the sediment development process during the early colonization (rehabilitation) of mangroves in an OC-poor estuary in Panay Island, Philippines. Based on source apportionment of multiple end-members in the sedimentary organic matter, the contribution of mangrove plant material was higher at the older sites compared to the younger sites or bare sediments where there is a higher contribution of riverine input. A clear increasing gradient according to mangrove development was observed for bulk OC (0.06-3.4gμmolgg-1), porewater OC (292-2150gμmolgL-1), sedimentary OC stocks (3.13-77.4gMggCgha-1), and OC loading per surface area (7-223gμmolgm-2). The estimated carbon accumulation rates (6-33gmolgm-2gyr-1) based on chronosequence are within the global ranges and show an increasing pattern with the age of mangroves. Hence, the sediments of relatively young mangrove forests appear to be a significant potential C sink, and short-term chronosequence-based observations can efficiently define the importance of mangrove restoration programs as a potential carbon sequestration pathway. © 2023 Raghab Ray et al.
Seed dispersal by frugivorous bats in Central Guyana and a description of previously unknown plant-animal interactions			Species of bats in the subfamilies Stenodermatinae and Carolliinae are primarily frugivores, and through the ingestion of fruit and defecation of seeds, they play a crucial role in their environment through the dispersal of early successional and pioneer plants contributing to reforestation. These ecosystem services provided by frugivorous bats are becoming more critical with time, as anthropogenic habitat destructicin continues to rise. The objective of this study was to survey the plant species dispersed by frugivorous bats in a tropical rainforest in Guyana. Fecal samples were taken from captured frugivorous bats and stomach contents were taken from a representative collection. The four most common bats were Artibeus planirostris, A. obscurus, A. lituratus, and Carollia perspicillata, which accounted for 67% of total captures in mist nets set in the forest understory. Twenty plant species were identified in fecal and stomach content samples with the most abundant (Ficus nymphaeifolia, Piper bartlingianum, Cecropia latiloba, and C. sciadophylla) accounting for 60% of the total. Cecropia latiloba, which is an early colonizer of floodplains throughout the Guiana Shield and Amazon River Basin was previously unknown to be bat dispersed. Seven plant species were documented as being dispersed by nine bat species for the first time. These results enhance our understanding of seed dispersal by Neotropical bats, specifically by revealing previously unknown bat/plant relationships.
Seed rain into a degraded tropical peatland in Central Kalimantan, Indonesia			Forested tropical peatlands in Southeast Asia are important as global carbon stores and for biodiversity conservation yet are being rapidly converted to agriculture or degraded into fire-prone non-forest vegetation. Although large areas have been abandoned, there is little evidence for the subsequent recovery of forest. As part of a study of forest degradation and recovery, we assessed seed rain into an area of non-forest regrowth in degraded tropical peatland in the former Mega Rice Project: an abandoned attempt to convert 1 million hectares of tropical peatland for rice production in Central Kalimantan, Indonesia. Fifty seed traps were placed in the open and fifty under trees. Seeds were collected every 15±3days for 1year. Seed rain and foreign seed rain (species different from the tree over the trap) was higher for traps under trees (1127.8 seeds and 465.0 seedsm-2y-1 respectively) than for traps in the open (95.2 seedsm-2y-1). Foreign seed rain consisted largely of species that also grow in mature forest, but was dominated by a few abundant wind-dispersed species (particularly from the woody liana, Uncaria elliptica, and the tree, Combretocarpus rotundatus) and the majority of animal-dispersed foreign seeds were found under trees. While seed rain both in the open and under trees appears sufficient for the development of woody plant cover, diversity will be limited in the early stages of succession. We recommend enrichment planting with species that would have been present before forest destruction but are not represented in the current seed rain. © 2013 Elsevier Ltd.
Seeding ecological restoration of tropical forests: Priority setting under REDD+			Tropical deforestation continues to be the major driver of biodiversity loss and a considerable contributor to climate change. Increasing numbers of forest-dependent rural poor rely on degraded forest for their livelihoods. Ecological restoration of tropical forests has the potential to not only contribute to biodiversity conservation and climate mitigation, but also poverty alleviation. REDD+ provides a potentially powerful mechanism for supporting ecological restoration of tropical forests in developing countries. Decisions on when and how forest restoration activities should be implemented will require a detailed understanding of the ecological and socioeconomic context of the particular region. This paper focuses on three seed-related ecological traits of tropical trees which limit the likelihood of natural regeneration of degraded secondary forest or the recovery of abandoned agricultural land. These factors may also provide significant constraints to restoration through direct seeding and planting. A comprehensive review of 367 papers was conducted to evaluate masting phenology, seed storage and seed dispersal distances across important tropical timber tree families. This information is synthesised to identify the implications of these seed-related traits for ecological restoration of tropical forests and its integration into the REDD+ framework. Phenological monitoring, targeted nursery capacity building with a focus on recalcitrant and threatened timber species, the promotion of trees within the agricultural matrix, and conservation of remnant trees, are all important considerations. There is a major gap in our understanding of seed dispersal in heterogeneous landscapes, which must be addressed if we are to develop sustainable strategies for restoration in human dominated landscapes. (C) 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Seedling diversity in actively and passively restored tropical forest understories			Alternative methods for restoring tropical forests influence the ecological processes that shape recruitment of understory species. In turn, the traits of species recruited will influence the ecological processes the forests provide now and over the long term. We assess the phylogenetic and functional structure of seedlings beneath monoculture plantations, mixed-species plantations (both active restoration) and regenerating selectively logged native forests (passive restoration), considering traits of specific leaf area (SLA, including within-species variation), leaf nitrogen and phosphorus content, life-form, potential plant height, and dispersal type. Monoculture plantations comprised seedlings that were more closely related then would be expected by chance (i.e., phylogenetically clustered), and regenerating forest contained species more distantly related then would be expected by chance (i.e., phylogenetically overdispersed). This suggests that seedlings beneath monocultures assemble through environmental filtering and through the dispersal limitation of predictable functional guilds. However, dispersal limitation is frequently overcome by human-assisted dispersal, increasing trait diversity. Comparing SLA values revealed that regenerating forests recruit seedlings with both high and low mean and variation of SLA, leading to higher overall diversity. Regenerating forest seedlings showed signs of environmental filtering, only based on within-species variation of SLA. Regenerating forest understories appear to favor species that show a high intraspecific variation in SLA values (e.g., Pterocarpus indicus Willd.) and at the same time provided habitat for later successional seedlings that show a lower intraspecific variation in SLA (e.g., Canarium luzonicum (Blume) A.Gray). This trait diversity suggests limiting similarity or competitive exclusion may be reduced because of niche differences, allowing species with different traits to coexist. Phylogenetic and functionally distinct species are restricted in their regeneration capacity, many of which are of conservation significance (under the IUCN Red List). Reforestation projects should maximize desired ecological services (including conservation value) by actively managing for the recruitment of species that are phylogenetically and functionally (including intraspecifically) distinct. This management aim will increase the probability of fulfilling a wider array of niche spaces and potentially increase the diversity of ecosystem services provided.
Selecting tree species to restore forest under climate change conditions: Complementing species distribution models with field experimentation			The long-term success of forest restoration programs can be improved using climate-based species distribution models (SDMs) to predict which tree species will tolerate climate change. However, as SDMs cannot estimate if species will recruit at these habitats, determining whether their predictions apply to early life-cycle stages of trees is critical to support such a usage. For this, we propose sowing seeds of the focal tree species under the current climate and simulated climate change conditions in target restoration sites. Thus, using of SDMs to design climate-adaptive forest restoration programs would be supported if the differences in habitat occupancy probabilities of species they predict between the current and future climate concurs with the observed differences in recruitment rates of species when sowed under the current climate and simulated climate change conditions. To test this hypothesis, we calibrated SDMs for Vachellia pennatula and Prosopis laevigata, two pioneer tree species widely recommended to restore human-degraded drylands in Mexico, and transferred them to climate change scenarios. After that, we applied the experimental approach proposed above to validate the predictions of SDMs. These models predicted that V. pennatula will decrease its habitat occupancy probabilities across Mexico, while P. laevigata was predicted to keep out their current habitat occupancy probabilities, or even increase them, in climate change scenarios. The results of the field experiment supported these predictions, as recruitment rates of V. pennatula were lower under simulated climate change than under the current climate, while no differences were found for the recruitment rates of P. laevigata between these environmental conditions. These findings demonstrate that SDMs provide meaningful insights for designing climate-adaptive forest restoration programs but, before applying this methodology, predictions of these models must be validated with field experiments to determine whether the focal tree species will recruit under climate change conditions. Moreover, as the pioneer trees used to test our proposal seem to be differentially sensitive to climate change, this approach also allows establishing what species must be prescribed to restore forests with a view to the future and what species must be avoided in these practices.
Selective logging emissions and potential emission reductions from reduced-impact logging in the Congo Basin			To estimate carbon emissions from selective logging in Central Africa, we employed the reduced-impact logging for carbon emissions reductions (RIL-C) protocol to quantify baseline carbon emissions from legal timber harvests by source (i.e., hauling, skidding, and felling). We modeled the relationships between emissions and biophysical conditions, logging practices, and forest policies and then used these models to estimate potential emission reductions from full implementation of RIL-C practices. We applied the method in 8 forest management enterprises (FMEs; i.e., concessions) in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), 9 in Gabon, and 6 in the Republic of Congo (RoC). Committed logging emissions expressed per cubic meter of timber harvested (to control for differences in logging intensities) ranged from 0.63 Mg C m(-3) in a FME in RoC to 4.8 Mg C m(-3) in a FME in Gabon, with an overall average of 2.1 Mg C m(-3). Logging emissions were dominated by damage caused by road and log landing construction (i.e., hauling; 50%) and felling (43%; includes carbon in extracted logs). Total emissions represented only about 9% of unlogged forest biomass carbon stocks. Average emissions were highest in Gabon (2.65 Mg C m(-3)) followed by DRC (1.84 Mg C m(-3)) and RoC (1.54 Mg C m(-3)). Emissions from concessions certified by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC, N = 6) and those that were not certified (N = 17) did not differ. Nearly half (51%) of logging emissions could be avoided without reducing timber yields if all best examples of RIL-C logging practices observed were applied in the same FME. At the country level, if all FMEs were to utilize these practices, emissions reductions would be 34% in RoC, 45% in DRC, and 62% in Gabon. When combined with country-level logging statistics, emissions from selective logging as currently practiced in the six countries of the Congo Basin are equivalent to 40% of the region's total emissions from deforestation.
Selective logging impacts on soil microbial communities and functioning in Bornean tropical forest			Rainforests provide vital ecosystem services that are underpinned by plant-soil interactions. The forests of Borneo are globally important reservoirs of biodiversity and carbon, but a significant proportion of the forest that remains after large-scale agricultural conversion has been extensively modified due to timber harvest. We have limited understanding of how selective logging affects ecosystem functions including biogeochemical cycles driven by soil microbes. In this study, we sampled soil from logging gaps and co-located intact lowland dipterocarp rainforest in Borneo. We characterised soil bacterial and fungal communities and physicochemical properties and determined soil functioning in terms of enzyme activity, nutrient supply rates, and microbial heterotrophic respiration. Soil microbial biomass, alpha diversity, and most soil properties and functions were resistant to logging. However, we found logging significantly shifted soil bacterial and fungal community composition, reduced the abundance of ectomycorrhizal fungi, increased the abundance of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, and reduced soil inorganic phosphorous concentration and nitrate supply rate, suggesting some downregulation of nutrient cycling. Within gaps, canopy openness was negatively related to ectomycorrhizal abundance and phosphomonoesterase activity and positively related to ammonium supply rate, suggesting control on soil phosphorus and nitrogen cycles via functional shifts in fungal communities. We found some evidence for reduced soil heterotrophic respiration with greater logging disturbance. Overall, our results demonstrate that while many soil microbial community attributes, soil properties, and functions may be resistant to selective logging, logging can significantly impact the composition and abundance of key soil microbial groups linked to the regulation of vital nutrient and carbon cycles in tropical forests.
Sensitivity and resistance of soil fertility indicators to land-use changes: New concept and examples from conversion of Indonesian rainforest to plantations			Tropical forest conversion to agricultural land leads to a strong decrease of soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks. While the decrease of the soil C sequestration function is easy to measure, the impacts of SOC losses on soil fertility remain unclear. Especially the assessment of the sensitivity of other fertility indicators as related to ecosystem services suffers from a lack of clear methodology. We developed a new approach to assess the sensitivity of soil fertility indicators and tested it on biological and chemical soil properties affected by rainforest conversion to plantations. The approach is based on (non-)linear regressions between SOC losses and fertility indicators normalized to their level in a natural ecosystem. Biotic indicators (basal respiration, microbial biomass, acid phosphatase), labile SOC pools (dissolved organic carbon and light fraction) and nutrients (total N and available P) were measured in Ah horizons from rainforests, jungle rubber, rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) and oil palm (Elaeis guineensis) plantations located on Sumatra. The negative impact of land-use changes on all measured indicators increased in the following sequence: Forest < jungle rubber < rubber < oil palm. The basal respiration, microbial biomass and nutrients were resistant to SOC losses, whereas the light fraction was lost stronger than SOC. Microbial C use efficiency was independent on land use. The resistance of C availability for microorganisms to SOC losses suggests that a decrease of SOC quality was partly compensated by litter input and a relative enrichment by nutrients. However, the relationship between the basal respiration and SOC was non-linear; i.e. negative impact on microbial activity strongly increased with SOC losses. Therefore, a small decrease of C content under oil palm compared to rubber plantations yielded a strong drop in microbial activity. Consequently, management practices mitigating SOC losses in oil palm plantations would strongly increase soil fertility and ecosystem stability. We conclude that the new approach enables quantitatively assessing the sensitivity and resistance of diverse soil functions to land-use changes and can thus be used to assess resilience of agroecosystems with various use intensities. © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Sensitivity of Tropical Forest to Heat Stress -Trop-Heat			Tropical forests are biodiversity hotspots and important biological conservation regions. They deliver key ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration and storage, and water for electricity generation via hydropower (a large source of electricity in many tropical countries) and freshwater provision, serving the needs of millions of people and fast-growing populations in these regions.   However, tropical regions have experienced the largest recent increases in heat extremes over the globe, with ongoing warming predicted to exceed the bounds of historic climate variability in the next two decades. This climate change has potentially large but poorly understood consequences for tropical forests.   Recent findings suggest that these critical forests appear at substantial risk, in terms of their vulnerability and exposure to warming and its extremes. For example, extreme temperatures in lowland forest reduces tree growth and carbon storage. Furthermore, in the tropical Andes, recent warming has been associated with increased mortality of species in the warm extreme of their thermal ranges, triggering a compositional change towards warm-adapted species across all elevations. The mechanisms underpinning reduced tree growth and species compositional changes remain largely unknown. To predict species composition changes and their implications for forest function and ecosystem services, a mechanistically-informed understanding of the physiological strategies employed by thermally resilient and susceptible species is needed.  At our unique warming experiments along elevation gradients in the tropics in the Colombian Andes and in Rwanda in the Albertine Ridge we obtain a range of responses to the warming treatment: some species have died, some have shown reduced growth, while others have increased their growth. Importantly, and contrary to some expectations, plant physiological responses to average site temperatures cannot predict growth patterns. Rather, preliminary evidence suggests that tree growth and survival in the North Andean region and in our experiments in Colombia and Rwanda, is related to species abilities to deal with heat stress. Multiple mechanisms may be involved in determining the ability of species to cope with heat stress, but their relative roles in different settings is unknown. In Rwanda, preliminary data suggest that the most successful species thermoregulate, cooling their leaves via high rates of evapotranspiration to cope with extreme temperature, while species that have shown reduced growth with warming reach very high leaf temperatures (ie they cannot thermoregulate). In contrast, in Colombia, the most successful species are those that emit isoprene to ameliorate heat stress suggesting enhanced thermotolerance may be a key mechanism. Overall, our results demonstrate an urgent need to understand how different tropical tree species cope with extreme rather than average temperatures.    Using our experiments in Colombia and Rwanda, this project will deliver new mechanistic understanding of heat stress physiology for tropical forests and possible links to plant growth responses to warming which will inform how we understand and predict composition changes along elevation and climate gradients. We will use a holistic combination of measurements not done before in any ecosystem- thermoregulation, thermal tolerance thresholds, in situ isoprene emissions, and their thermal plasticity- to evaluate tree heat stress strategies. We will combine our experimental data with mechanistic modelling to generalise our results to other ecosystems and with data from Andean trees to determine the extent to which the new understanding of species-level heat stress strategies can explain compositional changes in Andean forest tree species. Our project will support better prediction of future biodiversity shifts and forest function, tropical forest restoration and conservation.
Sequestering carbon in tropical forests: Experiments, policy implications, and climatic change			This article outlines the contribution of tropical deforestation to global warming and assesses the prospects for changes in tropical forest cover trends that would slow climate change. Deforestation releases greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, and reforestation removes them by sequestering carbon. An end to deforestation, coupled with reforestation, could become an important component in near-term strategies for mitigating climate change. To assess the likelihood of this scenario, this article reviews the effectiveness of recent efforts to conserve or create forests in tropical countries. These efforts could mark the beginning of a transition from deforestation to reforestation. A tropical forest transition could achieve substantial amounts of carbon sequestration if elites press for multiple means of conservation, the land productivity of agriculture improves, and nonfarm economic sectors absorb surplus rural labor.
Setting the Carbon Bar: Measurement, Reporting, and Verification in Bilateral Forestry Agreements			0
Setting the direction of sustainable restoration projects in peatlands considering ecosystem services: Case of Jambi and Sumatra Selatan, Indonesia			Conserving tropical forests and peatlands is considered a key strategy for international forest project cooperation and the promotion of carbon neutrality. Focusing on peatlands in the Sumatra Selatan and Jambi provinces in Indonesia, this study aimed to assess land-cover changes from 1992 to 2020 and associated ecosystem services to assist in the development of effective forest and peatland-related projects. This study first analyzed the historical land-cover changes as a baseline for establishing potential project scenarios. Carbon storage, habitat suitability, water yield, and crop production were selected as the key ecosystem services in the peatlands, and these were assessed for the current land cover and two possible project scenarios in 2050 - business-as-usual (BAU) and forest and wetland restoration (FOR) - using the Integrated Valuation of Ecosystem Services and Tradeoffs (InVEST) tool. In terms of land-cover changes, the area of forests and wetlands decreased, but that of agriculture, grassland, and built-up areas increased in the peatlands. Based on the land-cover scenarios, the carbon storage, habitat suitability, water yield, and crop production varied on 2.32-2,74 billion tC, 92.02-93.46 %, 16.45-16,91 billion m3, and 2.34-2.73 million ton, respectively. The total economic value of the ecosystem services for the current land cover was $75.41 billion, while that predicted for BAU and FOR was estimated to be $70.59 billion and $77.79 billion, respectively. Restoration plans have the environmental and economic benefit of provinciallevel assessment, so the development of appropriate projects for tropical forest and peatland conservation and restoration is necessary for international cooperation projects.
Shade tree diversity may not drive prey-predator interaction in coffee agroforests of the Western Ghats biodiversity hotspot, India			Agricultural intensification can decrease biodiversity and ecosystem services they deliver to agroecosystems. Diverse trees-shaded coffee is structurally and functionally complex and has biodiversity adequate for sustainable production of coffee and mitigation of biodiversity loss due to deforestation. However, shade tree simplification is intense in coffee agroforests worldwide, threatening their economic and environmental targets. In south India, native trees have been replaced by silver oak (Grevillea robusta) trees. Native trees-shaded coffee is floristically complex and diverse than oak-shaded coffee. We hypothesize that the natural prey removal fares better in native trees-shaded coffee than in oak-shaded coffee. Artificial caterpillar models of three colors were installed rotationally on leaves, stems, and branches of coffee plants in native trees-shaded- and oak-shaded coffee, and assessed the predation rates for fruiting and leaf-flushing periods of coffee to test this. Forty-four percent of the caterpillars were predated. Arthropods, and in particular the ants, were the predominant predators. Lizards followed by birds, and mammals were second, third, and fourth important predators of coffee agroforests. Overall, predation rates did not differ with the shade diversity, but lizard predation rates were higher in diverse trees-shaded coffee than in oak-shaded coffee. The predation rates were slightly higher in the fruiting season of coffee. Predation rates of any predator taxa were higher for the caterpillars placed on stems and branches than on leaves. The study does not support the hypothesis that the natural predation rates might be higher in floristically complex coffee agroforests, but highlights the biocontrol potential of lizards in diverse-shaded coffee.
Shade tree diversity, carbon sequestration, and epiphyte presence in coffee agroecosystems: A decade of smallholder management in San Ramon, Nicaragua			Coffee smallholder management practices have received attention for their potential to conserve biodiversity and sequester carbon by maintaining structural complexity, high canopy diversity, and minimal external inputs. We conducted shade tree surveys on 95 1000 m(2) research plots over a 10-year period to identify patterns of shade tree density and diversity, epiphyte presence, and carbon stocks within smallholder shade coffee systems of northern Nicaragua. We also analyzed each of these parameters with respect to management by comparing collectively-and individually-managed farms. Our results indicate that the overall shade tree density has decreased over time (F = 42.597, p < 0.001), but that diversity remained constant. Carbon stocks in coffee systems also showed a decreasing trend over time (F = 2.981, p = 0.056), most likely due to the decreasing tree densities. Epiphytic plant presence increased over time despite decreased host tree densities, suggesting either a change in management or improved habitat conditions for epiphytes. Research plots on individually-managed coffee farms generally had higher shade tree densities than those on collectively managed farms (t = 2.141, p = 0.037), but we found no differences in shade tree species richness or carbon stocks (t = 0.573, p = 0.568). We conclude that smallholder coffee farmers continue to conserve both shade tree diversity and epiphyte communities. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Shade-Grown Coffee in Colombia Benefits Soil Hydraulic Conductivity			Secondary tropical forests and coffee agroforestry systems contain fewer trees than native forests but can positively impact soil hydrological functions, such as water infiltration compared to the pasture land that they replace. However, for both land uses it remains in how far the soil hydraulic characteristics are comparable to that of native forest. Therefore, we investigated the saturated hydraulic conductivity (K-s) and some hydrophysical soil attributes in four land-use types: (i) a shade-grown coffee; (ii) a natural regenerated forest 15 years ago; (iii) a pasture; and (iv) a reference forest, in the municipality of La Jagua de Ibirico, Cesar department, Colombia. We determined historical land use and conducted soil sampling, using the Beerkan method to determine the K-s values. We also measured canopy cover, vegetation height, diameter at breast height and total number of trees in the forest covers. Our results indicate that K-s values were similar for the coffee and the reference forest, reflecting the positive effect of trees on soil hydrological functioning in agroforestry systems. Our results suggest that 15 years of forest regeneration after land abandonment in Sub-Andean Forest, can improve the soil hydraulic attributes. Additionally, soil water repellency was observed for the reference forest soil.
Shaping pollinator diversity through coffee agroforestry management: A meta-analytical approach			Pollinator diversity plays an important role in improving the resilience of pollination services. However, agricultural intensification is causing declines in pollinator diversity. Such losses could be mitigated and even reversed by agroforestry systems, whose structural complexity exceeds that of intensive agricultural systems. Research, primarily conducted in tropical regions, suggests that efficiently managing agroforestry systems can increase pollinator diversity. We performed a global meta-analysis to explore how coffee agroforestry management practices affect the diversity of bee pollinators. We employed 137 sets of results from 20 studies that had been conducted at widely distributed locations across four of the seven continents. More specifically, we investigated the impact of augmenting floral resources (60 sets of results) and shade-tree cover (43 sets of results) and reducing the distance to natural forests (34 sets of results). Additionally, we examined key moderating factors, including climatic conditions, pollinator sociality, the metrics used to describe pollinator diversity, pollinator sampling methods, the metrics used to characterise the effects of management practices and floral resource type. We observed that bee pollinator diversity broadly increased as local floral resources increased in tropical coffee agroforestry systems. Shade-tree cover and proximity to natural forests did not broadly influence bee pollinator diversity. However, the strength and direction of the relationships between the agroforestry management practices and bee pollinator diversity were moderated by different factors, mainly climatic conditions and pollinator sociality. Our findings underscore the importance of managing coffee agroforestry systems to maximise bee diversity, which is crucial for coffee plant pollination. The broader objective should be to ensure the availability of resources that promote pollinator fitness, effective pollination and, as a consequence, crop yields.Through a global meta-analysis, we explored how coffee agroforestry management practices (i.e., local floral resources, shade-tree cover and distance to natural forests) affect the diversity of bee pollinators. Additionally, we analysed key moderating factors: climate, pollinator sociality, diversity metrics, sampling methods, metrics to characterise management practices and floral resource types. In tropical coffee agroforests, bee pollinator diversity increased with the rise in local floral resources. Shade-tree cover and forest proximity had limited influence, moderated by various factors, primarily climatic conditions. image
Shift from ecosystem P to N limitation at precipitation gradient in tropical dry forests at Yucatan, Mexico			The effect of precipitation regime on N and P cycles in tropical forests is poorly understood, despite global climate models project total precipitation reductions during the 21st Century. I investigated the influence of variation in annual precipitation (1240-642 mm yr(-1)) on N and P intra-system cycling along a precipitation regime gradient at Yucatan including 12 mature, tropical dry forests (TDFs) growing under otherwise similar conditions (similar annual temperature, rainfall seasonality and geological substrate). I analyzed N and P storage and turnover in the forest floor and mineral soil and explored the dependence of these processes and pools on precipitation level. The study findings indicate that with decreasing precipitation the litterfall decreases slightly (10%), while nutrient use efficiency increases by 20% for N, and by 40% for P. Decomposition rate and nutrient release was smallest in the dry extremity of precipitation regime. The difference between N and P turnover times in the forest floor and in organic matter indicates that different nutrients control the ecosystem function across the precipitation gradient. The data from this study reveals a pattern of limitation shifting from P towards N with decreasing annual precipitation. I suggest that the long-term consequences of the expected decrease in precipitation in many tropical dry regions would changes N and P supply could have long-term negative effects on primary productivity and future carbon storage in TDFs.
Shifting cultivation and logging change soil organic carbon functional groups in tropical lowland rainforests on Hainan Island in China			Recent evidence has demonstrated that tropical forest secondary succession has significant influences on soil organic C (SOC) storage. However, the changes in the SOC functional groups with forest restoration are still uncertain. In this study, the stock and functional groups of SOC in tropical forest recovery after two types of disturbance were measured, and the key influencing factors were analyzed. The SOC stocks were significantly higher in the young-secondary forests after shifting cultivation and in the clear cut forests than in the old-growth forests. However, the shifting cultivation and logging practices significantly increased the ratio of carbohydrate C to N-alkyl/methoxyl C (CC/MC), indicating that the decomposition degree of SOC in the old-growth forests was higher. The proportion of aromatic C in soil was higher in the young-secondary forests after shifting cultivation than in the old-growth forests. The proportion of aromatic C in litter and fine roots, the α-diversity of soil fungal and bacterial communities, and soil phosphorus were positively correlated with soil aromatic C between the shifting cultivation secondary and old-growth forests. The proportion of O-alkyl C in soil was higher in the logged forests than in the old-growth forests. The proportion of O-alkyl C in litter was positively correlated with O-alkyl C in soil between the logged and old-growth forests. Our results suggest that the labile O-alkyl C functional group recovers more rapidly after logging practices, and restoration after shifting cultivation increases the labile carbohydrate C functional group and aromaticity in tropical lowland rainforests. However, SOC has greater chemical stability in terms of the decomposition degree in tropical old-growth forests. © 2023 Elsevier B.V.
Shifting trait coordination along a soil-moisture-nutrient gradient in tropical forests			Soil nutrients and water availability are strong drivers of tropical tree species distribution across scales. However, the physiological mechanisms underlying environmental filtering along these gradients remain incompletely understood. Previous studies mostly focused on univariate variation in structural traits, but a more integrative approach combining multiple physiological traits is needed to fully portray species functional strategies. We measured nine leaf functional traits related to trees' resource capture and hydraulic strategies for 552 individuals belonging to 21 tropical tree species across an environmental gradient in Amazonian forests. Our sampling included generalist and specialist species from terra firme (TF) and seasonally flooded (SF) forests. We tested the influence of the topographic wetness index, a proxy for soil moisture and nutrient gradients, on each trait separately and on the trait integration through multivariate indices computed from the eigenvalues of a principal component analysis on the traits of the species. Finally, we evaluated intraspecific trait variability (ITV) for generalists and specialists by calculating the coefficient of variation for each trait. Results showed that (1) the environment had a greater influence on trait syndromes than single trait variation. Moreover, (2) SF specialist species expressed a stronger leaf trait coordination than TF specialist species. Furthermore, (3) the ability of generalist species to occupy a broader range of environments was not reflected by a larger ITV than specialist species but by the capacity to change trait coordination across environments. Our work highlights the need to investigate functional strategies as multidimensional syndromes in physiological trait space to fully understand and predict species distribution along environmental gradients.Read the free Plain Language Summary for this article on the Journal blog.Les nutriments du sol et la disponibilit & eacute; de l'eau sont des facteurs importants de la distribution des esp & egrave;ces d'arbres tropicaux & agrave; diff & eacute;rentes & eacute;chelles. Cependant, les m & eacute;canismes physiologiques & agrave; l'origine du filtrage environnemental le long de ces gradients restent mal compris. Les & eacute;tudes pr & eacute;c & eacute;dentes se sont principalement concentr & eacute;es sur la variation des traits de fa & ccedil;on individuelle. Cependant, pour d & eacute;crire pleinement les strat & eacute;gies fonctionnelles des esp & egrave;ces, une approche plus int & eacute;grative, qui combine un ensemble de traits physiologiques (syndrome de trait) est n & eacute;cessaire. Dans cette & eacute;tude, nous avons mesur & eacute; neuf traits fonctionnels foliaires li & eacute;s & agrave; l'acquisition des ressources et & agrave; la gestion de l'eau des arbres, sur 552 individus appartenant & agrave; 21 esp & egrave;ces d'arbres tropicaux, le long d'un gradient environnemental. L'& eacute;chantillonnage comprend des esp & egrave;ces g & eacute;n & eacute;ralistes et sp & eacute;cialistes des for & ecirc;ts de terra firme et des for & ecirc;ts de bas-fond en Guyane fran & ccedil;aise. Nous avons utilis & eacute; un indice d'humidit & eacute; topographique (TWI) comme indicateur de l'humidit & eacute; et de l'accumulation des nutriments du sol. Nous avons test & eacute; l'influence de TWI sur chacun des traits s & eacute;par & eacute;ment et de fa & ccedil;on conjointe. Nous avons compar & eacute; la coordination des traits pour les esp & egrave;ces g & eacute;n & eacute;ralistes et sp & eacute;cialistes en fonction du TWI, gr & acirc;ce & agrave; des indices multivari & eacute;s, obtenus en utilisant la gamme des valeurs propres d'une analyse en composantes principales sur les traits de l'esp & egrave;ce. Enfin, nous avons & eacute;valu & eacute; la variabilit & eacute; intrasp & eacute;cifique des traits (ITV) pour les g & eacute;n & eacute;ralistes et les sp & eacute;cialistes en calculant le coefficient de variation pour chaque trait. Les r & eacute;sultats illustrent que (1) l'environnement a une plus grande influence sur le syndrome de traits que sur la variation des traits pris un par un. De plus, (2) les esp & egrave;ces sp & eacute;cialistes des bas-fond ont une plus forte coordination entre les traits que les sp & eacute;cialistes de terra firme. Enfin, (3) la capacit & eacute; des esp & egrave;ces g & eacute;n & eacute;ralistes & agrave; occuper une plus large gamme d'environnements se traduit par leur capacit & eacute; & agrave; changer la coordination de leurs traits & agrave; travers diff & eacute;rents environnements plut & ocirc;t que par une ITV plus importante que celle des esp & egrave;ces sp & eacute;cialistes. Notre travail plaide en faveur de l'utilisation de syndromes de traits pour & eacute;tudier les strat & eacute;gies fonctionnelles et comprendre les m & eacute;canismes de distribution des esp & egrave;ces le long des gradients environnementaux.Illustration of the French Guiana tropical forest landscape. Author Antia Iglesias Fernandez. Read the free Plain Language Summary for this article on the Journal blog.image
Shifts in plant respiration and carbon use efficiency at a large-scale drought experiment in the eastern Amazon			P>The effects of drought on the Amazon rainforest are potentially large but remain poorly understood. Here, carbon (C) cycling after 5 yr of a large-scale through-fall exclusion (TFE) experiment excluding about 50% of incident rainfall from an eastern Amazon rainforest was compared with a nearby control plot.Principal C stocks and fluxes were intensively measured in 2005. Additional minor components were either quantified in later site measurements or derived from the available literature.Total ecosystem respiration (R-eco) and total plant C expenditure (PCE, the sum of net primary productivity (NPP) and autotrophic respiration (R-auto)), were elevated on the TFE plot relative to the control. The increase in PCE and R-eco was mainly caused by a rise in R-auto from foliage and roots. Heterotrophic respiration did not differ substantially between plots. NPP was 2.4 +/- 1.4 t C ha-1 yr-1 lower on the TFE than the control. Ecosystem carbon use efficiency, the proportion of PCE invested in NPP, was lower in the TFE plot (0.24 +/- 0.04) than in the control (0.32 +/- 0.04).Drought caused by the TFE treatment appeared to drive fundamental shifts in ecosystem C cycling with potentially important consequences for long-term forest C storage.
Shorea robusta Forest Resources of Mainpat/Phendeling Tibetan Refugee Camp, Chhattisgarh, India			Many tropical forests of India are highly degraded and sometimes lack adequate regeneration. In the tropical dry deciduous forest, Shorea robusta is a highly valued timber species. The Mainpat/Phendeling Tibetan settlement was established in 1962 in Chhattisgarh, east-central India. We assessed the forest surrounding the settlement and interviewed local residents to assess the forest conditions and the uses of forest products. Six sites were chosen to measure forest structure over a gradient of human impact. The forest area surrounding Mainpat showed evidence of degradation and overuse. We found that those sites classified as higher impact had more dead trees ha(-1) and more dead tree basal area than low-impact sites. The dominant tree species, S. robusta, had no regeneration. Survey responses showed that the forest was primarily used for the collection of fuelwood and construction materials. Although the forest is under government protection, there are social needs and ecological issues associated with regeneration that merit management attention. We suggest several considerations for management including environmental education, provision of alternative forest resources, testing of artificial S. robusta regeneration, alternative energy sources, and participation in a payment for ecosystem services plan. No matter the approach, the restoration and conservation of the forest is critical for the regeneration of S. robusta and the future sustainability of the forest ecosystem.
Short term patterns of germination in response to litter clearing and exclosure of large terrestrial vertebrates along an Amazon forest regrowth gradient			Efforts to restore tropical forest ecosystem services depend on understanding the barriers to germination of species of economic and cultural interest. Here we use two important non-timber forest product species (NTFP: Inga capitata. Desv. - Fabaceae and Euterpe oleracea Mart. - Arecaeae) to compare germination across a forest regrowth gradient in the northeast Brazilian Amazon. Experimental treatments were used to examine the effects of mid to large-bodied vertebrates and litter cover on seed fate (germination, removal and invertebrate infestation) in 15 lowland sites within small-holder properties. Regrowth stage was classified into three groups, with five sites each of: late second-regrowth forest, early second-regrowth forest and abandoned pasture. We conducted a paired split-plot experiment using experimental plots composed of a vertebrate exclosure versus an open treatment and subplots with and without litter. We used Generalized Linear Mixed-Effects Models (GLMMs) to compare additive and interaction effects of treatments across regrowth stages compared with 15 paired control sites. We found that the effects of regrowth stage and exclosure were species specific and these effects differed between responses (germination, removal and invertebrate infestation). Clearing litter generated a significant effect only for invertebrate infestation, which increased in the cleared plots. Our findings show that seed removal limits germination success for both species across forest regrowth stages, with invertebrate infestation also having important but secondary effects. Increased removal and unfavorable abiotic conditions make direct seeding unviable in pasture sites. We suggest that direct seeding is a viable alternative for the establishment of these widely available NTFP species in late and early regrowth forests. (C) 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license.
Silvicultural and economic aspects of pure and mixed native tree species plantations on degraded pasturelands in humid Costa Rica			Reforestation of degraded land in tropical regions provides one means of restoring ecosystems and improving rural livelihoods. Most plantations in humid tropical regions are established in pure plots, including few species of high commercial value, generally exotics. The present study compares growth and economic viability of 15-16 year-old trees of native species in pure and mixed plantations on degraded pasturelands at La Selva Biological Station, Costa Rica. The species with the best growth were Vochysia guatemalensis, Virola koschnyi, Jacaranda copaia, Terminalia amazonia, and Hieronyma alchorneoides. The mixed plantations performed better than pure plantations for all growth variables considered, including height, diameter at breast height, volume, and aboveground biomass. Mixed plantations outperformed pure plantations economically, with Net Present Value (NPV) of $1,124 to $8,155/ha and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 7.7-15.6% depending on the species mixture. The most profitable pure plantations were those of Vochysia guatemalensis, with NPV and IRR of $6,035/ha and 14.3%, respectively; Hieronyma alchorneoides ($2,654 and 10.8%); and Virola koschnyi ($1,906/ha and 9.22%). These are the estimated benefits that would be accrued at harvest. These projections are realistic since the decision to harvest is generally mandated not just by profit maximization but by economic necessity, thus many small- to medium-scale farmers in Costa Rica harvest plantations prior to the completion of the rotation length. Mixed plantation may be the preferred system for reforestation with native species designed for timber production or carbon sequestration because this system is more economically viable and productive than pure plantations.
Silvicultural Management System Applied to Logged Forests in the Brazilian Amazon: A Case Study of Adaptation of Techniques to Increase the Yield and Diversity of Species Forestry			The existence of degraded forests is common in the Eastern Amazon. The maintenance of these forests standing and the recovery of their productivity play an important role in the conservation of biodiversity, storage and carbon sequestration. However, the management techniques currently employed are designed for natural forests in the first harvest cycle or lightly explored and do not apply adequately to forests that have gone through several harvest cycles. Therefore, adaptations and the establishment of new management criteria that take into account other characteristics of these types of forests are necessary to ensure their sustainability. The objective of this study was to propose a silvicultural management system that has the potential to recover and perpetuate the productivity of an intensively logged tropical forest. A forest census was carried out on 535.6 ha for trees with dbh >= 25 cm. With these data, the following two treatments were designed: (1) criteria: the BDq method was applied from B = 9.8 m(2) ha(-1), D = 100 cm and q = 2. The criteria for standing wood commercialization were, in this order, first, Health; second, Tree Stem; third, Tree Density and fourth, dbh >= 105 cm. (2) Control: the planning was in accordance with Brazilian regulations. For the cost-benefit and sensitivity analysis, the Net Present Value (NPV) was used and a projection of +/- 20% was made in the commercial price of standing wood. In the criteria treatment, a higher number of trees and species destined for the commercialization of standing wood was verified in relation to the control treatment, showing a greater diversity of species. In the criteria treatment, NPV was positive and superior to the control treatment in all scenarios. The proposed silvicultural management system with an object of an explored and enriched forest, with criteria for harvesting trees with a minimum cut diameter of 25 cm, proved to be viable to generate economic returns and with conservationist potential for the continuous supply of forest products and maintaining biodiversity.
SILVOPASTORAL SYSTEMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE MITIGATION IN LATIN AMERICA			Cattle production is part of people's cultures and is important for human nutrition and welfare. However, conventional cattle ranching is a source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Carbon sequestration in vegetation and soils can be enhanced and GHG emissions reduced with controlled grazing, appropriate pasture species, and the use of silvopastoral systems (SPS), which combine trees and shrubs with pastures. In addition, SPS contribute to climate change adaptation thanks to the ameliorating effects of trees on air temperatures that dry out pastures, as well as improving animal well-being and productivity. Several types of SPS are commonly found in the agricultural landscapes of Latin America. Intensive SPS (ISPS), where fodder banks are combined with woody species planted at high density, produce better yields than conventional ranching thanks to higher cattle density and better weight gain by the animals. Research in Colombia, Nicaragua and Costa Rica shows that SPS have more carbon in aboveground biomass and in soils than degraded pastures. In SPS, the timber or fruit trees, either planted or from natural forest regeneration, increases carbon stocks and sequestration rates. Native tree species can be used in SPS with good results in terms of productivity, soil restoration, carbon sequestration, and biodiversity conservation. The use of SPS contributes to carbon sequestration in trees and in soils, while establishing forest plantations and conserving secondary forests increase carbon sequestration and storage at the landscape level. SPS and especially ISPS can contribute to climate change mitigation because their net GHG emissions can be negative. In Latin America, successful ISPS are being scaled up to regional levels. Incentives such as Payments for Environmental Services along with technical assistance can stimulate the adoption of SPS, thus contributing to climate change mitigation while preserving rural livelihoods.
Simulating land use and land cover change under contrasting levels of policy enforcement and its spatially-explicit impact on tropical forest landscapes in Ecuador			This study simulates the future impact of land use and land cover (LULC) change and the enforcement of policy bundles on the multi-functionality of tropical forest landscapes. It focusses on the Northern Ecuadorian Amazonas (NEA) which is characterised by high biodiversity and endemism but at the same time is threatened by deforestation and unsustainable land use practices. Scenario simulations mimic LULC change during 2016-2030 at canton-level (area: 2,146 km2) combining explorative with policy-screening components. Scenarios NATIONAL(+)POLICY, NATIONAL(-)POLICY, REGIONAL(+)POLICY, and REGIONAL(-)POLICY are contrasted by varying deforestation trends (high regional demand for agricultural products vs. national-level structural transformations) and the enforcement/ non-enforcement of policy bundles on forest protection, reforestation and restoration. An indicator-based impact assessment analysed in a spatially-explicit fashion for each scenario in 2030 (i) the evolution of agricultural and forestry-related LULC change trajectories, (ii) future hotspots of deforestation, (iii) remaining forest core zones (FCZ) as key element of habitat integrity, and (iv) the provisioning of long-term carbon sinks. Key findings reveal that only NATIONAL(+)POLICY, as the combination of enforced policy bundles and simulated national LULC change trend extrapolating the long-term reference period 1990-2016, lead to an expansion of forest areas and a 2% carbon stock gain in 2030 compared to 2016. When assuming a linear continuation of this trend, it requires 96 years to reach a similar carbon stock level compared to the reference year 1990. Farm area expansion will continue to affect protected forests in case of scenarios NATIONAL(-)POLICY and REGIONAL(-)POLICY but will be avoided in NATIONAL(+)POLICY and REGIONAL(+)POLICY. The simulated persistence of many farming areas reveals that the likelihood to reforest existing agricultural patches will be rather low. Against expectations, scenario NATIONAL(+)POLICY which assumes net zero deforestation by 2030 led to a high level of FCZ fragmentation contrasting its carbon sink potential (27,971 Mio. Mg ha-1) which performed best among all scenarios. Our study depicts a mismatch of future LULC change realities compared to the anticipated future achievements of the Ecuadorian land use policy framework. The simulated variability of forest change patterns (deforestation, reforestation) and farming trajectories (diversification, intensification, rotation) further suggests to foster more cross-sectoral policy approaches that acknowledges the hybrid role of local stakeholders who can be farmers and forest users at the same time. Our study shows that focusing on preserving carbon stocks and their long-term climate mitigation potential only while neglecting other important ecosystem functions or biodiversity can be a short-sighted policy goal if not accompanied by rural development programmes. We further conclude that scenario-based assessments should become an integral part of multi-stakeholder interactions across relevant levels of decision-making. This can support long-term sustainable land use management which is not only relevant for the case of the Northern Ecuadorian Amazons region but for many other landscapes in transition.
Simulating the potential for ecological restoration of dryland forests in Mexico under different disturbance regimes			Examining the potential for ecological restoration is important in areas where anthropogenic disturbance has degraded forest landscapes. However, the conditions under which restoration of degraded tropical dry forests (TDF) might be achieved in practice have not been determined in detail. In this study, we used LANDIS-II, a spatially explicit model of forest dynamics, to assess the potential for passive restoration of TDF through natural regeneration. The model was applied to two Mexican landscapes under six different disturbance regimes, focusing on the impact of fire and cattle grazing on forest cover, structure and composition. Model results identified two main findings. First, tropical dry forests are more resilient to anthropogenic disturbance than expected. Results suggested that under both a scenario of small, infrequent fires and a scenario of large, frequent fires, forest area can increase relatively rapidly. However, forest structure and composition differed markedly between these scenarios. After 400 years, the landscape becomes increasingly occupied by relatively shade-tolerant species under small, infrequent fires, but only species with both relatively high shade tolerance and high fire tolerance can thrive under conditions with large, frequent fires. Second, we demonstrated that different forms of disturbance can interact in unexpected ways. Our projections revealed that when grazing acts in combination with fire, forest cover, structure and composition vary dramatically depending on the frequency and extent of the fires. Results indicated that grazing and fire have a synergistic effect causing a reduction in forest cover greater than the sum of their individual effects. This suggests that passive landscape-scale restoration of TDF is achievable in both Mexican study areas only if grazing is reduced, and fires are carefully managed to reduce their frequency and intensity. (C) 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Slash-and-Burn Practices Decrease Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi Abundance in Soil and the Roots of Didierea madagascariensis in the Dry Tropical Forest of Madagascar			Deforestation and the use of fire to clear land have drastic effects on ecosystem functioning and compromise essential ecosystem services, especially in low-income tropical countries such as Madagascar. We evaluated the effects of local slash-and-burn practices on soil nutrients and arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi abundance in a southwestern Madagascar forest. Nine sampling plot pairs were established along the border of a reserve within the Fiherenana-Manombo (pk-32) complex, where soil and seedling root samples of the endemic tree Didierea madagascariensis were taken. We analysed soil extractable PO43-, NH4+, and NO3- as well as total soil carbon and nitrogen. We analysed AM fungal abundance in soil and roots through fatty acid marker analysis (NLFA and PLFA 16:1 omega 5), spore extraction, and root staining. Slash-and-burn caused an increase in pH and doubled the plant available nutrients (from 7.4 to 13.1 mu g PO43- g(-1) and from 6.9 to 13.2 mu g NO3- g(-1)). Total C and total N increased in deforested soil, from 0.6% to 0.84% and from 0.06% to 0.08%, respectively. There was a significant decline in AM fungi abundance in soil, with a decrease in soil NLFA 16:1 omega 5 from 0.2 to 0.12 nmol/g. AM fungi abundance in D. madagascariensis roots was also negatively affected and colonization decreased from 27.7% to 16.9% and NLFA 16:1 omega 5 decreased from 75.7 to 19 nmol/g. Together with hyphal network disruption, increased nutrient availability caused by burning is proposed as an explanation behind AM decline in soil and roots of D. madagascariensis. This is the first study to report the effects of slash-and-burn on AM symbiosis in Madagascar's dry forests, with likely implications for other tropical and subtropical dryland forests worldwide where slash-and-burn is practiced.
Slow growth rates of Amazonian trees: Consequences for carbon cycling			Quantifying age structure and tree growth rate of Amazonian forests is essential for understanding their role in the carbon cycle. Here, we use radiocarbon dating and direct measurement of diameter increment to document unexpectedly slow growth rates for trees from three locations spanning the Brazilian Amazon basin. Central Amazon trees, averaging only approximate to 1 mm/year diameter increment, grow half as fast as those from areas with more seasonal rainfall to the east and west. Slow growth rates mean that trees can attain great ages; across our sites we estimate 17-50% of trees with diameter > 10 cm have ages exceeding 300 years. Whereas a few emergent trees that make up a large portion of the biomass grow faster, small trees that are more abundant grow slowly and attain ages of hundreds of years. The mean age of carbon in living trees (60-110 years) is within the range of or slightly longer than the mean residence time calculated from C inventory divided by annual C allocation to wood growth (40-100 years). Faster C turnover is observed in stands with overall higher rates of diameter increment and a larger fraction of the biomass in large, fast-growing trees. As a consequence, forests can recover biomass relatively quickly after disturbance, whereas recovering species composition may take many centuries. Carbon cycle models that apply a single turnover time for carbon in forest biomass do not account for variations in life strategy and therefore may overestimate the carbon sequestration potential of Amazon forests.
Smallholder REDD plus strategies at the forest-farm frontier: a comparative analysis of options from the Peruvian Amazon			Background: Involving local populations in developing countries will be key to the success of the REDD+ forest mitigation mechanism. Strategies should therefore be designed to target specific activities, land uses and decision-making at the smallholder level. This article analyzes and compares smallholder land use and livelihood strategies at the forest-farm frontier in the Peruvian Amazon to draw out locally contextualized REDD+ strategies. Results: Data were collected through household surveys and interviews. The results point to four central REDD+ strategies: payments for ecosystems services, reduced forest degradation, enhanced carbon production and income diversification. Conclusion: Local REDD+ strategies should be contextually informed and allow for the widest conception of potential strategies under the mechanism to maximize implementation flexibility and, thus, participative equity.
Smallholder reforestation and livelihoods in the humid tropics: a systematic mapping study			Systematic mapping studies provide a snapshot of the literature based on systematic literature searches. In this systematic mapping study, the original research that links reforestation and livelihoods in the tropics was mapped and analysed to identify the trends, biases and gaps in the literature. In total, 339 papers from 92 journals were identified. Agroforestry Systems was the journal in which articles were most frequently published, and Cameroon and Indonesia the most frequently studied countries. The greatest number of authors came from the USA, and authors were most commonly affiliated with ICRAF. A limited collaboration between research groups in the tropical regions was identified. Anthropology and Social Sciences were the most frequent areas of research, especially in Africa. Latin America had more technical studies and more publications discussing payment for environmental services than the other regions. Based on the temporal analysis of the main terms in abstracts of the publications included, it was found that agriculture-related terms and terms related to the human component in the landscape were consistently prevalent in the literature relating reforestation and livelihoods throughout time. Agroforestry systems were especially important in small-scale reforestation and livelihoods. Trends, biases and gaps were discussed. Broader cooperation between tropical regions and between clusters of authors would be beneficial for research and practice.
Social and ecological factors associated with the use of non-timber forest products by people in rural Borneo			Supply of non-timber Forest Products (NTFPs) is an important provisioning ecosystem service. It is often argued that forest conservation contributes to poverty alleviation through provisioning of NTFPs to the poor. However, implicit assumptions of the argument that NTFPs are more intensively utilized by poor who lack alternative subsistence options, and that NTFP supplies are limited by forest cover, have rarely been critically examined. This study investigated social and environmental factors affecting NTFP uses in rural areas of Borneo, using a land cover map and socio-economic dataset collected from 1596 households in 87 villages. The NTFPs examined were wild boars, sambar deer, wild fruits, firewood, wild vegetables, and wild mushrooms. To explain the variations in NTFP uses among households, four village and nine household characteristics were considered using generalized linear mixed models. We found that forest cover and collection pressure limit the use of some NTFPs, supporting the second assumption. On the other hand, the first assumption was supported only for firewood, and animals and wild fruits were more frequently used by wealthier households, contrary to this assumption. Other factors (education, age and sex of householder and agricultural activities) were also related to the use of one or more NTFPs. This study demonstrates the complexity of the process by which forest cover and other factors affect the ecosystem services people receive. Evaluation of ecosystem services is an important and urgent research subject today, but it is also necessary to pay attention to who receives the benefits, and who does not. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Socioecological system and potential deforestation in Western Amazon forest landscapes			The ecosystem services provided by tropical forests are affected by deforestation. Territorial management strategies aim to prevent and mitigate forest loss. Therefore, modeling potential land use changes is important for forest management, monitoring, and evaluation. This study determined whether there are relationships between forest vulnerability to deforestation (potential deforestation distribution) and the forest management policies applied in the Ecuadorian Amazon.Proxy and underlying variables were used to construct a statistical model, based on the principle of maximum entropy that could predict potential land use changes. Entropy can be seen as a measure of uncertainty for a density function. Receiver operating characteristics (ROC) analysis and the Jackknife Test were used to validate the model. The importance of input variables in the model was determined through: Percent Contribution (PC) and Permutation Importance (PI). The results were compared with prevailing regional forest management strategies.The socioeconomic variables that provided the largest amount of information in the overall model (AUC=0.81) and that showed most of the information not present in other variables were: "Protected areas-Intangible zone" (PC=24%, PI=12.4%), "timber harvesting programs" (PC=21.7%, PI=4.7%), "road network" (PC=18.9%, PI=7.7%), and "poverty rate" (PC=3.7%, PI=6.1%). Also, the biophysical variable "temperature" (PC=7,9%, PI=22.3%) provided information in the overall model.The results suggested the need for changes in forest management strategies. Forest policies and management plans should consider integrating and strengthening protected areas and intangible zones, as well as restricting timber harvesting in native forest and establishing forest areas under permanent management. Furthermore, the results also suggested that financial incentive programs to reduce deforestation have to be evaluated because their present distribution is inefficient. In this context, conservation incentive plans need to be revised so that they focus on areas at deforestation risk. (c) 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Socio-economic (education, finance, technology) and agro-ecological (soil, plant, ecosystem) expectations and doubts of farmers in the Berambadi watershed upon the introduction of vermicompost and biochar technology in their farming systems.			Number in parentheses are percentage of farmers from all farmers (n = 29) who designated specific issues (%; VC = vermicompost, B = biochar). Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Socioeconomic and Environmental Basis for the Development of Small Scale Forestry in a Highly Degraded Watershed in the Venezuelan Andes			In the last 20 years, the Mocoties watershed in the Venezuelan Andes has experienced an intense process of land-use change, with natural forests being replaced by "sun grown coffee" (Coffea arabica) monocultures in sites of high slope, increasing risk conditions and the vulnerability of people living in lower parts of the watershed. Using a local-scale approach, 37 productive units (10% of total) in the San Isidro micro-watershed (51.85 km(2)) were assessed in order to evaluate local socioeconomic conditions and perceptions of ecosystem services, and how both are affected by human activity. Almost 65% of residents work in small farms of less than 5 ha, while family ownership remains the most important form of management. A significant lack of financial support was detected, support which is required to improve coffee productivity and improve conservation practices. Severe soil loss was detected in 45% of the area, associated with cultivation on steep slopes and the use of chemical fertilizers. Agroforestry and tree planting are well-regarded, as locals tend to recognize soil protection and climate change mitigation as two of the most important ecosystem services. Using a small-scale forestry approach, it is believed that current land management could be greatly improved to: (1) progressively introduce tree cover into coffee monocultures; (2) restore degraded areas where forest cover is lost and (3) reduce deforestation. Recommended policies and actions include institutional strengthening, decentralization and the development of community-based forest enterprises. The general principles presented in this work could provide a preliminary basis for basin-wide land restoration.
Soil Bacterial Community Shifts Are Driven by Soil Nutrient Availability along a Teak Plantation Chronosequence in Tropical Forests in China			Simple Summary Tropical forests play an important role in the global carbon cycle, especially in the context of global climate change. Soil microorganisms are essential to the functions, services, and productivity of terrestrial ecosystems as a link to maintain the connections and interactions between the aboveground and belowground ecosystems. The interactions between plants and the soil microbiome are crucial for plant growth, health, and resistance to stressors. However, information on the response of soil microbial communities to a chronosequence of woody plants is lacking, especially in tropical forests. This study compares the soil properties, diversity, composition, and co-occurrence patterns of bacterial communities in the rhizosphere and bulk soils along a teak plantation chronosequence. The results show that the composition and co-occurrence patterns of the bacterial communities are statistically different among the plantations, while stand age has no significant impact on soil bacterial alpha diversity. The results further show that soil nutrients play a key role in shaping the soil bacterial community. The study also provides information about the dynamics and characteristics of these soil bacterial communities and adds valuable information that may underpin new strategies for the management of teak plantations. Soil bacterial communities play crucial roles in ecosystem functions and biogeochemical cycles of fundamental elements and are sensitive to environmental changes. However, the response of soil bacterial communities to chronosequence in tropical ecosystems is still poorly understood. This study characterized the structures and co-occurrence patterns of soil bacterial communities in rhizosphere and bulk soils along a chronosequence of teak plantations and adjacent native grassland as control. Stand ages significantly shifted the structure of soil bacterial communities but had no significant impact on bacterial community diversity. Bacterial community diversity in bulk soils was significantly higher than that in rhizosphere soils. The number of nodes and edges in the bacterial co-occurrence network first increased and then decreased with the chronosequence. The number of strongly positive correlations per network was much higher than negative correlations. Available potassium, total potassium, and available phosphorus were significant factors influencing the structure of the bacterial community in bulk soils. In contrast, urease, total potassium, pH, and total phosphorus were significant factors affecting the structure of the bacterial community in the rhizosphere soils. These results indicate that available nutrients in the soil are the main drivers regulating soil bacterial community variation along a teak plantation chronosequence.
Soil carbon accumulation and carbon sinks under different afforestation patterns in Chinese subtropical forests			Carbon sink forests can fix atmospheric carbon dioxide and they play an important role in mitigating global warming. Research on the accumulation of soil carbon in carbon sink forests grown using different afforestation models in the South Asian subtropical region will contribute to our understanding of carbon sequestration by carbon sink forests. A single-factor randomized block design was used to investigate carbon sinks and three afforestation models. These were new afforestation (I), closed mountain afforestation (II), and replanting (III). Soil carbon accumulation and carbon sink function were also investigated. The results showed that the soil total carbon content was significantly different before and after the five-year study period. The soil carbon content in the 0-20 cm soil layer varied significantly among the afforestation models (P<0.05), and the largest variation range was -0.861±1.893 g C/ kg to 3.021±1.577 g C/ kg. The multiple comparisons of soil organic carbon content showed that the soil organic carbon content in the 0-20 cm layer for the afforestation model was significantly different (P <0.05) from the other two models. In 2016, after nearly five years of carbon sinking and afforestation, there were significant differences in the soil organic carbon contents between the different afforestation models (P < 0.05), especially in the topsoil. The soil carbon stocks in the 0-60 cm soil layer ranged between -2.233±3.540 and 8.670 ±2.342 Mg C/ hm2 for the different afforestation models and the difference in soil carbon stocks between new afforestation (I) and replanting (III) was extremely significant (P<0.01) after the carbon sink trees had been allowed to grow for 5 years. The soil carbon stocks also increased significantly. Between 2012 and 2016, the soil carbon sinks of the various afforestation models were ranked as follows: III>II>I, and the soils after closed mountain afforestation (II) and replanting (III) were significantly better carbon sinks than after model I. The afforestation model has significant effects on soil organic carbon accumulation and carbon sequestration in carbon sink forests. The main differences are caused by root decomposition, litter, and precipitation. The adoption of new afforestation models for the first five years does not improve soil organic carbon. Furthermore, accumulation and fixation do not improve organic carbon levels. Adopting a closed mountain afforestation model does improve soil organic carbon fixation, but does not increase the accumulation of organic carbon. However, the replanting model (III) improves both soil carbon fixation and soil carbon accumulation. © 2019 Science Press. All rights reserved.
Soil carbon and nitrogen sequestration over an age sequence of Pinus patula plantations in Zimbabwean Eastern Highlands			Forests play a major role in regulating the rate of increase of global atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations creating a need to investigate the ability of exotic plantations to sequester atmospheric CO2. This study examined pine plantations located in the Eastern Highlands of Zimbabwe relative to carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) storage along an age series. Samples of stand characteristics, forest floor (L, F and H) and 0-10, 10-30 and 30-60 cm soil depth were randomly taken from replicated stands in Pinus patula Schiede & Deppe of 1, 10, 20, 25, and 30 years plus two natural forests. Sodium polytungstate (density 1.6 g cm(-3)) was used to isolate organic matter into free light fraction (fLF), occluded light fraction (oLF) and mineral associated heavy fraction (MaHF). In both natural and planted forests, above ground tree biomass was the major ecosystem C pool followed by forest floor's humus (H) layer in addition to the 45%, 31% and 24% of SOC contributed by the 0-10, 10-30 and 30-60 cm soil depths respectively. Stand age caused significant differences in total organic C and N stocks. Carbon and N declined initially soon after establishment but recovered rapidly at 10 years, after which it declined following silvicultural operations (thinning and pruning) and recovered again by 25 years. Soil C and N stocks were highest in moist forest (18.3 kg C m(-2) and 0.66 kg of N m(-2)) and lowest in the miombo (8.5 kg m(-2) of C and 0.22 kg of N m(-2)). Average soil C among Pinus stands was 11.4 kg of C m(-2), being highest at 10 years (13.7 of C kg m(-2)) and lowest at 1 year (9.9 kg of C m(-2)). Some inputs of charcoal through bioturbation over the 25 year period contributed to stabilisation of soil organic carbon (SOC) and its depth distribution compared to the one year old stands. Nitrogen was highest at 10 years (0.85 kg of N m-2) and least at 30 years (0.22 kg of N m(-2)). Carbon and N in density fractions showed the 20 year old stand having similar proportions of fLF and oLF while the rest had significantly higher B.F. than oLF. The contribution of fLF C, oLF C and MaHF C to SOC was 8-13%, 1-7% and 90-91% respectively. Carbon and N in all fractions decreased with depth. The mineral associated C was significantly affected by stand age whilst the fLF and oLF were not. Conversion of depleted miombo woodlands to pine plantations yield better C gains in the short and long run whilst moist forest provide both carbon and biodiversity. Our results highlight the importance of considering forestry age based C pools in estimating C sink potential over a rotation and the possibility of considering conservation of existing natural forests as part of future REDD + projects. (C) 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Soil carbon and nitrogen stocks along the altitudinal gradient of the Darjeeling Himalayas, India			Soil is the largest terrestrial carbon pool and has been increasingly recognized to play crucial role to mitigate global warming resulting from climate change and land use and land cover change. The carbon cycle is closely linked with nitrogen cycles and needs to be studied together for their important implications for mitigating land degradations and associated declining productivity. Within the global biodiversity hotspot ofHimalayas, which constitutes more than one third of India's carbon pool, the Eastern Himalayas in spite of having highest forest cover, protected area network coverage, biodiversity, and endemicity have been understudied for soil carbon and nitrogen dynamics. The present study was designed to assess the patterns and determinants of soil carbon stock, SOC stocks, nitrogen stocks, and carbon/nitrogen (C:N) ratio along the altitudinal gradient, forest type, and depth in Darjeeling Himalayas, India. We followed standard protocol for soil sampling and analysis. The soil carbon stocks (257.02 to 527.79MgCha(-1)), SOC stocks (152.55 to 398.88MgCha(-1)), and soil nitrogen stocks (15.10 to 32.38MgNha(-1)) increased (but C:N ratio 15.13 to 19.12 declined) along the altitudinal gradient (154 to 3170m), forest types (tropical moist deciduous forest: MWLS < East Himalayan temperate forest: NVNP < East Himalayan sub-alpine forest: SNP) and annually (year 1<year 2); however, opposite pattern was observed with increase in depths. The soil carbon stocks, SOC stocks, soil nitrogen stocks, and C:N ratio showed strong effects of forest type, depth, elevation, NDVI, bulk density, MI, and AET. Additionally, there was strong relationship of MAP with soil carbon stock and SOC stock, MAT with C:N ratio, and year of sampling with SOC stocks and C:N ratio. The soil carbon stocks, SOC stocks, and soil nitrogen stocks showed negative correlation with different environmental factors (MAT, MAP, NDVI, MI, AET), but positive correlation with elevation, however, C:N ratio had weakpositive correlation. We conclude that the different forests types of Darjeeling Himalayas encompassing wide elevation gradient have high levels of soil carbon stocks, SOC stocks, soil nitrogen stocks, and C:N ratio, and hence must be properly managed to maximize their soil carbon sequestration potential.
Soil Carbon and Nutrient Dynamics Following Cessation of Anthropogenic Disturbances in Degraded Subtropical Forests			Soil carbon (C) and nutrient availability is fundamental to terrestrial biodiversity and functionality. In recent decades, the restoration of degraded forests has become a major concern worldwide, and recent studies have demonstrated that soil C and nitrogen (N) increase over time following restoration. However, our understanding of the responses of soil phosphorus (P), calcium (Ca), potassium (K) and magnesium (Mg) and elemental stoichiometric ratios to restoration remains elusive. We employed a chronosequence to examine the responses of C and macronutrients in three soil layers (0-10cm, 10-20cm and 20-30cm) to the time (0 to 31years) since the cessation of anthropogenic disturbances in the degraded subtropical forests of Eastern China. We found that stand basal area, soil water content, organic matter content and C concentration and stock increased, while soil pH and bulk density decreased over time, with the most pronounced effects within the 0-10cm layer. Total and available N and K as well as available P and total Mg increased, while total P in the 20-30cm layer and Ca in all soil layers decreased over time. The mass concentration ratios of soil C to total N and available N, P and K decreased, whereas those for C to total P and Ca as well as total N to total P and available N to available P increased over time. Our results suggest that soil C accumulation and biologically driven nutrients increase, while nutrients that are driven primarily through geochemical mechanisms decrease with live biomass accumulation following restoration. Copyright (c) 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Soil carbon dynamics and climate change: current agro-environmental perspectives and future dimensions			The management of soil organic carbon (SOC) has now been identified as the most imperative dimension for managing the global climate change as well as soil fertility. In this respect, various agro-ecological approaches such as organic and integrated nutrient management system have been proposed worldwide, though accepted with limited enthusiasm. The understanding of the different soil C pools and processes are of vital importance before the implementation of these agro-ecological management practices, as it determines the success of SOC management. In the present study, we tried to encompass various SOC pools and processes governing the SOC dynamics in the agro-ecosystems. In this paper, dry tropical ecosystems having a unique ecological behaviour (such as strong nutrient conservation mechanisms and potential C sink nature) have been discussed especially due to its potential role in global climate change and mitigation, and linked soil fertility. It is proposed that a multi-factorial experimentation involving quantitative and qualitative change in soil available N, microbial and aggregate attributes, which has been recently found to be of crucial significance, is required for the proper mechanistic understanding of SOC dynamics. It may also help in the identification of some integrative functional indicators, which can be used to achieve a balanced SOC dynamics via suitable agro-management.
Soil carbon dynamics in the humid tropical forest zone			Conversion of natural forests to agriculture in the humid tropics leads to a reduction in ecosystem carbon storage due to the immediate removal of aboveground biomass and a gradual subsequent reduction in soil organic carbon. A considerable part of soil carbon is protected from microbial attack by a range of physical and chemical mechanisms and is not sensitive to landuse change. We analyzed the soils data base for Sumatra (Indonesia) developed by the Center for Soil and Agroclimate Research (CSAR) to estimate-effects of landuse on soil C content. Sumatra has a considerable diversity of soils ranging from those of recent origin in the highlands, to older sedimentary and heavily leached soils in the pedimont peneplain and large areas of wetland soils along the coast. Peat soils (Histosols) and other wetland soils (Aquic and Fluvic suborders) contain the greatest soil C reserves, followed by young volcanic soils (Andisols). Agricultural use of these soils can have a disproportionately large effect on C release to the atmosphere. On the major part of the upland soils the difference in (top) soil C content between natural forest and agricultural land is in the range 0.5-1.0% C, equivalent to a change in total C stock of 10-20 Mg ha-1. These results agree with data collected in S. Sumatra in the 1930s. C(org) of forest soils is related to soil pH, and is lowest in the pH range 5.0-6.0. Wetland conditions, lower pH, higher altititude (lower temperature) and higher clay and silt content all contributed to higher soil C contents in a multiple regression analysis of the whole data set. Existing models and data sets are insufficient to predict changes in soil C contents under various landuse practices. Carbon isotope studies, and especially the δ 13C method may be used to study the effects of landuse change, especially when the vegetation was changed from one dominated by C3 plants (most forest species) to one dominated by grasses and crops with a C4 photosynthetic pathway. Results from Brazil documented a gradual decline of organic matter originating from the forest system and its partial replacement by organic matter derived from inputs of sugarcane during the first fifty years of cultivation. Forest conversion to well managed grasslands may lead to an increased soil C storage, after an initial decline. The consequences of erosion on losses of soil C depend on the scale at which these losses are considered, because of sedimentation processes. When net erosion losses are not expressed per unit area, but per length scale to the power 1.6, erosion losses appear to be largely independent of scale. The 'fractal dimension of erosion' (on average around 1.6) probably is a landscape characteristic and estimates of its value are needed for extrapolation. Better understanding of soil C deposition sites is needed to evaluate overall erosion effects and test whether or not erosion can contribute to net C sequestration.
Soil carbon dynamics under young tropical secondary forests on former pastures-A case study from Panama			Secondary forests are gaining increased importance in tropical landscapes and have recently been reported to act as potential belowground carbon sinks. While economic interest in the management of secondary forests to mitigate carbon emissions is rising, the dynamics of soil carbon stocks under these ecosystems remain poorly understood. Recent studies report conflicting results concerning soil carbon trends as well as multiple confounding factors (e.g. soil type, topography and land-use history) affecting these trends. In this study, organic carbon stocks were measured in the mineral soil up to 20 cm depth of at 24 active pastures, 5-8-year-old, and 12-15-year-old secondary forest sites on former pastures. Additionally, we estimated carbon stocks under a 100-year-old secondary forest and compared them to those of nearby mature forests. Abiotic conditions in the study area were homogenous, enabling us to isolate the effect of land-use change on soil organic carbon stocks. Contrary to our expectations, soil carbon stocks in the top 10 cm did not change with young secondary forest development. Pasture soils stored 24.8 +/- 2.9 Mg ha(-1) carbon (mean +/- standard error) in the top 10 cm, and no accumulation of soil carbon was apparent during the first 15 years of secondary succession. Soil carbon stocks under 100-year-old secondary forests, averaging 43.0 +/- 7.9 Mg ha(-1) (mean +/- standard error), were clearly higher than those recorded at younger sites and approached levels of soil carbon stocks under mature forests. These data indicate that soil carbon stocks in this region of Panama are not affected by the land-use transition from pasture to young secondary regrowth. However, an increase of soil carbon storage might be possible over a longer period of time. Our results support trends observed in other tropical areas and highlight the importance of environmental conditions such as soil properties rather than land-use transitions on soil carbon dynamics. While our understanding of organic carbon dynamics in tropical soils remains limited, these results underscore the challenges of undertaking short-term reforestation projects with the expectation of increasing soil carbon sequestration. 2010 Elsevier BM. All rights reserved.
Soil carbon losses in conventional farming systems due to land-use change in the Brazilian semi-arid region			Conventional farming systems reduce soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks in tropical regions, predisposing these soils to emit CO2 to the atmosphere. However, studies conducted worldwide have shown that the magnitude of these losses depends on the management practices adopted as well as climate and soil conditions; thus, accurately quantifying these SOC changes can be a major challenge. In this regard, the aim of this study was to derive specific SOC stock change factors for conventional farming systems in the semi-arid region of Brazil and to evaluate the impacts caused by the conventional systems of annual crops throughout time and soil profile on SOC stocks in this region. A total of 66 pairs of comparisons were used, and datasets were analyzed through a mixed linear model. Conventional systems with annual crops reduced the SOC stocks by 17, 13 and 4% for the 0-30, 0-50 and 0-100 cm soil layers, respectively, and for the period of 20 years of land use change. The SOC losses increased with the crop period, since the land-use change factors derived for 40 years showed a decrease of 26, 22 and 13% for the 0-30, 0-50, and 0-100 cm soil layers, respectively, when compared to the SOC stocks in native vegetation.
Soil Carbon Sequestration in Natural and Managed Tropical Forest Ecosystems			This review article collates and synthesizes the available information on the potential of agroforestry and tropical plantations on soil carbon (C) sequestration to mitigate the greenhouse effect. Tropical forest ecosystems (TFEs) occupy 1.8 billion hectares (Bha) of the total area of 4.2 Bha in forest biomes. The terrestrial C pool in TFEs comprises 120 Mg/ha (tons) in vegetation and 123 Mg/ha in soil to 1-m depth. Soil: vegetation C pool ratio ranges from 0.9 to 1.2 and increases with increase in latitude. Total C pool is 212 petagrams (Pg = 1 X 1015 g = 1 gigaton) in vegetation and 216 Pg in soil. The soil C pool of TFEs represents about 14% of the global soil organic C (SOC) pool of 1550 Pg. Deforestation and conversion of natural to agricultural ecosystems depletes the C pool. Thus, the SOC pool can be enhanced by restoration of degraded soils, and conversion to planted fallows, agroforestry, plantations, improved pastures, and mulch farming. The rate of SOC sequestration in soils is 100-1000 kg C/ha/yr, and total potential of SOC sequestration in TFEs is 200-500 Tg C/yr (1 Teragram= 112 g) for two to five decades. There is a vast potential of converting degraded ecosystems and agriculturally marginal soils to agroforestry and forest 2plantations to restore ecosystems, sequester carbon, and mitigate the greenhouse effect. [Article copies available for a fee from The Haworth Document Delivery Seivice: 1-800-HAWORTH. E-mail address: < docdelivery@haworthpress.com > Website: < https://www.HaworthPress.com > © 2005 by The Haworth Press. Inc. All rights reserved.]. © 2005 by The Haworth Press. Inc. All rights reserved.
Soil carbon stock and biological activity in silvopastoral systems planted with Eucalyptus grandis in a tropical climate			Context: There is little information on the effects of tree densities and ages of silvopastoral systems (SSPs) on total soil carbon stock (TSCS). Aims: This study aimed to evaluate the TSCS, carbon and nitrogen fractionation and biological activity in SSPs planted with Eucalyptus grandis in different densities and ages. Methods: Two SSPs (333 or 166 trees ha-1) and one full sun pasture (FSP) grown for 5 or 7 years and native vegetation (NV) were evaluated (seven treatments). Samples were collected up to 1 m deep to evaluate the variables. Key results: Particulate organic carbon (POC) and particulate organic nitrogen (PON) were higher (P < 0.05) in FSP (14.1 and 0.725 g kg-1), intermediate in SSP (9.88 and 0.46 g kg-1) and lower in NV (6.12 and 0.29 g kg-1). TSCS was 44.8% (194 vs 134 Mg ha-1; P < 0.001) higher in SSP and FSP compared to NV. Higher tree density reduced TSCS in younger systems, but without effect on older systems. TSCS was 13.7% (207 vs 182 Mg ha-1; P = 0.026), POC was 52.0% (11.9 vs 7.83 g kg-1; P < 0.001) and PON was 54.4% (0.556 vs 0.360 g kg-1; P < 0.001) higher in SSP for 7 compared to 5 years, respectively. Conclusions: Tree density had a limited effect on TSCS. Higher SSP age increased carbon sequestration, probably due to greater cycling in the particulate fraction and better biological activity. Implications: The SSP and well-managed FSP are good strategies to increase TSCS compared to NV, and their use can improve environmental indicators.  © 2022 The Author(s) . Published by CSIRO Publishing.
Soil carbon stock and nutrient characteristics of forest-savanna transition: Estimates from four land use systems in Ghana			Land use change has led to drastic soil degradation and greenhouse gas emissions with implications for sustainable agriculture and climate change. Here, we report soil carbon stock and nutrient compositions of four land use types in the forest-savanna transition agro-ecological zone of Ghana. These were cashew, mango, oil palm and arable land. Soil samples were collected at 0-15 cm and 15-30 cm depths from each land use type. Soil nutrients and organic carbon content were greater in the tree-based land use types than in the arable land. Total soil organic carbon (SOC) ranged from 1.71% under cashew to 1.12% under the palms at the 0-15 cm depth. Soil carbon stock under the cashew was 12.5% greater than that of mango (56 Mg C/ha), and 40% more than that under oil palm. However, active carbon or permanganate oxidizable carbon was greatest (similar to 130 mg/kg) under mango and least (similar to 92.6 mg/kg) in arable land in the surface soil. Overall, active carbon was dependent on soil total carbon in the land use types (r = 0.81-0.91). Soil microbial biomass carbon was least in arable land (p < 0.05) and similar among the tree-based systems (p > 0.05) at 0-15 cm depth. No clear trend was observed in the exchangeable base compositions in the surface soils but cashew and mango systems appeared to show significantly greater levels of exchangeable calcium and magnesium, respectively. We conclude that strong nexus between soil microbial biomass carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus, and active soil carbon may drive soil carbon dynamics in land use systems of tropical forest-savanna ecotone.
Soil carbon stock in relation to plant diversity of homegardens in Kerala, India			Conservation of biodiversity and mitigation of global warming are two major environmental challenges today. In this context, the relationship between biodiversity (especially plant diversity) and soil carbon (C) sequestration (as a means of mitigating global warming) has become a subject of considerable scientific interest. This relationship was tested for homegardens (HG), a popular and sustainable agroforestry system in the tropics, in Thrissur district, Kerala, India. The major objectives were to examine how tree density and plant-stand characteristics of homegardens affect soil C sequestration. Soil samples were collected at four depths (0-20, 20-50, 50-80, 80-100 cm) from HG of varying sizes and age classes, and their total C content determined. Tree density and plant-stand characteristics such as species richness (Margalef Index) and diversity (Shannon Index) of the HG were also determined. Results indicated that the soil C stock was directly related to plant diversity of HG. Homegardens with higher, compared to those with lower, number of plant species, as well as higher species richness and tree density had higher soil carbon, especially in the top 50 cm of soil. Overall, within 1 m profile, soil C content ranged from 101.5 to 127.4 Mg ha-1. Smaller-sized HG (<0.4 ha) that had higher tree density and plant-species density had more soil C per unit area (119.3 Mg ha-1) of land than larger-sized ones (>0.4 ha) (108.2 Mg ha-1). Soil C content, especially below 50 cm, was higher in older gardens. The enhanced soil-C storage in species-rich homegardens could have relevance and applications in broader ecological contexts. © 2009 Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
Soil carbon stocks and dynamics of different land uses in Italy using the LUCAS soil database			In terrestrial biosphere, soil represents the largest organic carbon pool, and a small change of soil organic carbon (SOC) can significantly affect the global carbon cycle and climate. Land use change (LUC) and soil management practices coupled with climate variables can significantly influence the soil organic carbon stocks (SOC-S) and its dynamics; however, our understanding about the responses of SOC in different LUC's (e.g., cropland, grassland and forest land) to mitigate climate change is quite limited at country level like Italy. Thus, the aims of this study were which factors are affecting SOC dynamics in three LUC's over time across Italy; and their relevance in terms of SOC-S in the superficial layer of soil that significantly contributes to the climate change mitigation, using LUCAS soil database. To calculate the SOC-S, it is necessary to have soil bulk density (BD) which is not present in the LUCAS database. Thus, we estimate the soil BD using the pedotransfer function (PTFs); and results shows that the soil BD obtained from fitting of the PTFs were reasonable to estimate the SOC-S for different land use types (R-2 >= 0.75). Overall, results showed that LUC's and soil management practices can significantly (p < 0.001) influences SOC dynamics and SOC storage from the soil and varied among LUC's but not for over time except grassland. Spatially, the mean SOC-S storage of the different LUC's was in the following order: forest land > grassland > cropland for both years 2009 and 2015. On the other hand, the SOC-S storage increased by 8.33% for cropland, 13.56% for forest land, and 29.79% for grassland during the year of 2009-2015, while SOC-S storage increased significantly (p < 0.001) in grassland over time but not for cropland and forest land which also follow the increasing trend but insignificantly. Our results also reveal that the SOC dynamics negatively correlated with MAT, and positively correlated with MAP for all land uses except forest land. Thus, this research indicates that LUC's and soil management practices coupled with climate variables can significantly influence SOC storage and its dynamics in the superficial layer of soil which have the potential capacity to mitigate climate change.
Soil Carbon Storage in Silvopasture and Related Land-Use Systems in the Brazilian Cerrado			Silvopastoral management of fast-growing tree plantations is becoming popular in the Brazilian Cerrado (savanna). To understand the influence of such systems on soil carbon (C) storage, we studied C content in three aggregate size classes in six land-use systems (LUS) on Oxisols in Minas Gerais, Brazil. The systems were a native forest, a treeless pasture, 24- and 4-yr-old eucalyptus (Eucalyptus sp.) plantations, and 15- and 4-yr-old silvopastures of fodder grass plus animals under eucalyptus. From each system, replicated soil samples were collected from four depths (0-10, 10-20, 20-50, and 50-100 cm), fractionated into 2000- to 250-, 250- to 53-, and < 53 mu m size classes representing macroaggregates, microaggregates, and silt + clay, respectively, and their C contents determined. Macroaggregate was the predominant size fraction under all LUS, especially in the surface soil layers of tree-based systems. In general, C concentrations (g kg(-1) soil) in the different aggregate size fractions did not vary within the same depth. The soil organic carbon (SOC) stock (Mg C ha(-1)) to 1-m depth was highest under pasture compared with other LUS owing to its higher soil bulk density. The soils under all LUS had higher C stock compared with other reported values for managed tropical ecosystems: down to 1 m, total SOC stock values ranged from 461 Mg ha(-1) under pasture to 393 Mg ha(-1) under old eucalyptus. Considering the possibility for formation and retention of microaggregates within macroggregates in low management-intensive systems such as silvopasture, the macroaggregate dynamics in the soil seem to be a good indicator of its C storage potential.
Soil characterization and drainage effects in a savanna palm swamp (vereda) of an agricultural area from Central Brazil			ABSTRACT Brazilian palm swamps (veredas) are fundamentals in the hydrological balance of watercourses in the Brazilian savanna (Cerrado). The "sponge effect" of their soils is the main factor controlling local hydrology, storing rainwater, and functioning as headwaters. The restricted knowledge of these tropical ecosystems has led to increased losses, poor preservation, and reduction in their ecosystem services. Veredas have become refuges surrounded by croplands, often drained and inappropriately managed. This study shows the impacts of anthropization on soil processes and properties of a vereda in an agricultural area. Two soil profiles were selected and characterized as preserved and anthropized, respectively upstream and downstream of the studied vereda. Morphological, physical, chemical and microbiological properties were analyzed. Principal Components Analysis (PCA) was applied to synthesize the data and provide evidence of the main properties and underlying processes that most responded to the degradation action. The arrangement of this analysis shows three main distinguish drivers: one joining the properties related to the humification of organic matter and relative accumulation of mineral matter versus accumulation of organic matter; the second with properties related to soil chemical reactivity; and the third reflecting the mineralization of organic matter. Our results suggest that the anthropic action has strongly caused the organic carbon reduction (~22 %). After 20 years, the anthropized soil presents not only a great decline in carbon stock (~14 kg m-2), but also strong impacts on several other ecologic functions, such as water holding capacity. Veredas are complex and fragile environments, and they should be fully protected to maintain their ecosystem services. Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Soil CO2-C flux and carbon storage in the dry tropics: Impact of land-use change involving bioenergy crop plantation			The study was conducted to evaluate the impact of land-use change in the dry tropics on soil CO2-C flux and soil organic carbon (SOC) storage, along with the major factors controlling them i.e. soil microbial biomass (SMB), belowground net productivity (BNP), and soil aggregate size fractions. Land-use change, in this study, involved conversion of natural forest, to degraded forest and then to an agroecosystem or a bioenergy crop plantation of Jatropha curcas. The soil CO2-C flux was highest in the agroecosystem followed in decreasing order by degraded forest, bioenergy crop plantation and smallest in the natural forest. The inverse trend was found in case of SOC storage, SMB and BNP. The proportion of macroaggregate in the soil follows the trend of SOC storage, whereas mesoaggregate follows the trend of CO2-C flux across all land-use types. The CO2-C flux showed significant negative correlation with BNP, SMB, macroaggregate size fraction, and SOC. Our study suggests that the flux of soil CO2-C was regulated directly by the soil aggregate fraction and not by SMB or BNP. However, soil aggregate formation was, in turn, related to the SMB and/or below BNP. Macroaggregates appear to protect the SOC, which results in lower CO2-C flux and higher SOC storage. It can be concluded that the bioenergy crops plantation on degraded forest lands in the dry tropics, may increase C storage in soil and reduce soil CO2-C flux, thereby helping in the mitigation of global climate change in addition to providing feed stocks for fossil fuel substitution. © 2015 .
Soil degradation challenges for sustainable agriculture in tropical India			Soil degradation is a pervasive, systemic phenomenon and an urgent priority in order to ensure human well-being, protect biodiversity and ecosystem services. Agriculture sector is frequently affected by soil loss resulting into unproductive soil and lowered crop yields. This article focuses on critical sustainable challenges of Indian agriculture, soil degradation status and mitigation strategies as well as policies and management response options in respect of development of degraded lands. It also provides policymakers with the necessary information to develop appropriate mitigation technologies at the local, regional and national scale.
Soil degradation in oil palm and rubber plantations under land resource scarcity			Tropical regions, such as Sumatra, experiencing extensive transformation of natural ecosystems, are close to complete exhaustion of available land. Agroecosystems strongly modify water and nutrient cycles, leading to losses of soil fertility, C sequestration and biodiversity. Although large companies are the main drivers of deforestation and plantation establishment, smallholders account for 40% of the oil palm and the majority of the rubber production in Indonesia. Here, we assess the extent and mechanisms of soil degradation under smallholder oil palm and rubber plantations in a context of land scarcity. The topsoil properties (C and N contents, C stocks, C/N ratio, bulk density) in 207 oil palm and rubber plantations in the Jambi province of Sumatra were determined beside trees, inside rows and interrows. Soils under oil palms were on average more degraded than under rubber, showing lower C content and stocks, lower N and higher bulk density. While soil properties were homogenous under rubber, two opposite trends were observed under oil palm plantations: the majority of soils had C content <2.2%, but about one fifth of the plantations had >9% C. This resulted from the establishment of oil palms under conditions of land scarcity. Because the oil palm boom started when rubber was already well-established, oil palms were frequently planted in marginal areas, such as peatlands or riparian areas (high C) or soils degraded by previous use (low C). The management of oil palms led to subsequent soil degradation, especially in interrows: C content decreased and bulk density increased in older oil palm plantations. This was not observed in rubber plantations because of a C input from leaf litter spread homogeneously all over the plantation, higher ground cover and a limited use of motorized vehicles. Considering that 10% of soils under oil palms had very low C content (<1%), we conclude that intensive cultivation can lead to intensive soil degradation and expect future degradation of soils under young oil palms. This challenges the sustainability of agricultural intensification in Sumatra. Because Sumatra is a pioneer of tropical land-use change, this should be regarded as potential threats that other tropical regions may face in future. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Soil enzyme responses to land use change in the tropical rainforest of the Colombian Amazon region			Soil enzymes mediate key processes and functions of the soils, such as organic matter decomposition and nutrient cycling in both natural and agricultural ecosystems. Here, we studied the activity of five extracellular soil enzymes involved in the C, N, and P-mineralizing process in both litter and surface soil layer of rainforest in the northwest region of the Colombian Amazon and the response of those soil enzymes to land use change. The experimental study design included six study sites for comparing long-term pasture systems to native forest and regeneration practices after pasture, within the main landscapes of the region, mountain and hill landscapes separately. Results showed considerable enzymatic activity in the litter layer of the forest, highlighting the vital role of this compartment in the nutrient cycling of low fertility soils from tropical regions. With the land use transition to pastures, changes in soil enzymatic activities were driven by the management of pastures, with SOC and N losses and reduced absolute activity of soil enzymes in long-term pastures under continuous grazing (25 years). However, the enzyme activities expressed per unit of SOC did not show changes in C and N-acquiring enzymes, suggesting a higher mineralization potential in pastures. Enzymatic stoichiometry analysis indicated a microbial P limitation that could lead to a high catabolic activity with a potential increase in the use of SOC by microbial communities in the search for P, thus affecting soil C sequestration, soil quality and the provision of soil-related ecosystem services.
Soil erosion as a resilience drain in disturbed tropical forests			Background Tropical forests are threatened by intensifying natural and anthropogenic disturbance regimes. Disturbances reduce tree cover and leave the organic topsoil vulnerable to erosion processes, but when resources are still abundant forests usually recover. Scope Across the tropics, variation in rainfall erosivity - a measure of potential soil exposure to water erosion - indicates that soils in the wetter regions would experience high erosion rates if they were not protected by tree cover. However, twenty-first-century global land cover data reveal that in wet South America tropical tree cover is decreasing and bare soil area is increasing. Here we address the role of soil erosion in a positive feedback mechanism that may persistently alter the functioning of disturbed tropical forests. Conclusions Based on an extensive literature review, we propose a conceptual model in which soil erosion reinforces disturbance effects on tropical forests, reducing their resilience with time and increasing their likelihood of being trapped in an alternative vegetation state that is persistently vulnerable to erosion. We present supporting field evidence from two distinct forests in central Amazonia that have been repeatedly disturbed. Overall, the strength of the erosion feedback depends on disturbance types and regimes, as well as on local environmental conditions, such as topography, flooding, and soil fertility. As disturbances intensify in tropical landscapes, we argue that the erosion feedback may help to explain why certain forests persist in a degraded state and often undergo critical functional shifts.
Soil fertility and species traits, but not diversity, drive productivity and biomass stocks in a Guyanese tropical rainforest			Tropical forests store and sequester large amounts of carbon in above- and below-ground plant biomass and soil organic matter (SOM), but how these are driven by abiotic and biotic factors remains poorly understood. Here, we test the effects of abiotic factors (light variation, caused by logging disturbance, and soil fertility) and biotic factors (species richness and functional trait composition) on biomass stocks (above-ground biomass, fine root biomass), SOM and productivity in a relatively monodominant Guyanese tropical rainforest. This forest grows on nutrient-poor soils and has few species that contribute most to total abundance. We, therefore, expected strong effects of soil fertility and species’ traits that determine resource acquisition and conservation, but not of diversity. We evaluated 6 years of data for 30 0.4-ha plots and tested hypotheses using structural equation models. Disturbance increased productivity but decreased above-ground biomass stocks. Soil phosphorus (P) enhanced above-ground biomass and productivity, whereas soil nitrogen reduced fine root biomass. In contrast to expectations, trait values representing acquisitive strategies (e.g. high leaf nutrient concentration) increased biomass stocks, possibly because they indicate higher nutrient absorption and thus higher biomass build-up. However, under harsh conditions where biomass increase is slow, acquisitive trait values may increase respiration and vulnerability to hazards and therefore increase biomass loss. As expected, species richness did not affect productivity. We conclude that light availability (through disturbance) and soil fertility—especially P—strongly limit forest biomass productivity and stocks in this Guyanese forest. Low P availability may cause strong environmental filtering, which in turn results in a small set of dominant species. As a result, community trait composition but not species richness determines productivity and stocks of biomass and SOM in tropical forest on poor soils. A plain language summary is available for this article. © 2017 The Authors. Functional Ecology © 2017 British Ecological Society
Soil Fungal Community Characteristics and Mycelial Production Across a Disturbance Gradient in Lowland Dipterocarp Rainforest in Borneo			The rainforests of Southeast Asia are a global biodiversity hotspot under increasing pressure from human activity. Selective logging and forest conversion to oil palm plantation has major implications for biogeochemical cycling and carbon storage that are underpinned by plant-soil interactions. Soil fungi are key regulators of carbon and mineral nutrient flows between above- and below-ground organisms, yet understanding of fungal community-productivity relationships in hyper-diverse tropical forests is lacking. Recent studies suggest sensitivity of soil fungal communities to land-use change, although impacts on fungal productivity remain largely unresolved. To address this gap, we installed hyphal in-growth bags for 6 months in old-growth (OG) and selectively logged (SL) forest and oil palm plantation (OP) in Bornean lowland rainforest. Mycelial (actively foraging) fungal communities were characterized by ITS amplicon sequencing, and mycelial production estimated by measurement of fungal hyphae. Mycelial fungal community compositions were similar in OG and SL forest, whereas OP had significantly different communities of saprotrophic, mycorrhizal, and pathogenic fungi. In particular, total mycorrhizal and ectomycorrhizal fungal relative abundances, total mycorrhizal richness and mycelial production was reduced. However, due to restricted sampling replication in OP, effects associated with site could not be excluded. In forest plots (OG & SL), we further explored the broader drivers of mycelial fungal communities using tree community, structure and productivity data, and soil and environmental properties. Forest mycelial community dissimilarities were related to soil and vegetation characteristics, while mycelial production was broadly independent of these as well as fungal community attributes. An increase in arbuscular mycorrhizal relative abundance was also found with selective logging, which may have implications for carbon storage capacity in these forests, while an apparent retention of mycorrhizal mycelium in SL forest may act as a reservoir of inoculum that could aid forest restoration. Our results show that conversion of rainforest to oil palm plantation has significant consequences for fungal diversity-productivity relationships with implications for nutrient and carbon dynamics and restoration over large spatial scales.
Soil Health Assessment of Forest Soils			Appropriate assessment of soil health is essential for understanding healthy ecosystems. Within forests, managing for ecosystem services such as clean water and air, food, fiber, or bioenergy requires knowledge of soil chemical, physical, and biological properties to assess a site’s capacity to sustainably produce those services and numerous other valuable forest products. These same soil properties are also used to quantify changes in soil functions such as filtering, buffering or nutrient cycling, but in complex forest ecosystems such assessment can be very difficult because of the multiple uses they must provide. The type of forest ecosystem (temperate or tropical) further complicates soil health assessment because different factors control both production and decomposition of biological material within these two distinct biomes. This chapter provides examples of how forest soil health is currently being assessed within temperate, tropical, and agroforestry ecosystems. Furthermore, we discuss how forest inventory and monitoring data can be effectively used to provide regional or national forest soil health indices. © 2021 Soil Science Society of America, Inc.
Soil Information as a Reforestation Decision-Making Tool and Its Implication for Forest Management in the Philippines			Over the last 2 decades, the Philippine government has devoted a considerable amount of resources to the rehabilitation and reforestation of degraded forest land. However, deforestation and forest degradation have continued to be a major environmental problem in the Philippines as vast forest cover is lost annually. While large-scale reforestation projects have been initiated, most have been far from successful. This chapter argues that soil is the single most important factor affecting survival, growth, and development of trees and thus, influence the success of reforestation programs. Within the context of the Philippines, it analyzes soil factors that limits the success of reforestation projects and discusses the use of exotic and native tree species in reforestation. Finally, it presents current research and development efforts to reforest degraded forest land, particularly the National Greening Program, and the role of the reforestation program on soil carbon sequestration.
Soil management for regulating C pools: Perspective in tropical and subtropical soils			Worldwide tropical region covers an area of about 8 billion ha. Tropics are increasingly threatened by intensive and inappropriate land use. According to some global data, land use change has resulted in losses of 25-50% of SOC in topsoil. The objective of this chapter is to highlight and synthesize the soil management options, which help to sequester carbon in tropical and subtropical regions. Some improved soil management practices for capturing and storing carbon with favourable impact on capturing carbon include growing cover crops, sowing crops with conservation tillage, maintaining balance level of soil fertility, and converting marginal and degraded lands to restorative land uses. A meta-analysis of 137 studies largely from tropical countries showed that the cover crop has the capability of annual change rate of 0.32 ± 0.08 mg ha-1 year-1 in the topsoil. Long-term conservation tillage experiments revealed that the improvement in soil organic C was proportionately higher in poorer soils than in soils with inherently higher organic C content. Integrated nutrient management involving addition of organic manures/composts along with inorganic fertilizers results in improved soil aggregation and greater carbon sequestration, especially in macroaggregates. Agricultural intensification also enhanced C-sequestration as increase in one tonne productivity of rice and wheat, resulting in a C-sequestration of 0.85 mg ha-1. Likewise, conversion of degraded croplands to grassland can result in an annual increase of 3% or more SOC concentration. Through this conversion, C-sequestration rate of 0.3-0.8 mg ha-1 year-1 was achieved in tropical West Africa. Some researchers even reported a higher sequestration rate between 1.2 and 1.7 mg ha-1 year-1 in the case of land conversion from degraded cultivated land to grassland. Maximizing the productivity of existing agricultural land and applying best management practices to that land would slow the loss of soil C. Soil C management needs to be considered within a broader framework of sustainable development. Widespread adoption of RMPs by resource-poor farmers of the tropics is urgently warranted. © Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020.
Soil management practices of major crops in the United States and their potential for carbon sequestration			Although the United States has no areas considered strictly tropical, there are subtropical and warm humid regions in the south where agricultural production is high. Practices in these regions, and the results of research on their effects towards carbon sequestration in soils, are certainly transferable to tropical regions. Soil management (e.g., tillage and amendment) and crop management (e.g., cropping system and cover crops) practices in the United States (with emphasis on the southern region) as well as new technologies and advances are covered in this chapter. Regulatory pathways for increasing carbon stores in managed agricultural lands in the United States are unlikely; therefore, willingness on the part of farmers to adopt practices aligned with C sequestration goals must be engendered. Reduced tillage and cover crop inclusion are being adopted more commonly in the United States. Reuse of organic waste materials for the benefit of agricultural production is also increasing. Breeding for greater or more stable root mass, and new methods for monitoring the flux of C from the soil to the atmosphere both represent exciting frontiers of discovery in this area. © Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020.
Soil microbial interconnections along ecological restoration gradients of lowland forests after slash-and-burn agriculture			Microbial interconnections in soil are pivotal to ecosystem services and restoration. However, little is known about how soil microbial interconnections respond to slash-and-bum agriculture and to the subsequent ecosystem restoration after the practice. Here, we used amplicon sequencing and co-occurrence network analyses to explore the interconnections within soil bacterial and fungal communities in response to slash-and-bum practice and a spontaneous restoration (spanning ca. 60 years) of tropical forests after the practice, in Papua New Guinea. We found significantly higher complexity and greater variations in fungal networks than in those of bacteria, despite no significant changes observed in bacterial or fungal networks across successional stages. Within most successional stages, bacterial core co-occurrences (co-occurrences consistently present across all sub-networks in a stage) were more frequent than those of fungi, indicating higher stability of interconnections between bacteria along succession. The stable interconnections occurred frequently between bacterial taxa (i.e. Sporosarcina, Acidimiaobiale and Bacillaceae) and between ectomycorrhizal fungi (Boletaceae and Russuia ochroleuca), implying important ecological roles of these taxa in the ecosystem restoration. Collectively, our results provide new insight into microbial interconnections in response to slash-and-bum agriculture and the subsequent ecosystem restoration, thus promoting a better understanding of microbial roles in ecosystem services and restoration.
Soil microbiome dynamics associated with conversion of tropical forests to different rubber based land use management systems			The biogeochemical cycles, carbon sequestration, and climate change all are significantly influenced by tropical rainforests, which is one of the world's most productive ecosystems and hotspots for biodiversity. Plantation crops like Rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) have displaced significant forest cover in the Asia pacific in the last two centuries due to their increasing demand. As a case study, we examined the soils of native forest (NF), rubber monoculture (RP) and three different managements i.e., cover crop (CC), weed crop (WC) and inter crop (IC) to understand the changes in microbial community structure across each practice and to estimate the influence of forest conversion to rubber monoculture on the soil microbiome. Soils were collected using nested sampling pattern and subjected to physiochemical characterization and whole metagenome sequencing. Results revealed that bacteria (60.56 M reads) predominated all land use types, followed by eukaryotes (0.52 M reads) and archaea (0.72 M reads). NF exhibited significantly higher bacterial richness and diversity then other land-use type. Interestingly, total functional diversity as well as genes associated with chemotaxis, flagellar assembly, and secretion systems were significantly higher in other land-use systems as compared to NF. Altogether, the results from this study indicate that the three different land use types used here like CC, IC, and WC has high abundance of functional diversity and biological profile compared to NF and RP. The study suggests that the adoption of aforementioned land-use management practices could play a significant role in fostering sustainable plantations in the tropics.
Soil natural capital modification through landuse and cover change in a tropical forest landscape: Implications for management			The aim of this study was to describe the effects of landuse change on soil properties using a space-for-time sampling strategy based on a mosaic of landuses (tropical forest, cropland maize, pastures and natural fallow plots) in three localities that differ in parent material, slope and climate. A multivariate discriminant function analysis was used to describe the results. Some soil properties did not change with landuse while others are use-sensitive. Landuse change from forest to maize has clear negative effects on β-glucosidase, dehydrogenase, total organic carbon concentration, nitrogen, bulk density and electrical conductivity with differences in magnitude between localities. With a change in landuse to pasture and secondary vegetation, soil properties responded positively, showing differential recovery. This study provides information that can be used to promote sustainable agricultural procedures that can change cultivation patterns and promote biological activity. © Forest Research Institute Malaysia.
Soil nutrients			Surface soil nutrients collected in 2007, 2012, 2017 from research plots described in Holl, K. D., J. L. Reid, R. J. Cole, F. Oviedo-Brenes, J. A. Rosales, and R. A. Zahawi. 2020. Applied nucleation facilitates tropical forest recovery: Lessons learned from a 15-year study. Journal of Applied Ecology 57:2316-2328 (https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2664.13684). In July-Aug 2007 and June-July 2012 and 2017 we collected twenty-five 2.5-cm diameter * 15-cm deep soil cores across each 50 x 50 m plot. Cores were mixed, passed through a 2-mm sieve and air dried prior to analysis. In 2007, 2012, and 2017 samples were analyzed for organic matter, Bray and Mehlich III P, and cations and micronutrients using Mehlich III extractions following standard procedures at Brookside Laboratories, Knoxville, Ohio (see https://www.blinc.com/resources/testing-methods for details on protocols). In 2007 a small sample was finely ground, and C and N were determined by Dumas combustion using a Carlo Erba 1108 elemental analyzer at the University of California, Santa Cruz Stable Isotope Laboratory - see http://es.ucsc.edu/~silab/index.php. In 2012 and 2017 C:N ratios were analyzed at Brookside Laboratories. Name of data files in data set: Soil - nutrients - 2007 - Brookside Labs Soil - nutrients - 2012 - Brookside Labs Soil - nutrients - 2012 - Brookside Labs Soil - CNisotopes - 2007 - UCSC Lab Soil - CN - 2012 - Brookside Labs Soil - CN - 2012 - Brookside Labs See read.me file for more details. Copyright: CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication
Soil nutrients affect spatial patterns of aboveground biomass and emergent tree density in southwestern Borneo			Studies on the relationship between soil fertility and aboveground biomass in lowland tropical forests have yielded conflicting results, reporting positive, negative and no effect of soil nutrients on aboveground biomass. Here, we quantify the impact of soil variation on the stand structure of mature Bornean forest throughout a lowland watershed (8-196 m a.s.l.) with uniform climate and heterogeneous soils. Categorical and bivariate methods were used to quantify the effects of (1) parent material differing in nutrient content (alluvium > sedimentary > granite) and (2) 27 soil parameters on tree density, size distribution, basal area and aboveground biomass. Trees >= 10 cm (diameter at breast height, dbh) were enumerated in 30 (0.16 ha) plots (sample area = 4.8 ha). Six soil samples (0-20 cm) per plot were analyzed for physiochemical properties. Aboveground biomass was estimated using allometric equations. Across all plots, stem density averaged 521 +/- 13 stems ha(-1), basal area 39.6 +/- 1.4 m(2) ha(-1) and aboveground biomass 518 +/- 28 Mg ha(-1) (mean +/- SE). Adjusted forest-wide aboveground biomass to account for apparent overestimation of large tree density (based on 69 0.3-ha transects; sample area = 20.7 ha) was 430 +/- 25 Mg ha(-1) stop. Stand structure did not vary significantly among substrates, but it did show a clear trend toward larger stature on nutrient-rich alluvium, with a higher density and larger maximum size of emergent trees. Across all plots, surface soil phosphorus (P), potassium, magnesium and percentage sand content were significantly related to stem density and/or aboveground biomass (R-Pearson = 0.368-0.416). In multiple linear regression, extractable P and percentage sand combined explained 31% of the aboveground biomass variance. Regression analyses on size classes showed that the abundance of emergent trees > 120 cm dbh was positively related to soil P and exchangeable bases, whereas trees 60-90 cm dbh were negatively related to these factors. Soil fertility thus had a significant effect on both total aboveground biomass and its distribution among size classes.
Soil nutrients limit fine litter production and tree growth in mature lowland forest of southwestern Borneo			Efforts to improve models of terrestrial productivity and to understand the function of tropical forests in global carbon cycles require a mechanistic understanding of spatial variation in aboveground net primary productivity (ANPP) across tropical landscapes. To help derive such an understanding for Borneo, we monitored aboveground fine litterfall, woody biomass increment and ANPP (their sum) in mature forest over 29 months across a soil nutrient gradient in southwestern Kalimantan. In 30 (0.07 ha) plots stratified throughout the watershed (∼340 ha, 8-190 m a.s.l.), we measured productivity and tested its relationship with 27 soil parameters. ANPP across the study area was among the highest reported for mature lowland tropical forests. Aboveground fine litterfall ranged from 5.1 to 11.0 Mg ha-1 year-1 and averaged 7.7 ± 0.4 (mean ± 95 C.I.). Woody biomass increment ranged from 5.8 to 23.6 Mg ha-1 year-1 and averaged 12.0 ± 2.0. Growth of large trees (≥60 cm dbh) contributed 38-82% of plot-wide biomass increment and explained 92% of variation among plots. ANPP, the sum of these parameters, ranged from 11.1 to 32.3 Mg ha-1 year-1 and averaged 19.7 ± 2.2. ANPP was weakly related to fine litterfall (r2= 0.176), but strongly related to growth of large trees at least 60 cm dbh (r2= 0.848). Adjusted ANPP after accounting for apparent "mature forest bias" in our sampling method was 17.5 ± 1.2 Mg ha-1 year-1.Relating productivity measures to soil parameters showed that spatial patterning in productivity was significantly related to soil nutrients, especially phosphorus (P). Fine litterfall increased strongly with extractable P (r2=0.646), but reached an asymptote at moderate P levels, whereas biomass increment (r 2=0.473) and ANPP (r2=0.603) increased linearly across the gradient. Biomass increment of large trees was more frequently and strongly related to nutrients than small trees, suggesting size dependency of tree growth on nutrients. Multiple linear regression confirmed the leading importance of soil P, and identified Ca as a potential co-limiting factor. Our findings strongly suggest that (1) soil nutrients, especially P, limit aboveground productivity in lowland Bornean forests, and (2) these forests play an important, but changing role in carbon cycles, as canopy tree logging alters these terrestrial carbon sinks. © 2007 Springer Science+Business Media, LLC.
Soil organic carbon fraction losses upon continuous plow-based tillage and its restoration by diverse biomass-C inputs under no-till in sub-tropical and tropical regions of Brazil			The conversion of native vegetation (NV) into agricultural land by clearing and tillage disrupts the soil structure, and depletes soil organic carbon (SOC) pool. The data on changes in SOC pools are needed to enhance scientific knowledge regarding the effects of land use and no-till (NT) systems on soil fertility, agronomic productivity, and soil C sink capacity. Thus, the objective of this study was to quantify changes in SOC fractions due to conversion of NV to agricultural land, and to assess the rate of recovery of SOC fractions and the resilience index of NT cropping systems under sub-tropical (Ponta Grossa/PR - PG) and tropical (Lucas do Rio Verde/MT - LRV) regions of Brazil. The conversion from CT to NT was 29 and 8 years at the PG and LRV sites, respectively. Five different fractions of SOC pools were extracted by chemical methods (i.e., C in the polysaccharides - CTPS, hot-water extractable C - HWEOC, chemically-stabilized organic C - CSOC), and physical fractionation (i.e., particulate organic C - POC, and mineral-associated organic C - MAOC). Land use change primarily altered the labile (HWEOC, TPS, and POC) and also some of the stable (MAOC) pools at both sites. The CSOC pool was almost constant throughout the soil profile and represented, across land uses, 7.2 g C kg(-1) at the PG and 3.1 g C kg(-1) at the LRV sites. At the PG site, the HWEOC and CUPS concentrations in the 0-5 cm depth decreased by 56% (1.21 g kg(-1)) and 45% (7.21 g kg(-1)) in CT soil, respectively. At the LRV site, concentrations of HWEOC and CTPS in the 0-5 cm depth decreased by 50% (0.4 g kg(-1)) and 42% (4.8 g kg(-1)), respectively. In contrast, concentrations of HWEOC and CTPS fractions in soil under NT in the 0-20 cm depth were closer than those under NV, and exhibited a distinct gradient from surface to sub-soil layers. The adoption of CT reduced POC by 46% (4.7 Mg ha(-1)), and MAOC by 21% (15.1 Mg C ha(-1)) in the 0-20 cm depth at the PG site. Using CT for 23 years at the LRV site, decreased SOC fractions in the 0-20 cm depth at the rate of 0.25 and 034 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1) for POC and MAOC, respectively. In contrast, adoption of intensive NT systems in tropical agro-ecoregions increased POC at the rate of 0.23 to 0.36 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1), and MAOC by 0.52 and 0.70 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1). An important effect to be emphasized is the possibility of recovering, at least partially, the SOC fractions by adopting high biomass-C inputs under NT management, and despite the fact that the experimental duration at the LRV site was only eight years. With a high and diversified input of biomass-C in intensive NT systems, higher resilience index was observed for CTPS, HWEOC, and MAOC. The variation in SOC among CT and NT systems was mainly attributed to the MAOC fraction, indicating that a significant proportion of that fraction is relatively labile, and that spatial inaccessibility of SOC plays a significant role in the restoration of SOC. (C) 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Soil Organic Carbon Stocks across Hydrologic Schemes in Freshwater Wetlands of the Chi River Basin, Northeast Thailand			The role of freshwater wetlands as soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks has been well documented for temperate regions but less is well known in tropical regions. In this study, SOC stocks were compared within three different hydrologic schemes in six freshwater wetlands of the Chi River Basin in tropical Northeast Thailand. The SOC concentration exhibited a decrease with increased depth and significantly differed among the hydrologic schemes (9.15 +/- 0.84, 8.66 +/- 0.67, and 5.53 +/- 0.49 g C kg(-1) for the intermittently flooded zone, saturated zone, and permanently flooded zone, respectively). The SOC stocks at 50 cm depth were significantly highest in the intermittently flooded zone (69.05 +/- 10.86 Mg C ha(-1)), followed by the saturated zone and the permanently flooded zone (66.06 +/- 7.75 and 43.39 +/- 5.83 Mg C ha(-1), respectively). Total SOC stocks among wetlands ranged from 123.30 to 291.29 Mg C ha(-1). These differences indicate the spatial variability of SOC within wetland locations and among wetlands. The study demonstrates an important ecosystem service of these wetlands as carbon stocks, and it will be useful for management and policy planning of the wetlands in the Chi River Basin.
Soil organic carbon turnover following forest restoration in south China: Evidence from stable carbon isotopes			As over half of the world's tropical forests are reforested or afforested, understanding the resilience of carbon (C) pool in these forests is critical for global C balance. While most previous studies on the reforested lands have focused on C stock recovery, soil C turnover has largely been overlooked. We evaluated soil C turnover rate by calculating the isotopic enrichment factors of α (defined as the slope of the regression between the δ13C difference and ln-transferred C concentrations in mineral soil samples relative to the surface litter) and β (defined as the slope of the regression between δ13C and log-transferred C concentrations) along 0–30 cm soil profiles in a 400-year-old monsoon evergreen broad-leaved forest (MEBF), a 51-year-old mixed-native plantation (NP1), a 31-year-old mixed-native plantation (NP2), a 31-year-old Acacia mangium plantation (AP), a 31-year-old mixed-conifer plantation (CP), and a 31-year-old secondary forest with natural restoration (SF). Results showed that soil C stocks did not differ among the six forests. The estimated α values ranged from 1.0023 to 1.0086 and increased in the order of MEBF = NP1 < NP2 = AP = CP < SF. The estimated β values ranged from −19.70 to −5.22 but showed an opposite trend to α values. Additionally, changes of the α and β values among these forests were mainly regulated by soil water content and bulk density. Our findings demonstrate that forest restoration could enhance soil C stock equivalent to the undisturbed old-growth forests within a few decades, but the rate of soil C turnover in these restored forests were still higher. © 2020 Elsevier B.V.
Soil organic carbon variation under sub-tropical forest of Himachal Pradesh, India			It is important to estimate soil organic carbon (SOC) content of natural forests for an understanding of the Himalayan ecosystem. In this study SOC concentration was evaluated at three different soil depths (0-10, 10-20 and 20-30 cm) under Anogeissus latifolia (site I) and Pinus roxburghii (site II) forest stands in Himachal Pradesh, India. SOC (%) in these forests ranged from 0.37% to 2.20% up to 30 cm soil depth and was higher at site I compared to site II. Tree density was also more at site I than site II. The present study shows that the tree species can influence SOC of the forest ecosystem, but other environmental parameters such as soil type, moisture and pH are also responsible for changes in the soil carbon sequestration potential. Carbon sequestration in the study area showed significant contribution in minimizing the increase in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and improving soil quality.
Soil organic matter and nutrient accumulation in areas under intensive management and swine manure application			Purpose Land use change and soil management are frequently associated to land degradation and soil organic matter (SOM) losses in tropical regions. In Brazil, in order to avoid this process, different management strategies have been applied, such as no-tillage and agricultural disposal of swine manure (SM). This study was carried out to evaluate the quantity and quality of SOM, as well as the occurrence of nutrient accumulation in soils of areas under contrasting management systems that have received consecutive applications of SM over the last decades in Brazil.Materials and methods Five land uses were sampled: native vegetation (NV), pasture with SM application (PA + SM), no-tillage with SM application (NT + SM), no-tillage (NT), and conventional tillage with SM application (CT + SM). Soil organic carbon (SOC), N, labile C, C management index (CMI), P, Ca2+, Mg2+, K+, Al3+, Fe, Zn, Mn, Cu, and H + Al were quantified.Results and discussion Except for PA + SM, the agricultural land uses caused decreases in SOC contents comparing to NV. PA + SM showed the highest C stocks, 138.9 +/- 3.4 Mg ha(-1) down to 0.4 m. The application of SM can be associated to the greater C stocks in PA + SM, NT + SM, and CT + SM and to the higher N contents in all land uses under this practice. Land uses which receive higher rates of swine manure application (PA + SM and CT + SM) have shown CMI greater than 100. However, this practice is associated to the accumulation of P, Cu, Na, and Zn in these soils.Conclusions The SM application is associated to improvement on C stocks and SOM quality in area under pasture, no-tillage, and conventional tillage in Parana State, Brazil. However, this practice is the main driver of nutrient accumulation in these areas.
Soil organic matter dynamics and soil carbon stocks from tropical and sub-tropical areas under no-till: An on-farm research			Understanding the mechanisms of soil organic matter (SOM) stabilization is fundamental to soil carbon sequestration and reduction of greenhouse gas emission (GEE), playing a pivotal role in the soil carbon cycle. Soil samples were collected from 1-meter trenches in no-till systems and compared to native vegetation, totalizing 256 samples from commercial farms in the Cerrado, Atlantic Forest, and Pampa Brazilian biomes. Soil fractionation (>53 mu m and < 53 <mu>m), laser-induced fluorescence spectroscopy (LIFS), and delta C-13 isotopic analysis were employed to investigate SOM dynamics and their relationships with soil carbon stocks. SOM presents chemical compounds more susceptible to decomposition in the surface, increasing its recalcitrance in deeper layers. Over 90 % of soil carbon is in the < 53 mu m fraction, indicating organo-mineral association as the major SOM stabilization mechanism. However, in a minor extension physical protection by soil aggregation, can play a role in SOM stabilization. H-LIFS from < 53 mu m fraction demonstrated that SOM in these agricultural areas contains more labile compounds than in native vegetation areas, indicating recently incorporated less transformed organic material. Farms 2 and 4 (Cerrado) showed increases in carbon stocks in agricultural areas compared to native vegetation of 89 Mg C ha(-1) and 24 Mg C ha(-1), respectively, with distinct delta C-13 patterns. Farm 1 (Atlantic Forest) presented a reduction of 59 Mg C ha(-1), primarily due to land use change, from native vegetation to agriculture. Farm 3 (Pampa) maintained its carbon stock, with no differences in delta C-13 patterns. These findings provide valuable insights into SOM stabilization for carbon sequestration, and the benefits of conservationist management practices, emphasizing the importance of generate data from on-farm research experiments. Measurements from agricultural and native vegetation areas in on-farm research across commercial farms provide real-field data to optimize protocols and support good management practices for enhancing soil carbon sequestration in tropical regions.
Soil organic matter, biota and aggregation in temperate and tropical soils - Effects of no-tillage			The long-term stabilization of soil organic matter (SOM) in tropical and temperate regions is mediated by soil biota (e. g. fungi, bacteria, roots and earthworms), soil structure (e. g. aggregation) and their interactions. On average, soil C turnover was twice as fast in tropical compared with temperate regions, but no major differences were observed in SOM quality between the two regions. Probably due to the soil mineralogy dominated by 1: 1 clay minerals and oxides in tropical regions, we found a higher aggregate stability, but a lower correlation between C contents and aggregate stability in tropical soils. In addition, a smaller amount of C associated with clay and silt particles was observed in tropical versus temperate soils. In both tropical and temperate soils, a general increase in C levels (approximate to 325 +/- 113 kg C.ha(-1).yr(-1)) was observed under no-tillage compared with conventional tillage. On average, in temperate soils under no-tillage, compared with conventional tillage, CH4 uptake (approximate to0.42 +/- 0.10 kg C-CH4.ha(-1) yr(-1)) increased and N2O emissions increased (approximate to 1.95 +/- 0.45 kg N-N2O.ha(-1).yr(-1)). These increased N2O emissions lead to a negative global warming potential when expressed on a CO2 equivalent basis.
Soil organic matter, nutrient cycling and biological dinitrogen-fixation in agroforestry systems			This special issue includes a series of manuscripts presented at the second World Congress of Agroforestry held in Nairobi, Kenya, 23-28 August 2009. The studies were performed in various tropical and temperate regions. They cover a wide range of topics on nutrient cycling in different agroforestry types: soil organic matter fractions, biological N2 fixation and soil enrichment. All of these case studies showed that soil organic matter fractions play an important role in soil C sequestration and nutrient cycling processes in agroforestry systems. Fallow systems enriched with leguminous trees appear to be a viable option for managing N despite the large amount of N removed from the system as timber and fuelwood. © 2011 Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
Soil properties of thickets and adjacent land use types in coastal savanna landscape of Ghana			Thicket vegetation may be of great importance in soil carbon (C) storage and in provision of other ecosystem services such as soil erosion control and biodiversity conservation. However, it is less studied in tropical ecosystems due to limited understanding of its ecological importance. This study reports soil C pools and nutrient concentrations [nitrogen (N), available phosphorus (P), exchangeable calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg) and potassium (K)] of unique thicket formations on Vertisol in comparison with adjacent land use types viz. rangeland, dry forest, and farmland at Kpong in the coastal Accra plains of Ghana. We also examined soil particle and nutrient distributions of termitarium associated with the thicket clumps on the Vertisols. Soils were sampled from each land use at 0-30 cm depth in addition to deep coring up to 100 cm. In the rangeland, forest and farmland, we demarcated 1600 m(2) area each and established 4 subplots measuring 20 x 20 m (400 m(2)) and selected for the thicket vegetation, 4 thicket clumps each of approximately 400 m(2) for soil sampling. The thicket clumps had greater soil total N, available P, exchangeable Ca and Mg concentrations than the rangeland and farmland but the levels in the thicket were similar (p > 0.05) to that of the adjacent dry forest. Soil C stock varied from 59 Mg ha(-1) in the rangeland to 111 Mg ha(-1) in the thicket clumps. The C stored in the silt + clay (S + C) fraction did not differ significantly (p > 0.05) in both the thicket and the dry forest, indicating similar C sequestration abilities. The S + C fraction contributed 89.6, 82.8, 81.3, and 73.7% to total soil organic C content in the rangeland, farmland, dry forest, and thickets, respectively. Soils of the termite mounds in the thickets were more clayey (ca. 38-41% clay) than the surrounding thicket soils (ca. 32% clay). We conclude that Vertisols in thicket areas store soil C and nutrients comparably as tropical dry forest, underscoring their ecological importance and the need for their conservation to enhance soil quality in the Anthropocene.
Soil Respiration in Planted and Naturally Regenerated Castanopis carelesii Forests during Three Years Post-Establishment			Reforestation through assisted natural regeneration usually accumulates more biomass carbon than through tree planting, but its effects on soil respiration (Rs) and its components, autotrophic respiration (Ra) and heterotrophic respiration (Rh), are poorly understood despite the importance in forest carbon cycling. In this study, we clear-cut part of a 35-year-old secondary Castanopsis carelesii (C. carelesii) forest and reforested the logged land with C. carelesii via two approaches-active tree planting and assisted natural regeneration-and measured Rs, Ra, and Rh as well as soil temperature and moisture in these forests. In the first two years following reforestation, Rs, Ra and Rh rates were mostly reduced in the two young forests compared to the secondary forest, likely due to reduced photosynthate production and thus carbon substrate input associated with the clear-cut. However, the Rh:Rs ratio was significantly greater in the young plantation than in the other two forests in the first two years, suggesting a greater loss of soil organic carbon from the young plantation. In the third year, the mean Rs, Rh, and Ra rates of the young forest established via assisted natural regeneration were similar to those of the secondary forest, but significantly greater than those of the young plantation. The rates of Rs, Rh, and Ra mostly increased exponentially with increasing soil temperature in all forests, but mostly lack significant relationships with soil moisture. These findings indicate that, compared with reforestation via tree plantation, assisted natural regeneration not only reduced the loss of soil organic carbon via soil respiration, but also had a more rapid recovery of soil respiration to the level of the secondary forest. Our study highlights that, in addition to temperature, carbon substrate availability is also important in regulating soil respiration following reforestation.
SOIL RESPONSES TO RESTORATION OF A TROPICAL PASTURE IN VERACRUZ, SOUTH-EASTERN MEXICO			TOBON W, MARTINEZ-GARZA C & CAMPO J. 2011. Soil responses to restoration of a tropical pasture in Veracruz, south-eastern Mexico. Investigations were carried out on litter nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P), and soil carbon (C), N and P in an active pasture, a mature tropical rainforest, and two treatments of restoration (cattle exclusion alone and combined with planting of tree seedling) in Veracruz, Mexico. The aim was to outline how the two treatments of restoration affect the recovery of soil nutrient status in the short-term (one year). Thirty years of cattle ranching activities decreased the litter N and P pools by a factor of 72 in the former and Si in the latter, largely reflecting differences in litter mass between pasture and mature forest. Pasture soils consistently had lower pools of organic C and total N and ammonium (NH4+) than forest soils. However, landuse did not affect the pool of soil nitrate (NO3-), and total and extractable P. Exclusion of grazing and exclusion of grazing plus planted tree seedlings increased N and P pools in the litter. In contrast, restoration treatments did not consistently affect soil C, N and P. The main response to restoration practices was a decrease of NO3- and extractable P pools in soils. Overall, we observed that, subsequent to these practices, there
Soil-litter ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) community response to reforested lands of Gishwati tropical montane forest, northern-western part of Rwanda			Recently, human activities have impacted biodiversity-rich forest in western Rwanda, creating a need to enhance restoration activities of degraded lands in the region. To evaluate the effects of reforestation activities on the community composition of soil-litter ants, research was conducted in Gishwati tropical montane forest, located in northern-western part of Rwanda. The ant fauna was studied in reforested lands dominated by regenerated native species and exotic tree species. Further, a primary forest made of native trees served as a reference. In each forest type, nine sampling points were used to sample ants. Ant specimens were collected using pitfalls, hand sampling and Winkler extractor. They were identified to subfamilies, genus and species levels using dichotomous keys, and also statistically analysed for species richness, diversity, evenness and community composition. We collected a total of 2,481 individuals from 5 subfamilies, 18 genera and 35 species. Higher abundance, diversity and species richness were found in soil-litter under natural primary and secondary forests dominated by regenerated native plant species compared to exotic tree forest. The ant community composition analysis indicated higher similarities in ant species sampled under primary native forest and secondary forest dominated by regenerated native species. Reforestation by regenerating native species may be given priority in restoration of degraded lands due to their importance in species richness and species diversity.
Some aspects of ecophysiological and biogeochemical responses of tropical forests to atmospheric change			Atmospheric changes that may affect physiological and biogeochemical processes in old-growth tropical forests include: (i) rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations; (ii) an increase in land surface temperature; (iii) changes in precipitation and ecosystem moisture status; and (iv) altered disturbance regimes. Elevated CO2 is likely to directly influence numerous leaf-level physiological processes, but whether these changes are ultimately reflected in altered ecosystem carbon storage is unclear. The net primary productivity (NPP) response of old-growth tropical forests to elevated CO2 is unknown, but unlikely to exceed the maximum experimentally measured 25% increase in NPP with a doubling of atmospheric CO2 from pre-industrial levels. In addition, evolutionary constraints exhibited by tropical plants adapted to low CO2 levels during most of the Late Pleistocene, may result in little response to increased carbon availability. To set a maximum potential response for a Central Amazon forest, using an individual-tree-based carbon cycling model, a modelling experiment was performed constituting a 25% increase in tree growth rate, linked to the known and expected increase in atmospheric CO2. Results demonstrated a maximum carbon sequestration rate of ca. 0.2 Mg C per hectare per year (ha(-1) yr(-1), where 1 ha = 10(4) m(2)), and a sequestration rate of only 0.05 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1) for an interval centred on calendar years 1980-2020. This low rate results from slow growing trees and the long residence time of carbon in woody tissues. By contrast, changes in disturbance frequency, precipitation patterns and other environmental factors can cause marked and relatively rapid shifts in ecosystem carbon storage. It is our view that observed changes in tropical forest inventory plots over the past few decades is more probably being driven by changes in disturbance or other environmental factors, than by a response to elevated CO2. Whether these observed changes in tropical forests are the beginning of long-term permanent shifts or a transient response is uncertain and remains an important research priority.
Some perspectives on carbon sequestration in agriculture			One of the main options for greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation identified by the IPCC is the sequestration of carbon in soils. Since the breaking of agricultural land in most regions, the carbon stocks have been depleted to such an extent, that they now represent a potential sink for CO2 removal from the atmosphere. Improved management will however, be required to increase the inputs of organic matter in the top soil and/or decrease decomposition rates. In this paper we use data from selected regions to explore the global potential for carbon sequestration in arable soils. While realising that C sequestration is not limited to the selected regions, we have, however, focussed our review on two regions: (i) Canadian Prairies and (ii) The Tropics. In temperate regions, management changes for an increase in C involve increase in cropping frequency (reducing bare fallow), increasing use of forages in crop rotations, reducing tillage intensity and frequency, better crop residue management, and adopting agroforestry. In the tropics, agroforestry remains the primary method by which sequestration rates may be significantly increased. Increases in soil C may be achieved through improved fertility of cropland/pasture; on extensive systems with shifting cultivation cropped fallows and cover crops may be beneficial, and adopting agro forestry or foresting marginal cropland is also an alternative. In addition, in the tropics it is imperative to reduce the clearing of forests for conversion to cropland. Some regional analyses of soil C sequestration and sequestration potential have been performed, mainly for temperate industrialized North America where the majority of research pertaining to C sequestration has been carried out. More research is needed, especially for the Tropics, to more accurately capture the impact of region-specific interactions between climate, soil, and management of resources on C sequestration, which are lost in global level assessments. By itself, C sequestration in agricultural soils can make only modest contributions (3-6% of fossil fuel contributions) to mitigation of overall greenhouse gas emissions. However, effective mitigation policies will not be based on any single 'magic bullet' solutions, but rather on many modest reductions which are economically efficient and which confer additional benefits to society. In this context, soil C sequestration is a significant mitigation option. © 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Soundscapes and artificial intelligence provide powerful tools to track biodiversity recovery in tropical forests			Tropical forest recovery is fundamental to addressing the intertwined climate and biodiversity loss crises. While regenerating trees sequester carbon relatively quickly, the pace of biodiversity recovery remains contentious. Here, we use bioacoustics and meta-barcoding to measure forest recovery post-agriculture in a global biodiversity hotspot in Ecuador. We show that the community composition, and not species richness, of vocalizing vertebrates identified by experts reflects the restoration gradient. Two automated measures - an acoustic index model and a bird community derived from an independently developed Convolutional Neural Network - correlated well with restoration (adj-R2 = 0.62 and 0.69, respectively). Importantly, both measures reflected composition of non-vocalizing nocturnal insects identified via meta-barcoding. We show that such automated monitoring tools, based on new technologies, can effectively monitor the success of forest recovery, using robust and reproducible data. Crucially, this will help ensure that forest restoration efforts result in resilient, biodiverse tropical forests and not simply carbon farms. DNA was extracted from 200-L aliquots using the DNEasy blood & tissue kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturers instructions. Multiplex PCR was performed using 5 L of extracted genomic DNA, Plant MyTAQ (Bioline, Luckenwalde, Germany) and high-throughput sequencing (HTS)-adapted mini-barcode primers targeting the mitochondrial CO1-5P region (mlCOIintF - 5- GWACWGGWTGAACWGTWTAYCCYCC-3; dgHCO2198-5-TAAACTTCAGGGTGACCAAARAAYCA-3; following Leray et al., 2013 - also see Moriniere et al.; Moriniere et al.. Amplification success and fragment length were determined using gel electrophoresis. The amplified DNA was cleaned and each sample was resuspended in 50 L of molecular water. Illumina Nextera XT (Illumina Inc., San Diego, USA) indices were ligated to the samples in a second PCR, conducted at the same annealing temperature as in the first but with only seven cycles. Ligation success was confirmed by gel electrophoresis. DNA concentrations were measured using a Qubit fluorometer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA), and the samples were then combined into 40-L pools containing equimolar concentrations of 100 ng each. The pooled DNA was purified using MagSi-NGSprep Plus beads (Steinbrenner Laborsysteme GmbH, Wiesenbach, Germany). The final elution volume was 20 L. HTS was performed on an Illumina MiSeq using v3 chemistry (2*300bp, 600 cycles, maximum of 25 mio paired-end reads). # DNA Metabarcoding RAW FASTQ data for "Soundscapes and artificial intelligence provide powerful tools to track biodiversity recovery in tropical forests" [this dataset contains demultiplexed Illumina FASTQ files along with a samplesheet to process these files and an excel file listing all of the detected BINs with identification success rate and taxonomy retreived from sequence BLAST on BOLD (www.boldsystems.org)] **Demultiplexed RAW FASTQ Illumina sequence data files used for analysis of the dataset.** Use the "*BIOINFORMATIC\_INFORMATION.xlsx*" file for your bioinformatic pipeline to run primer trimming. Each FASTQ file is listed within the *BIOINFORMATIC\_INFORMATION.xlsx* with its corresponding primer sequences used. Follow the methods described in the material & methods section (described below) in order to generate an annotated OTU table. Primer used CO1 Leray et al., 2013 - https://frontiersinzoology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1742-9994-10-34 **Excel File containing detected BINs** Within the file "Nocturnal\_Arthropod\_Communities.xlsx" all of the detected BINs (Barcode Index Numbers) along with Hit-%-identity scores and taxonomy are listed. Presence of each BIN in the samples is indicated by read numbers. **Bioinformatics methods:** Paired-ends were merged using the *-fastq\_mergepairs* utility of the USEARCH suite v11.0.667\_i86linux32 (Edgar, 2010) with the following parameters: *-fastq\_maxdiffs* 99, *-fastq\_pctid* 75, *-fastq\_trunctail* 0\. Adapter sequences were removed using CUTADAPT75 (single-end mode, with default parameters). All sequences that did not contain the appropriate adapter sequences were filtered out in this step using the *--discard-untrimmed* parameter. The remaining pre-processing steps (quality filtering, dereplication, chimera filtering, and pre-clustering) were carried out using the VSEARCH suite v2.9.176. Quality filtering was performed using the *--fastq\_filter* VSEARCH utility (parameters: *--fastq\_maxee* 1, *--minlen* 300). Sequences were dereplicated with *--derep\_fulllength* (parameters: *--sizeout, --relabel Uniq*), first at the sample level, and then at the combined dataset level after concatenating all sample files into one large FASTA file, which was also filtered for singletons (sequences occurring only once in the entire dataset and *a priori* considered as noise; parameters: *--minuniquesize* 2, *--sizein*, *--sizeout*, *--fasta\_width* 0). To save processing power, a pre-clustering step (at 98% identity) was employed before chimera filtering using the *--cluster\_size* VSEARCH utility with the centroids algorithm (parameters: *--id* 0.98, *--strand plus*, *--sizein*, *--sizeout*, *--fasta\_width* 0, *--centroids*). Chimeric sequences were then detected and filtered out from the resulting file using the VSEARCH *--uchime\_denovo* utility (parameters: *--sizein*, *--sizeout*, *--fasta\_width* 0, *--nonchimeras*). A custom perl script obtained from the authors of VSEARCH (see [https://github.com/torognes/vsearch/wiki/VSEARCH-pipeline](https://github.com/torognes/vsearch/wiki/VSEARCH-pipeline)) was then used to regenerate the concatenated FASTA file, but without the previously detected chimeric sequences. The resulting chimera-filtered file was then used to cluster the reads into OTUs using SWARM v.3.1.077 (parameters: *-d* 13 *-z*). The value for the *d* parameter was chosen based on the experiments of Antich *et al.*78. The OTU representative sequences were then sorted using VSEARCH (parameters: *--fasta\_width* 0 *--sortbysize*) and an OTU table was constructed from the resulting FASTA file using the VSEARCH utility *--usearch\_global* (parameters: *--strand plus* *--sizein* *--sizeout* *--fasta\_width* 0). To reduce the risk of false-positives, a cleaning step was employed that excluded read counts in the OTU table constituting < 0.01% of the total number of reads in the sample. OTUs were additionally removed from the results based on negative control samples, i.e. if the number of reads for the OTU in any sample was less than the maximum among negative controls, those reads were excluded from further analysis. OTU representative sequences were blasted (parameters: program: Megablast; maximum hits: 1; scoring (match mismatch): 1-2; gap cost (open extend): linear; max E-value: 10; word size: 28; max target seqs 100) against (1) a custom database downloaded from GenBank (a local copy of the NCBI nucleotide database downloaded from ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/db/), and (2) a custom database built from data downloaded from BOLD ([www.boldsystems.org](http://www.boldsystems.org)79,80) including taxonomy and BIN information, by means of Geneious (v.10.2.5 - Biomatters, Auckland, New Zealand). All available Animalia data was downloaded from the BOLD database on 29 July 2022 using the available public data API (http://www.boldsystems.org/index.php/resources/api) in a combined TSV file format. The combined TSV file was then filtered to keep only the records that: (1) had a sequence (field 72, nucleotides); (2) had a sequence that did not hold exclusively one or more - (hyphens); had a sequence that did not contain non-IUPAC characters; (3) belonged to COI (the pattern COI-5P in either field 70 (markercode) or field 80 (marker\_codes)); (5) had an available BIN (field 8, bin\_uri). In (5), an exception was made in cases where the species belonging to that record did not occur with a BIN elsewhere in the dataset. In other words, BIN-less records were kept if their species were also completely BIN-less in the dataset. The dataset was then filtered to include only South American records, and in the following way: (1) records were kept that contained, in field 55 (country), the South American country names: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Falkland Islands, French Guiana, Guiana, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, and Venezuela; (2) records were additionally kept if their latitude (field 47, lat) was between -58.4 and 17 and their longitude (field 48, lon) was between -85.8 and -30.3. These values were found by taking the extreme north (Punta Gallinas), south (Cape Forward), east (Ponta do Seixas), and west (Punta Parinas) points of the continent. As a buffer, 500 km were added due north, south, east, and west, respectively of those geographic points using the Measure on Map function of SunEarthTools.com. It was then noted that a large part of the dataset, thus filtered, held also records from several Central American countries, in particular Costa Rica, whose biodiversity on BOLD dwarfs all other South American countries. Thus, a decision was made to additionally include all remaining records from Costa Rica. Finally, a FASTA file annotated with a Process ID (field 1, processid), BIN (field 8), taxonomy (fields 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22 - phylum\_name, class\_name, order\_name, family\_name, subfamily\_name, genus\_name, species\_name), geo location data (fields 47, 48, 55), and GenBank ID (field 71, genbank\_accession) was created from the filtered combined TSV file, and then converted into a BLAST database using Geneious v10.2.6 (Biomatters, Auckland, New Zealand). The results were exported and further processed according to methods described by Uhler *et al.*65. Briefly, the resulting csv files, which included the OTU ID, BOLD Process ID, BIN, Hit-%-ID value (percentage of overlap similarity (identical base pairs) of an OTU query sequence with its closest counterpart in the database), Grade-%-ID value (combining query coverage, E-value and identity values for each hit with weights of 0.5, 0.25 and 0.25 respectively, allowing determination of the longest, highest-identity hits), the length of the top BLAST hit sequence, as well as the phylum, class, order, family, genus and species information for each detected OTU were exported from Geneious and combined with the OTU table generated by the bioinformatic pre-processing pipeline. As an additional measure of control other than BLAST, the OTUs were classified into taxa using the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) naive Bayesian classifier81 trained on a cleaned COI dataset of Arthropods and Chordates (plus outgroups; see Porter & Hajibabei82. OTUs were also annotated with the taxonomic information from the NCBI (downloaded from https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/"), followed by the creation of a taxonomic consensus between BOLD, NCBI and RDP. Copyright: CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication
Sources of anthropogenic fire ignitions on the peat-swamp landscape in Kalimantan, Indonesia			Fire disturbance in many tropical forests, including peat swamps, has become more frequent and extensive in recent decades. These fires compromise a variety of ecosystem services, among which mitigating global climate change through carbon storage is particularly important for peat swamps. Indonesia holds the largest amount of tropical peat carbon globally, and mean annual CO2 emissions from decomposition of deforested and drained peatlands and associated fires in Southeast Asia have been estimated at, similar to 2000 Mt y-1. A key component to understanding and therefore managing fire in the region is identifying the land use/land cover classes associated with fire ignitions. We assess the oft-asserted claim that escaped fires from oil palm concessions and smallholder farms near settlements are the primary sources of fire in a peat-swamp forest area in Central Kalimantan, Indonesia, equivalent to around a third of Kalimantan's total peat area. We use the MODIS Active Fire product from 2000 to 2010 to evaluate the fire origin and spread on the land use/land cover classes of legal, industrial oil palm concessions (the only type of legal concession in the study area), non-forest, and forest, as well as in relation to settlement proximity. We find that most fires (68-71%) originate in non-forest, compared to oil palm concessions (17%-19%), and relatively few (6-9%) are within 5 km of settlements. Moreover, most fires started within oil palm concessions and in close proximity to settlements stay within those boundaries (90% and 88%, respectively), and fires that do escape constitute only a small proportion of all fires on the landscape (2% and 1%, respectively). Similarly, a small proportion of fire detections in forest originate from oil palm concessions (2%) and within close proximity to settlements (2%). However, fire ignition density in oil palm (0.055 ignitions km(-2)) is comparable to that in non-forest (0.060 km-2 ignitions km(-2)), which is approximately ten times that in forest (0.006 ignitions km(-2)). Ignition density within 5 km of settlements is the highest at 0.125 ignitions km(-2). Furthermore, increased anthropogenic activity in close proximity to oil palm concessions and settlements produces a detectable pattern of fire activity. The number of ignitions decreases exponentially with distance from concessions; the number of ignitions initially increases with distance from settlements, and, around from 7.2 km, then decreases with distance from settlements. These results refute the claim that most fires originate in oil palm concessions, and that fires escaping from oil palm concessions and settlements constitute a major proportion of fires in this study region. However, there is a potential for these land use types to contribute substantially to the fire landscape if their area expands. Effective fire management in this area should therefore target not just oil palm concessions, but also non-forested, degraded areas where ignitions and fires escaping into forest are most likely to occur. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Sparing land for secondary forest regeneration protects more tropical biodiversity than land sharing in cattle farming landscapes			Effectively managing farming to meet food demand is vital for the future of biodiversity.(1,2) Increasing yields on existing farmland can allow the abandonment (sparing) of low-yielding areas that subsequently recover as secondary forest.(2-5) A key question is whether such "secondary sparing" conserves biodiversity more effectively than retaining wildlife-friendly habitat within farmland ("land sharing"). Focusing on the Colombian Choco-Andes, a global hotspot of threatened biodiversity,(6) and on cattle farming, we examined the outcomes of secondary sparing and land sharing via simulated scenarios that maintained constant landscape-wide production and equal within-pasture yield: (1) for species and functional diversity of dung beetles and birds; (2) for avian phylogenetic diversity; and (3) across different stages of secondary forest regeneration, relative to spared primary forests. Sparing older secondary forests (15-30 years recovery) promotes substantial species, functional, and phylogenetic (birds only) diversity benefits for birds and dung beetles compared to land sharing. Species of conservation concern had higher occupancy estimates under land-sparing compared to land-sharing scenarios. Spared secondary forests accumulated equivalent diversity to primary forests for dung beetles within 15 years and within 15-30 years for birds, highlighting the need for longer term protection to maximize the biodiversity gains of secondary sparing. Promoting the recovery and protection of large expanses of secondary forests under the land-sparing model provides a critical mechanism for protecting tropical biodiversity, with important implications for concurrently assisting in the delivery of global targets to restore 350 million hectares of forested landscapes.(7,8)
Spatial and Temporal Patterns of Tropical Forest Recovery in an Agricultural Landscape			This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).Reforestation of tropical landscapes that were cleared of trees is a goal that has important implications for conservation biology, for developing diverse local economies, and for carbon sequestration and climate change. A novel approach of planting tree islands as source points for restoration of tropical forest is being tested with a large-scale and long-term experiment built around 15 ~1 ha plots spread across 100 square km in Costa Rica. The relative importance to forest recovery of local factors (restoration strategy, tree cover) versus the nature of the landscape (nearby forest cover) is also being tested. Treatments, established from 2004-2006, include tree islands of three sizes that were either planted with trees or left to be colonized through natural dispersal. Results to date have provided key insights into patterns of bird foraging, seed rain, seed germination, and seedling growth. This award will maintain an experimental infrastructure that has attracted numerous project collaborators and support  ongoing and new monitoring of vegetation, seed dispersal, bats, and birds in restored and reference forests. Results of this study will inform tropical forest restoration efforts, which are critical to conserve biodiversity and ecosystem services, such as hydrological cycling and carbon sequestration. Additional broader impacts will include training of US and Latin American graduate and undergraduate students, as well as Costa Ricans of all educational levels. Results will be disseminated in English and Spanish to general and scientific audiences, through educational institutions, government agencies, and non-profit organizations.
Spatial and temporal variation of carbon stocks in a lowland tropical forest in West Africa			Understanding the nature and cause of spatial and temporal variation in forest carbon is critical for implementation of climate mitigation strategies such as REDD. Such knowledge is lacking and hard to acquire in resource poor regions such as West Africa's Upper Guinea where benefits of such schemes for forest conservation could have great impact.We undertook a systematic and representative survey of an entire Upper Guinea forest - Gola Forest in southeast Sierra Leone - by measuring over 600 plots (0.125 ha) in order to quantify the level of spatial variation in C that might exist within a discrete forest type and relate this to historic and contemporary impacts on the forest. We modelled current C stocks and compared these with values calculated from historic surveys. Mean C content in above ground biomass was c. 160 Mg ha(-1). The southern part of the forest which was subject to heavier logging in the 1980s had a lower C content (121-144 Mg ha(-1)) compared to the less disturbed central areas (186 Mg ha(-1)). Volumes of extracted timber and distance to settlements around the forest explained 42% of the variation in C content. Elevation, slope and other metrics of human impact such as distance to roads did not explain significant additional variation. A survey from the 1950s recorded much higher carbon content than currently found in the south of the forest. This accords with evidence that commercial logging in this area was destructively high. However, old surveys from the late 1960s/early 1970s in less disturbed areas recorded lower carbon content than present. Most of the past surveys were in areas that had not yet been commercially logged so the accumulation in biomass in the last 40 years implies recovery from a much older disturbance event, or a change in environmental conditions promoting growth.As a typical Upper Guinean forest, our results from Gola demonstrate the long term impacts of disturbance events on carbon stocks and how these can vary greatly at small scales, highlighting the need for representative and regionally relevant empirical data to inform REDD type initiatives. Nonetheless these forests remain important for carbon sequestration and storage in the region despite this history and the parts of the forest with no recorded logging activity that increased in carbon in recent decades with levels now akin to undisturbed plots reported from elsewhere in the region demonstrate the sequestration potential these forests provide once adequately protected. (C) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Spatial Assessment of Water-Related Ecosystem Services to Prioritize Restoration of Forest Patches			Forests provide several ecosystem services and its presence near streams can increase water quality and quantity. In human-dominated landscapes such as agricultural lands, the forests are usually limited to a few patches. To improve the protection of water ways in these areas, we propose a methodological framework to: (i) assess the contribution of water-related ecosystem services offered by the present forest vegetation in the landscape, and (ii) prioritize areas for recovery and restoration actions. The methodology is based on a balance between local demand (physical variables) and supply (forest characteristics) of water-related services. This balance has the advantage of showing the amount of forest that currently has potential to provide services and the areas with higher deficit of services. Although this method still needs to be validated, its simplicity and easy replicability makes our methodology a rapid assessment of forest potential to provide water-related ecosystem services within agricultural areas.
Spatial distribution of phytomass carbon in Indian forests			A spatial analysis of phytomass carbon (C) in Indian forests for the period (1988-94) at the district-level is reported. District-level forest phytomass C (1988,1994) was computed by combining remote sensing-based forest area inventories on 1:250 000 scale, field inventories of growing stock volume by the Forest Survey of India (FSI), and crown density-based biomass expansion factors. The estimates of forest area inventory, forest phytomass C density, and forest phytomass C pools (1988-94) were linked to the district boundary coverage of India in ARC/INFO Geographic Information System (GIS). Of the total 386 districts examined, only 17 districts had more than 75% forest cover (as percent of their geographic area) in 1988. Estimated district-level forest phytomass C densities ranged from 4.3 to 206.8 MgC ha(-1)*. At the national level, forest phytomass C pool was estimated to be 3871.2 and 3874.3 TgC# in 1988 and 1994, respectively. Although the aggregated national estimates were similar, the district-level change analysis indicated a decrease of 77.8 TgC and an increase of 81 TgC (1988-94). The highest decrease of 10.4 TgC was observed in Vishakapatnam district (Andhra Pradesh) while largest increase of 9.8 TgC in Bastar district (Madhya Pradesh) resulting from deforestation and afforestation activities, respectively. At the national level, the total forest cover decreased by similar to0.6 Mha, however, the district-level spatial analysis indicated an increase of 1.07 Mha, and decrease of 1.65 Mha forest cover during 1988-94 period. Although, this is the first district level phytomass C analysis of Indian forests, the aggregated results at state-level were close to the earlier estimates. The spatial analysis identified the districts that have undergone significant changes in their forest phytomass C during the study period. This improved understanding of forest phytomass C pools is important to sustainable development and conservation of forests, mitigation strategies for C sequestration, and accurate estimation of contribution of land use changes to C emission in India.
Spatial indicator of priority areas for the implementation of agroforestry systems: An optimization strategy for agricultural landscapes restoration			The ecological functions restoration in agricultural areas is a major challenge on a landscape scale. In the specific case of active restoration through Agroforestry Systems (AFS), the absence of a specific direction hinders ecological restoration processes, especially in regions that prefer intensive agriculture. Thus, this study aims to develop a Spatial Indicator of Priority Areas to guide Agroforestry Systems implementation in agricultural landscapes. A spatial multicriteria decision analysis (MDCA) was carried out based on environmental factors: soil, geology and slope (which determine the natural vulnerability of the land) and anthropogenic factors: land use and land cover, forest fragments, potential land use capacity and legal protected areas in rural properties (which reflects human pressure and land use suitability). Subsequently, four priority levels were classified for agroforestry interventions: (1) Low priority; (2) Average priority; (3) High priority; (4) Extreme priority. A final map was made to identify priority areas for landscape recovery in 9 cities located at the mouth of the Mogi Guacu River Hydrographic Basin, State of Sao Paulo, Brazil. Considering the natural vulnerability of the land and the multifunctional aspects of the landscape, the scenarios projection allowed a consensus for forest conservation and agricultural suitability perspectives. A final combination of the explored aspects culminated in the spatial indicator, which model foresees 22,300 ha available for urgent actions for restoration, reforestation and sustainable exploitation through agroforestry systems. We emphasize the challenges in reconciling the socioeconomic and ecological functions in the agroecosystem, however, the metric provides a more inclusive and assertive management strategy for natural resources and advances towards the goal of reforestation and implementation of payment for environmental services (PES) schemes.
Spatial pattern of carbon stocks in forest ecosystems of a typical subtropical region of southeastern China			Spatial pattern information of carbon (C) density and storage in forest ecosystems plays an important role in the evaluation of C sequestration potential and forest management practices. However, such information related to subtropical forests still remain poorly understood. In this study, we collected forest samples from 838 plots in a typical subtropical forest of Zhejiang Province, southeastern China. The Moran's I, geostatistics and geographical information system (GIS) techniques were applied to reveal the spatial pattern of C stocks in forest ecosystems. The results showed that the mean C density of forest ecosystems in Zhejiang Province was 145.22 Mg ha−1, and the forest vegetation, soil, litter, and dead wood layer C densities were 27.34, 108.89, 1.79, and 1.38 Mg ha−1, respectively. The spatial distribution of forest ecosystems C density showed a decreasing trend from the southwest to northeast area, roughly in line with Zhejiang Province's topographic feature, as well as differences in land use, forest management, economic and social development. In addition, the C storage of forest ecosystems in Zhejiang Province was approx. 877.19 Tg (1 Tg = 1012 g), with 203.88 Tg in the vegetation layer, 656.20 Tg in the soil layer, 10.84 Tg in the litter layer, and 6.27 Tg in the dead wood layer, accounting for 23.24%, 74.81%, 1.24%, and 0.71% of the total C storage, respectively. These results indicated that the soil layer is the most important contributor to C storage in subtropical forest ecosystems. The young and middle-aged forests with low C densities dominated in the study area. Therefore, in order to enhance the C sequestration potentials, forest management should focus on the selection of tree species, management of stand-age structures and implementation of sustainable afforestation and reforestation practices in the future. © 2017 Elsevier B.V.
Spatial scale and sampling resolution affect measures of gap disturbance in a lowland tropical forest: implications for understanding forest regeneration and carbon storage			Treefall gaps play an important role in tropical forest dynamics and in determining above-ground biomass (AGB). However, our understanding of gap disturbance regimes is largely based either on surveys of forest plots that are small relative to spatial variation in gap disturbance, or on satellite imagery, which cannot accurately detect small gaps. We used high-resolution light detection and ranging data from a 1500 ha forest in Panama to: (i) determine how gap disturbance parameters are influenced by study area size, and the criteria used to define gaps; and (ii) to evaluate how accurately previous ground-based canopy height sampling can determine the size and location of gaps. We found that plot-scale disturbance parameters frequently differed significantly from those measured at the landscape-level, and that canopy height thresholds used to define gaps strongly influenced the gap-size distribution, an important metric influencing AGB. Furthermore, simulated ground surveys of canopy height frequently misrepresented the true location of gaps, which may affect conclusions about how relatively small canopy gaps affect successional processes and contribute to the maintenance of diversity. Across site comparisons need to consider how gap definition, scale and spatial resolution affect characterizations of gap disturbance, and its inferred importance for carbon storage and community composition.
Spatially explicit estimates of forest carbon emissions, mitigation costs and REDD+ opportunities in Indonesia			Carbon emissions from the conversion and degradation of tropical forests contribute to anthropogenic climate change. Implementing programs to reduce emissions from tropical forest loss in Southeast Asia are perceived to be expensive due to high opportunity costs of avoided deforestation. However, these costs are not representative of all REDD+ opportunities as they are typically based on average costs across large land areas and are primarily for reducing deforestation from oil palm or pulp concessions. As mitigation costs and carbon benefits can vary according to site characteristics, spatially-explicit information should be used to assess cost-effectiveness and to guide the allocation of scarce REDD+ resources. We analyzed the cost-effectiveness of the following REDD+ strategies in Indonesia, one of the world's largest sources of carbon emissions from deforestation: halting additional deforestation in protected areas, timber and oil palm concessions, reforesting degraded land and employing reduced-impact logging techniques in logging concessions. We discover that when spatial variation in costs and benefits is considered, low-cost options emerged even for the two most expensive strategies: protecting forests from conversion to oil palm and timber plantations. To achieve a low emissions reduction target of 25%, we suggest funding should target deforestation in protected areas, and oil palm and timber concessions to maximize emissions reductions at the lowest cumulative cost. Low-cost opportunities for reducing emissions from oil palm are where concessions have been granted on deep peat deposits or unproductive land. To achieve a high emissions reduction target of 75%, funding is allocated across all strategies, emphasizing that no single strategy can reduce emissions cost-effectively across all of Indonesia. These findings demonstrate that by using a spatially-targeted approach to identify high priority locations for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, REDD+ resources can be allocated cost-effectively across Indonesia. © 2017 IOP Publishing Ltd.
Spatiotemporal modeling of soil organic carbon stocks across a subtropical region			Given the significance and complex nature of soil organic carbon in the context of the global carbon cycle, the need exists for more accurate and economically feasible means of soil organic carbon analysis and its underlying spatial variation at regional scale. The overarching goal of this study was to assess both the spatial and temporal variability of soil organic carbon within a subtropical region of Florida, USA Specifically, the objectives were to: i) quantify regional soil organic carbon stocks for historical and current conditions and ii) determine whether the soils have acted as a net sink or a net source for atmospheric carbon-dioxide over an approximate 40 year time period. To achieve these objectives, geostatistical interpolation models were used in conjunction with "historical" and "current" datasets to predict soil organic carbon stocks for the upper 20 cm soil profile of the study area. Soil organic carbon estimates derived from the models ranged from 102 to 108 Tg for historical conditions and 211 to 320 Tg for current conditions, indicating that soils in the study area have acted as a net sink for atmospheric carbon over the last 40 years. A paired resampling of historical sites supported the geostatistical estimates, and resulted in an average increase of 0.8 g carbon m(-2) yr(-1) across all collocated samples. Accurately assessing the spatial and temporal state of soil organic carbon at regional scale is critical to further our understanding of global carbon stocks and provide a baseline so that the effects sustainable land use policy can be evaluated. (C) 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Special issue:: Restoring and designing ecosystems for a crowded planet			Given increasing rates of consumption of our natural resources, the study of ecosystem services and restoration ecology will become more and more relevant because functional ecosystems represent the natural capital upon which our economies depend for ecosystem goods and services. Ecological restoration may occur through different activities: 1) rehabilitating disaster areas; 2) increasing the production capacity of degraded land; 3) improving the quality of existing nature reserves; and 4) enhancing the conservation of nature. But what can be done when degradation is extreme? Creation of new ecosystems (designer ecosystems) may be the only way. The goal of this special issue is threefold: 1) to consider how a perspective of ecosystem functioning may be realistically used in a restoration or ecological design context; 2) to evaluate the extent to which ecosystem services are being re-established in degraded habitats; and 3) to assess whether designed ecosystems are successfully fulfilling the expectations of restoration ecology in terms of structure and ecosystem function. Several examples of innovative recent studies of designer ecosystems focused both on plants and animals are presented. These involve tropical and temperate forests, riparian trees along urban streams, wetlands, and coastal dunes. In addition, the relevance of natural ecosystem dynamics for restoration projects and designer ecosystems is reviewed.
Species Richness and Diversity in Secondary Lowland Forest, Bintuni, Bird's Head Peninsula, West Papua, Indonesia			Tropical forests play an important role in ecosystem services, yet anthropological activities have changed the ecological conditions. Thus, this research was designed to reveal the species richness and diversity in secondary forests, including the lifeform alteration. The 50 perpendicular plots were placed in both forests and distributed 25 for each. The study revealed that the secondary forest represents a stage of ecological succession in which species richness and diversity decreased. Additionally, the composition of life forms in the secondary forest changed, with dominant herbs indicating more dynamic vegetation due to shifting ecological conditions. Species classified as Threatened have disappeared due to human activities in the forest. However, the secondary forest has provided a habitat for certain species, including those with conservation status, such as Threatened or Extinct, to thrive and colonize, where approximately 15.7% of species exclusively thrive in secondary forests, including Antiaropsis uniflora C.C.Berg. Therefore, to promote sustainable forest management, this study suggests monitoring the species in secondary forests, particularly since the use of forests has traditionally been determined by local communities, including in restricted forest areas. Moreover, the local government could officially designate traditional forest use, thereby allowing restricted forests to be conserved as old-growth forests.
Species Richness, Stem Density, and Canopy in Food Forests: Contributions to Ecosystem Services in an Urban Environment			Food forests expand the traditional concepts of urban forestry and agriculture, providing a broad diversity of tree-related ecosystem services and goods. Even though food forest systems bridge an obvious gap between agriculture and forestry, their potential value in the urban landscape is often undervalued. The inclusion of edible species in urban forest stands can enhance nutrition and well-being in the urban landscape, where food deserts are common. The potential for ecosystem services is especially pronounced in subtropical and tropical regions, where there is a heightened need for shade due to climate change-related heat waves. For this study, we investigated the tree species richness, stem density, and canopy cover provided by food forest gardens in 10 Miami-Dade County, Florida public schools located in the urban landscape. We compared results with neighboring properties around the schools and discovered that the food forest canopy was comparable with neighborhood urban tree cover. Additionally, we established that arborescent species richness (including an increase in edible taxa) and stem density was higher in food forests than in adjacent neighborhood plots. We posit that local food production could be enhanced by planting edible species in small spaces (e.g., empty lots or residential yards), as opposed to focusing on just ornamental taxa or recommended street trees. Our study highlights the importance of using mixed edible tree species plantings (especially with consideration to provisioning, regulating, and supporting services), potentially meeting urban forestry and agricultural goals proposed by urban planners and managers.
Species-specific tree water use characteristics in reforestation stands in the Philippines			Reforestation in the tropics offers opportunities for restoration of ecosystem services, biodiversity conservation, wood production and carbon sequestration. The potentially high water use rates associated with reforestations will however require that a balance is found between wood production or carbon fixation and the use of water resources. Species selection has been put forward as a measure to control tree water use of reforested stands but species-specific information is at present very limited. We studied ten broad-leaved tree species in 12-year-old reforestations on Leyte island, the Philippines. Objectives were (1) to identify environmental and tree structural controls on water use and (2) to test for differences in water use characteristics across species. The studied species included eight native species, four of which were dipterocarps, and two species not native to the region but widely planted in the tropics. Per species five well-exposed individuals were equipped with thermal dissipation probes to measure sap flux density. A Jarvis-type model, with global radiation and vapour pressure deficit as explanatory variables, was applied at the tree level and successfully predicted measured sap flux densities. The model parameters suggested significant species differences in maximum sap flux density, differing twofold across species, as well as in sap flux response to environmental variables. Maximum transpiration rates per unit crown area varied up to a factor of four across species. Maximum water use rates were strongly related to tree diameter (Radj2 = 0.65) and weaker, though significant, to estimated aboveground biomass (Radj2 = 0.34). Despite its size dependence, tree water use rates differed about twofold for a given diameter or biomass depending on species, which leads us to conclude that species selection indeed offers opportunities to control tree water use in reforested stands. © 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Specific effects of tree species on soil carbon sequestration in a rice-tree association mesocosm experiment: Evidence from natural 13C abundance			Within agroforestry systems, trees greatly contribute to soil carbon (C) sequestration. We still know little about how this contribution varies according to tree species. Here, we quantified the soil C content derived from three main tree species, Eucalyptus robusta, Coffea arabica and Citrus clementina, used in rainfed rice-based agroforestry in the Highlands of Madagascar. A fully factorial controlled mesocosm experiment was performed, with seedlings of the tree species planted with or without rice in a Ferralsol. The natural C-13 abundance in the soil was measured to assess tree-and rice-derived C. One year after planting, Eucalyptus robusta was the species exhibiting the highest tree-derived C values, with 148 g C m(-2) on average. In contrast, Citrus clementina transferred only 12 g C m(-2) to the soil. No significant contribution of Coffea arabica to the soil C stock was found. The presence of rice affected neither the growth of tree seedlings nor their abilities to provide C to the soil. The difference in soil C sequestration among tree species was significantly correlated with differential root biomass. Tree root biomass was significantly correlated with soil delta C-13. This experimental assay highlighted the contrasting contributions of tree species to ecological processes such as soil C sequestration at the early stage of agroforestry establishment. Further studies considering tree density and spatial arrangement should be conducted under field conditions to gain further insights into tree contributions to soil C sequestration in agroforestry systems.
Spectroscopic characteristics of humic acids extracted from soils under different integrated agricultural production systems in tropical regions			Soil Organic Matter (SOM) plays an important in many ecosystems on the planet. Therefore, we employed elemental analysis (CHN), fluorescence spectroscopy (EEM-CP/PARAFAC), and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) to characterize the humic acids (HA) extracted from soils under integrated agricultural production systems (e.g. agroforestry systems (AFS)). These systems (S) included Crop (C), Livestock (L), Forest (F), and different combinations of them (CLFS, LFS, and CLS), which were compared with pastures (intensive (INT) and extensive (EXT)) and native forest (NF). For this purpose, we collected samples of a dystrophic Red-Yellow Latosol from experimental field areas which it is located at the Embrapa Pecu ' aria Sudeste in Sao Carlos, Sao Paulo state, Brazil. Results showed that the HA humification index increased with soil depth, which is identified by complex structures more affluent in semiquinone-type free radical (SFR) and higher fluorescence intensity, especially in the AFS. Therefore, the HA from the CLFS systems had a higher aromaticity profile than HA from pastures and native forest areas, suggesting a longer lifetime to Carbon compounds. These significant findings are important for developing climate change mitigation strategies.
Spiders in the Web: Understanding the Evolution of REDD plus in Southwest Ghana			The implementation of the global programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in developing countries, and the role of Conservation, Sustainable Management of Forests and Enhancement of Forest Carbon Stocks (REDD+) is lacks a robust financial mechanism and is widely criticized for producing too little positive impact for climate, nature, and people. In many countries with tropical forests however, a variety of REDD+ projects continue to develop on the ground. This paper fills in some of the gaps in our understanding of the dynamic relation between global policymaking and implementation of REDD+ on the ground. Using the introduction of REDD+ in Southwest Ghana as an example, we apply a practice-based approach to analyze the different roles that local actors and global-local intermediaries played in the introduction of REDD+. Our results show a more balanced picture than polarized debates at the global levels suggest. The logic of practice explains how REDD+ was translated to the local situation. Global actors took a lead but depended on local actors to make REDD+ work. Together, they integrated elements of existing practices that helped REDD+ land' locally but also transformed REDD+ globally to resemble such local practices. REDD+ initiatives absorbed elements from established community-based conservation, forest restoration, and sustainable agro-forestry practices. The evolution of REDD+ in Ghana reflects global trends to integrate REDD+ with landscape approaches.
Stabilization of Organic Matter by Biochar Application in Compost-amended Soils with Contrasting pH Values and Textures			Food demand and soil sustainability have become urgent concerns because of the impacts of global climate change. In subtropical and tropical regions, practical management that stabilizes and prevents organic fertilizers from rapid decomposition in soils is necessary. This study conducted a short-term (70 days) incubation experiment to assess the effects of biochar application on the decomposition of added bagasse compost in three rural soils with different pH values and textures. Two rice hull biochars, produced through slow pyrolization at 400 degrees C (RHB-400) and 700 degrees C (RHB-700), with application rates of 1%, 2%, and 4% (w/w), were separately incorporated into soils with and without compost (1% (w/w) application rate). Experimental results indicated that C mineralization rapidly increased at the beginning in all treatments, particularly in those involving 2% and 4% biochar. The biochar addition increased C mineralization by 7.9%-48% in the compost-amended soils after 70 days incubation while the fractions of mineralized C to applied C significantly decreased. Moreover, the estimated maximum of C mineralization amount in soils treated with both compost and biochar were obviously lower than expectation calculated by a double exponential model (two pool model). Based on the micromorphological observation, added compost was wrapped in the soil aggregates formed after biochar application and then may be protected from decomposing by microbes. Co-application of compost with biochar may be more efficient to stabilize and sequester C than individual application into the studied soils, especially for the biochar produced at high pyrolization temperature.
Status and trends of pollination services in Amazon agroforestry systems			With the growing demand for food production worldwide, natural landscapes are increasingly being replaced by agricultural areas, which directly affects biodiversity and local ecosystem services. Agroforestry systems, which are the intentional integration of trees and shrubs into crop and animal farming systems, are a more sustainable production approach that has been increasing in several forested areas around the globe. Here, we examine the trends of agroforestry in the Brazilian Legal Amazon and estimate the associated value of ecosystem services mediated by pollinators. Using data from 2006 and 2017, we detected an increase in agroforestry activity in the Amazon, both in the number (3.27%) and in the area (23.18%) of establishments. Crop production in forested areas increased by 45.61% in the same period, and the main products cultivated in both years were native products from the Amazon, such as acai , Brazil nut and babassu. Although the crop data are from forested areas, all the five crops with the highest production value are associated with agroforestry in the Amazon. Pollination services also increased during the same period from US$73.3 to US$156.7 million (113.76%). In 2006, the value of pollination services corresponded to 44% of the total crop production, and it jumped to 64.43% in 2017. Bees and beetles were the two main groups of pollinators quoted for the analysed crops. Our estimates show the important contribution of pollinators to crop production in the Amazon forest. However, a growing loss of Amazon forest has been observed, and this can jeopardize pollinators and have detrimental consequences on food production in the near future. Public policies are urgently needed to encourage crop production in harmony with natural areas, combining the protection of forests and pollinators with food production.
Stoichiometric controls on carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus dynamics in decomposing litter			The mineralization of nitrogen and phosphorus from plant residues provides an important input of inorganic nutrients to the soil, which can be taken up by plants. The dynamics of nutrient mineralization or immobilization during decomposition are controlled by different biological and physical factors. Decomposers sequester carbon and nutrients from organic substrates and exchange inorganic nutrients with the environment to maintain their stoichiometric balance. Additionally, physical losses of organic compounds from leaching and other processes may alter the nutrient content of litter. In this work, we extend a stoichiometric model of litter nitrogen mineralization to include (1) phosphorus mineralization, (2) physical losses of organic nutrients, and (3) chemical heterogeneity of litter Substrates. The enhanced model provides analytical mineralization curves for nitrogen and phosphorus as well as critical litter carbon : nutrient ratios (the carbon : nutrient ratios below which net nutrient release occurs) as a function of the elemental composition of the decomposers, their carbon-use efficiency, and the rate of physical loss of organic compounds. The model is used to infer the critical litter carbon : nutrient ratios from observed nitrogen and phosphorus dynamics in about 2600 litterbag samplings from 21 decomposition data sets spanning artic to tropical ecosystems. At the beginning of decomposition, nitrogen and phosphorus tend to be immobilized in boreal and temperate climates (i.e., both C:N and C:P critical ratios are lower than the initial ratios), while in tropical areas nitrogen is generally released and phosphorus may be either immobilized or released, regardless of the typically low phosphorus concentrations. The critical carbon : nutrient ratios we observed were found to increase with initial litter carbon : nutrient ratios, indicating that decomposers adapt to low-nutrient conditions by reducing their carbon-use efficiency. This stoichiometric control on nutrient dynamics appears ubiquitous across climatic regions and ecosystems, although other biological and physical processes also play important roles in litter decomposition. In tropical humid conditions, we found high critical C:P ratios likely due to high leaching and low decomposer phosphorus concentrations. In general, the Compound effects of stoichiometric constraints and physical losses explain most of the variability in critical carbon: nutrient ratios and dynamics of nutrient immobilization and release Lit the global scale.
Stratification ratio of organic matter pools influenced by management systems in a weathered Oxisol from a tropical agro-ecoregion in Brazil			Enhancement of organic matter plays an essential role in improving soil quality for supporting sustainable food production. Changes in carbon stocks with impacts on emissions of greenhouse gases may result from the stratification of organic matter as a result of soil use. The objective of this study was to evaluate the impact of soil management systems on soil carbon stocks and stratification ratios (SR) of soil organic matter pools. Total organic carbon (TOC), particulate organic carbon (POC), mineral-associated organic carbon, microbial biomass carbon (MBC) and nitrogen, basal respiration, and particulate organic matter nitrogen (PON) were determined. The field experiment comprised several tillage treatments: conventional tillage, no-till with biannual rotation, no-till with biannual rotation combined with a second crop, no-till with annual rotation, and pasture. The labile fractions indicated a high level of variation among management systems. Pasture proved to be an excellent option for the improvement of soil carbon. While the conventional tillage system reduced total carbon stocks of the soil (0-40 cm), no-tillage presented TOC stocks similar to that of native vegetation. Sensitivity of the TOC SR varied from 0.93 to 1.28, a range of 0.35; the range for POC was 1.76 and for MBC 1.64. The results support the hypothesis that the labile fractions (POC, MBC, and PON) are highly sensitive to the dynamics of organic matter in highly weathered soils of tropical regions influenced by different management systems. Reductions to SRs of labile organic matter pools are related to the impacts of agricultural use of Cerrado soils.
Strengthening conservation in the tropics: The water canon of costa rica			Problem statement: The tropics contain primary forests with a significant value for society, as they provide services such as carbon sequestration, soil conservation, bio-prospecting, water storage and others. Competing land uses have not favored conservation during the last several decades and therefore the need for an effective public policy instrument to curtail forest loss is evident. Approach: This article analyzed a policy intended to augment the funds for subsidizing forest conservation in Costa Rica through a tax on the consumption of potable water. This potable water canon was compared on the basis of legitimacy criteria to the alternative of imposing a tax on the exploitation of marginal lands. The analysis was based on comparing the perceptions different stakeholders have toward deforestation and its potential solutions, which result into different frames, or views regarding the problem. The perceptions were obtained from semi-structured interviews of individuals representing the central and local governments, national and local non-governmental organizations, the private sector, academia and political parties. Results: Overall, the water canon is a superior policy from the point of view of technical implementability and political feasibility. The regulation was expected to increase the forest cover in private hands in a more effective way than the tax on marginal lands, while keeping government expenditures to a minimum. The policy context is one of high expert and social trust and low government trust, requiring substantive stakeholder education and the creation of feedback mechanisms to increase acceptability during the implementation period. Conclusion: If approved by the Costa Rican Congress, the water canon will become an innovative conservation policy from which other developing countries will be able to obtain valuable lessons. © 2009 Science Publications.
STRENGTHENING THE ROLE OF FORESTS IN CLIMATE CHANGE MITIGATION THROUGH THE EUROPEAN UNION FOREST LAW ENFORCEMENT, GOVERNANCE AND TRADE ACTION PLAN			Forests influence climate change by either increasing or decreasing the atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases. When unsustainably managed, forests can release more greenhouse gases than they can absorb, intensifying their atmospheric concentration with adverse climate and human health outcomes. Several frameworks and institutional arrangements have been adopted globally to help strengthen political commitment and actions to promote the sustainable management of forests and enhance forests’ contribution to climate change mitigation. Nevertheless, the destruction of tropical forests is accelerating at an alarming rate, making it an uphill battle to stop forest sector carbon emissions, limit the global average temperature rise to well below 2°C, and build a sustainable and climate-resilient future for all. The continuous release of forest-related emissions indicates that humanity has fallen short of meeting global forest and climate-related goals and, hence, reiterates the need to develop and apply additional tools to support international cooperation on mitigating forest carbon emissions. Considering deforestation’s challenge for voluntary frameworks such as the UN Forest Instrument and REDD+, opportunities/actions beyond non-legally binding agreements and principles must be harnessed promptly. Trade-related measures, such as the Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade Action Plan, are relevant in addressing deforestation. Arguably, the Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade Action Plan provides the most appropriate framework for future regional/global forest law reform. © 2021 by author(s).
Stress tolerance of soil fungal communities from native Atlantic forests, reforestations, and a sand mining degraded area			Microorganisms are essential to the functionality of the soil, particularly in organic matter decomposition and nutrient cycling, which regulate plant productivity and shape the soil structure. However, biotic and abiotic stresses greatly disrupt soil fungal communities and, thereby, disturb the ecosystem. This study quantified seasonal tolerances to UV-B radiation and heat of fungal communities, which could be cultured, found in soil from two native Atlantic forest fragments called Fl and F2, five reforested areas (RA) planted in 1994, 1997, 2004, 2007, and 2009 with native species of the Atlantic forest, and one sand mining degraded soil (SMDS). The cold activity of the soil fungal communities (FC) from the eight different areas was also studied. Higher tolerance to UV-B radiation and heat was found in the FC from the SMDS and the 2009RA, where the incidence of heat and UV radiation from sun was more intense, which caused selection for fungal taxa that were more UV-B and heat tolerant in those areas. Conversely, the FC from the native forests and older reforested sites were very susceptible to heat and UV-B radiation. The cold activity of the soil FC from different areas of the study showed an erratic pattern of responses among the sampling sites. Little difference in tolerance to UV-B radiation and heat was found among the FC of soil samples collected in different seasons; in general soil FC collected in winter were less tolerant to UV-B radiation, but not for heat. In conclusion, FC from SMDS soil that receive intense heat and UV radiation, as well as with low nutrient availability, were more tolerant to both UV-B radiation and heat. (C) 2017 British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Strong but taxon-specific responses of termites and wood-nesting ants to forest regeneration in Borneo			Land use change is accelerating globally at the expense of biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. Invertebrates are numerically dominant and functionally important in old growth tropical rain forests but highly susceptible to the adverse effects of forest degradation and fragmentation. Ants (Formicidae) and termites (Blattodea: Termitoidae) perform crucial ecosystem services. Here, the potential effects of anthropogenic disturbance on ant and termite communities in dead wood are investigated. Community composition, generic richness, and occupancy rates of ants and termites were compared among two old growth sites (Danum Valley and Maliau Basin) and one twice-logged site (the Stability of Altered Forest Ecosystems' (SAFE) Project), in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo. Occupancy was measured as the number of ant or termite encounters (1) per deadwood items, and (2) per deadwood volume, and acts as surrogates for relative abundance (or generic richness). Termites had a lower wood-occupancy per volume in logged forest. In contrast, there were more ant encounters, and more ant genera, in logged sites and there was a community shift (especially, there were more Crematogaster encounters). The disruption of soil and canopy structure in logged forest may reduce both termite and fungal decay rates, inducing increased deadwood residence times and therefore favoring ants that nest in dead wood. There is an anthropogenic-induced shift of dead wood in ants and termites in response to disturbance in tropical rain forests and the nature of that shift is taxon-specific.
Struggling to Make a Life in the Peruvian Amazon: a Case Study on the Livelihood Activities in the Indigenous Community Naranjal			0
Successional changes in vegetation and litter structure in traditional Lacandon Maya agroforests			The Lacandon Maya is an indigenous group who live in Chiapas, Mexico. Their traditional lifeways involve swidden, sequential agroforestry management that mimics ecological disturbance and modifies succession. Lacandon farmers use fire to clear small plots for polyculture milpa agroforests, which they subsequently fallow. They actively manage all stages of their agroforests to provide ecosystem services and facilitate site recovery. However, it is unclear whether or how quickly the ecosystem structure of Lacandon agroforests matches that of a mature forest. Therefore, this study quantified canopy cover, basal area, ground cover, and litter layers and depth to empirically evaluate successional trends in vegetation and litter structure. Our results show that the Lacandon agroforest structure typically recovers to mature forest levels, but the speed and nature of this recovery vary by metric. They also indicate Lacandon traditional agroforestry is predicated on nuanced understanding of tropical forest successional dynamics, as illustrated by Lacandon farmers' recognition of successional stages that correspond to patterns in vegetation and leaf litter structure. As such, Lacandon ecological knowledge has the potential to facilitate the restoration of degraded tropical forests in Chiapas, Mexico. However, our findings also demonstrate that shortening fallow periods will undermine the ecological integrity of this traditional agricultural system.
Successional trajectories of secondary forests and tree plantations in Costa Rican lowlands			Tree plantations used for carbon sequestration or forest restoration often support diverse plant communities. However, it is unknown how rates of successional change in tree plantations compare to secondary forests. In this study, we compared the successional trajectory of tree plantations to that of secondary forests that were between 8 and 23 years old. Censuses of woody plants (≥ 2 cm dbh [diameter at breast height]) in seven tree plantation plots and seven secondary forest plots (30 × 30 m) were conducted over three years (May 2013-July 2016) in a lowland tropical forest. Secondary forests were naturally regenerating from abandoned cattle pastures. Tree plantations were monocultures of two different native species (Vochysia guatemalensis and Hieronyma alchorneoides), planted for carbon sequestration. We measured the change in stem density, basal area, species density, rarefied species richness, and relative abundance of different growth forms and regeneration guilds. We found that differences in stem density and basal area between these two forest types were declining. Nevertheless, we did not find evidence for differences between forest types in the rate of accu­mulation of species richness when accounting for sample size. On the other hand, even though the successional trajectory in tree plantations was very similar to secondary forests, there were differences between forest types in species composition. The rate of change in relative abundance of different growth forms and regeneration guilds was similar in both forest types. Overall, our results suggest that structural-but not compositional differences-between tree plantations and secondary forests are converging during the second decade of succession. © 2019, Universidad de Costa Rica. All rights reserved.
Supporting decision-making by companies in delivering their climate net-zero and nature recovery commitments: Synthesising current information and identifying research priorities in rainforest restoration			Many companies are making ambitious pledges to achieve positive impacts for climate and nature by financing restoration of carbon-and biodiversity-rich natural habitats. However, companies cannot make evidence-based choices that will deliver successful restoration if the scientific in-formation required to guide investment has not been synthesised in a way that they can use, or there are knowledge gaps. To explore this issue, share information, and identify knowledge gaps and research priorities, we bring together researchers, a conservation NGO and a multinational consumer goods company (Unilever), focusing on Southeast Asian rainforests. These habitats offer significant restoration opportunities for carbon and biodiversity in areas that have been degraded by commercial logging and agriculture. We find that procedures for carbon restoration are much better developed than those for biodiversity, and that new research is urgently needed to deliver evidence-based biodiversity restoration. Companies need to be confident that their actions are fit-for-purpose to meet their environmental pledges. Achieving successful restoration outcomes will require co-designed projects with the potential to deliver positive co-benefits for carbon, biodiversity and local livelihoods.
Supporting decisions for forest landscape restoration and forest-based economy			Tropical forests hold ecosystems of huge wealth in biodiversity and provide a great diversity of ecosystem services critical to human well-being. However, these are regions where deforestation and forest degradation are historically more intense. The Atlantic Forest, for instance, has a great diversity of soils, relief, and vegetation that together generate habitats for unique species. The biome has about 3% of the endemic plant species and more than 2% of the vertebrate species endemic to the whole terrestrial surface, being one of the most important biodiversity hotspots in the world. However, it is estimated that it is the Brazilian biome with the smallest remaining original forest, presenting a great demand for forest restoration initiatives. Forest restoration contributes to increasing habitat cover for biodiversity, protecting soil, providing hydrological services, mitigating climate change, supporting pollination of agricultural crops, strengthening the livelihoods of local communities, and promoting social and economic development. Currently, there is a growing awareness of the importance of forest restoration and the understanding that its actions go beyond the recovery of ecosystem functions, but also have a strong socioeconomic component that implies the development of alternative economic activities with enormous potential to provide a wide variety of ecosystem services to human populations.For this reason, understanding different stakeholder perspectives on restoration becomes crucial for the development of instruments capable of supporting decision-making processes and pointing out alternatives and opportunities for the success of forest restoration initiatives. In this context, the Biota Síntese project has forest restoration in the state of São Paulo as one of its main challenges (challenge 2). The project aims to develop syntheses of academic knowledge and the harmonization of databases capable to support the creation of instruments to encourage and plan forest restoration initiatives. The objective of this post-doctorate is to carry out a survey of data and thematic databases and their subsequent harmonization and improvement in order to provide quick, clear, and interactive information to planners of restoration actions; to carry out interactive analyzes with other work fronts of the Biota Síntese project that involve solutions based on nature in different contexts, and explore alternatives that allow the creation of data-sharing software with users from different sectors of society. (AU)
Supporting forest conservation through community-based land use planning and participatory GIS – lessons from Crocker Range Park, Malaysian Borneo			In tropical regions, expanding human activities have become increasingly threatening to the ecological integrity of protected areas. Shifting cultivation and other agricultural activities around the protected areas by rural communities often lead to increased carbon emissions, wildlife habitat destruction and increasing hunting pressure. Land use planning, with the participation of local communities in the buffer zones, is being considered to strengthen the implementation of the Man and the Biosphere Program at Crocker Range Park, Sabah, Malaysia. As part of the European Union's ‘Tackling Climate Change Through Sustainable Forest Management and Community Development’ program, we emphasized the participatory geographic information systems (PGIS) approach to support village-scale land use planning that considers the needs of multiple stakeholders in the community. The PGIS was applied within a multi-criteria framework to determine the location of a potential community conservation area (CCA) and to plan future land use activities in the village. Key informant interviews were followed by a participatory mapping workshop, attended by various stakeholders and experts, which was convened to discuss and elicit local knowledge to generate the environmental and resource indicators for determining potential land use activities within the village (e.g., agriculture, tourism and recreation, and forest restoration). Based on the discussions and spatial analyses, a land use zoning map with a potential CCA was presented at a follow-up land use decision making workshop. The villagers and external stakeholders reached a consensus on the land use zoning; leading to the designation process of the CCA. The PGIS-based land use planning has effectively supported the community forest conservation and is potentially applicable to other Southeast Asia regions with similar environmental and socio-economic settings. © 2019 Elsevier GmbH
Survey of local perceptions of the livelihood and conservation benefits delivered by small-scale livelihood projects in eastern Madagascar			This archive consists of a) the primary dataset and b) accompanying documents for the survey of local perceptions of the livelihood and conservation benefits delivered by micro projects in the Ankeniheny Zahemena Corridor (CAZ), Madagascar, conducted as part of work package 6 (WP6) of the p4ges project (Can capturing global ecosystem service values reduce poverty). WP6 is concerned with the socio-economic aspects of the research undertaken within p4ges project. The objective of the survey was to document local perceptions of both the livelihood and conservation benefits delivered by small-scale livelihood projects (micro projects) that had been conducted in the CAZ region from 2010 to 2014, and to examine how the type of livelihood project (e.g., agriculture, beekeeping, fish farming or livestock production) influenced the benefits obtained. The survey included questions about how the small-scale livelihood projects were chosen, participation in the livelihood projects, perceived livelihood benefits provided by the projects, perceived negative impacts of the projects on livelihoods, levels of participant satisfaction with the way in which projects were implemented, potential conservation goals of the micro projects, and links between micro projects and conservation outcomes. It also included basic socioeconomic information about participants. The data was collected between Sept and November 2015 and was comprised of surveys of 611 participants who had participated in 61 micro projects (including 16 agricultural projects, 10 beekeeping projects, 17 fish farming projects and 18 livestock projects).There has been a recent explosion of interest in market mechanisms to capture global ecosystem service values. An argument in their favour is that they can, in principle, benefit the poor by increasing the value of their resources. However, the effect on poverty is not easily predicted and depends on a) the structure and distribution of payments (how and when payments are made, and to whom) and b) how land-use changes driven by the payments influence the supply of locally important ecosystem services and livelihood options to poor people. Our central research question is: How can international ecosystem service payment schemes (specifically for carbon sequestration/storage and biodiversity conservation) most effectively reduce poverty in low-income countries, given biophysical, economic and political realities? This question is of vital importance as there have been few, if any, detailed multi-dimensional assessments of either existing programmes or the conditions needed for optimal programme design. We focus on a single ecosystem (tropical forest) in a single low-income country (Madagascar) to achieve a uniquely complete analysis. Links to global structures involved in developing international payment for ecosystem services schemes (PES) ensure the results will be influential more widely. Major land-use changes which international payments are incentivizing include: reduced deforestation, targeted restoration or reforestation (through fire and grazing management or replanting) and changes in rules, or enforcement of rules, governing access to harvesting wild products. Welfare impacts on the poor will be different under these different approaches, and they vary in their potential for producing global benefits. Our central objectives are: 1) to understand effects on ecosystem service flows, to local and global beneficiaries, of the land-use changes incentivized under alternative PES approaches, and the spatial and temporal trade-offs in these flows; 2)to estimate the magnitude and distribution of net local welfare impacts from the range of PES approaches (incorporating both the effects of payments and land-use change) and the likely influence of different local and regional institutional structures; 3) to fully quantify the land-use changes and the payments distributed in an existing payment scheme; and 4) to develop effective recommendations for improved international PES schemes that maximise their potential for delivering poverty alleviation, given biophysical, economic and political realities. Copyright: Celia A. Harvey, Conservation International Luciano Andriamaro, Conservation International Madagascar
Survival and growth of five Neotropical timber species in monocultures and mixtures			Conversion of tropical forests to crop lands and pastures has been an on-going issue in the Neotropics for decades. Despite the fact that international agreements and incentives have tried to encourage the reforestation of degraded lands in developing countries, in Panama, the actual area reforested has been limited. One of the reasons is that one of the preferred timber species, Tectona grandis (Teak), grows poorly on the infertile and clay soils that dominate much of the country, including the Panama Canal watershed.Reforestation strategies that optimize both the economic return and the production of ecosystem services in tropical degraded lands could meet the demands of different stakeholders from local to international scales. We evaluated the growth and survival of five valuable native timber species grown in both monocultures and mixtures.In 2008 a fully replicated design with 267 plots and 21 treatments was set up. A total of 22,267 trees were annually monitored until 2015. Locally developed allometric biomass models were used to determine above-ground biomass (AGB) of each treatment in order to assess growth and productivity in monocultures and mixed plantations from five native species (Anacardiurn excelsium, Dalbergia retusa, Pachira quinata, Tabebuia rosea and Terminalia amazonia) that differed in key functional traits.Biomass accumulation of Terminalia amazonia monocultures far exceeded that of all other treatments, with up to 47.1 t/ha of biomass 7 years after planting. Nonetheless, individual tree growth of T. amazonia was much higher in mixtures than in monoculture, indicating that intraspecific competition started to limit growth. All target species significantly overyielded in the five-species mixture, indicating a diversity effect. The high Relative Land Output (>4) exhibited by Pachira quinata in mixture with the nitrogen fixing Dalbergia retusa indicated a facilitation effect from the latter.
Susceptibility of the Vegetation to Forest Fires in the Dry Forest of Ocana-Colombia			According to the climate zoning proposed by Holdrige, Ocana, in the department of Norte de Santander in Colombia, has a distribution of Dry Tropical Forest (Bs-T). This forest is threatened at the national level, so the Colombian state has been prioritized to restore and conserve it, since it provides a considerable number of ecosystem services and also, is key to the conservation of our biodiversity and the adaptation and mitigation of climate change. Forest fires have been a problem in the dry forest area of Ocana, with a frequency of up to 13 fires per year in 2015 alone, according to the regional fire department. So far, fire management in the area has been lim-ited to emergency response, not prevention, because there is no institutional framework for fire risk management at the local level. The objective of this work is to identify the zones of vulnerability of the vegetation to forest fires in the Bs-T area of Ocana. To do this, a protocol proposed by the Institute of Hydrology, Meteorology and Environmental Studies-IDEAM has been used, which specifies that it is necessary to first have a coverage map, adapted according to certain coverages (Corine Land Cover Methodology) prioritized by the protocol, to later generate the maps of type, duration and load of fuels, which are subjected to a multi-criteria evaluation in GIS soft-ware, thus generating the map of vegetation susceptibility to fires. As a result, for the predominant fuel type and load, a high threat was identified, mainly to the east of the Bs-T distribution area, while the low threat per fuel life, has a greater representativeness in hectares and is displayed mainly to the southeast of this area. It is concluded that the threat due to the vulnerability of vegetation to fire in Bs-T in Ocana is mainly moderate, representing an area of approximately 13,924 ha.
Sustainability implications of carbon dynamics on the avocado frontier			Carbon storage is examined along the avocado frontier in the state of Michoac ' an, Mexico, where native pine-oak forest is being rapidly lost for the sake of avocado production expansion. Carbon pools for aboveground biomass carbon and for belowground soil carbon were compared across avocado orchards and neighboring pine-oak forests. While aboveground carbon was found to be significantly higher in forests when compared to orchards, there was no significant difference found in soil carbon stocks between the two land uses. Mixed effects regression models were used to parse out the landscape scale heterogeneity that is affecting soil carbon beyond land cover alone. Temperature, precipitation, and fragmentation variables were all found to significantly impact soil carbon across the landscape studied. Furthermore, there is evidence of over-fertilization within orchards, particularly of phosphorus, which may be temporarily subsidizing soil carbon loss. Sustainability considerations, therefore, must consider land use decisions in relation to other soil nutrients, beyond just carbon, to comprehensively address sustainability concerns arising from the impacts of avocado production.
Sustainability issues in a tropical mega trail			Sustainability is a target that involves many socio-ecological questions, depends on opportunities and combines different initiatives. This can be especially difficult in regions with high biodiversity scores, mega cities, high level of human populations and an intense and long-standing land use. Here, we show how a mega trail, named Atlantic Forest Trail, within the Brazilian Atlantic Forest can join the protection of biodiversity and sustainable tourism through a 4270 km corridor connecting protected areas and crossing a variety of landscapes. Further, we show some initiatives of ongoing biodiversity monitoring, and an analysis of ecological restoration in private lands that can be applied in many regions to improve habitat connectivity for both biodiversity and human use.
Sustainable Agroforestry Landscape Management: Changing the Game			Location-specific forms of agroforestry management can reduce problems in the forest-water-people nexus, by balancing upstream and downstream interests, but social and ecological finetuning is needed. New ways of achieving shared understanding of the underlying ecological and social-ecological relations is needed to adapt and contextualize generic solutions. Addressing these challenges between thirteen cases of tropical agroforestry scenario development across three continents requires exploration of generic aspects of issues, knowledge and participative approaches. Participative projects with local stakeholders increasingly use 'serious gaming'. Although helpful, serious games so far (1) appear to be ad hoc, case dependent, with poorly defined extrapolation domains, (2) require heavy research investment, (3) have untested cultural limitations and (4) lack clarity on where and how they can be used in policy making. We classify the main forest-water-people nexus issues and the types of land-use solutions that shape local discourses and that are to be brought to life in the games. Four 'prototype' games will be further used to test hypotheses about the four problems identified constraining game use. The resulting generic forest-water-people games will be the outcome of the project "Scenario evaluation for sustainable agroforestry management through forest-water-people games" (SESAM), for which this article provides a preview.
Sustainable Forest Management and social-ecological systems: An institutional analysis of Caatinga, Brazil			Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) has globally gained support as a strategy to use and manage forest resources while maintaining forest ecosystem services. However, type, relevance, and utilisation of forest ecosystem services vary across eco-regions, countries, and policy implementation pathways. As such, the concept of SFM is subject to a series of translations within the social-ecological context in which it is implemented. This article discusses translations of SFM in Caatinga biome-a tropical dry forest in the north-eastern semi-arid region of Brazil. Our analysis is based on a qualitative analysis of 24 semi-structured interviews and 30 documents. We discuss SFM and the interplay of resources, governance, and actors. Results for Caatinga show that (1) a technical approach to SFM that focuses on firewood and charcoal production is dominant; that (2) SFM implementation practices hardly address the needs and interests of local populations; and that (3) local actors show little support for the implementation of SFM. We conclude that the social-ecological context of Caatinga shapes translations of SFM mostly in a techno-bureaucratic rather than a socially embedded way. As a result, local practices of forest use are excluded from the regional SFM approach, which negatively affects its implementation. © 2017 by the authors.
Sustainable Forest Management in a Changing World: A European Perspective			This 258-page book presents and describes Sustainable Forest Management in a Changing World, A European Perspective. The book is organized into 14 individually authored chapters. The first chapter deals with some basic remarks on sustainable forest management, environment and global ethics. The second chapter deals with sustaining the world's forests, managing competing demands for a vital resource, the role of the World Bank. The third chapter deals with conservation of tropical forests and climate change mitigation. Remaining chapters include non-wood forest products for livelihoods and sustainable development, conservation of forest genetic resources: the basis for adaptability in managed forests, and adaptive forest management, a prerequisite for sustainable forestry in the face of climate change, key challenges in forest protected area management, and forest organisations in change. The book highlights a list of contributors and their respective institutions. Each chapter contains a list of references. The text is written in English. Users of this book will include conservation biologists, ecologists, and environmental biologists.
Sustainable Forest Management: The Role of Reduced Impact Logging for Timber and Environmental Sustainability			0
Sustainable Forestry Policy: Indonesia's Adaptation in Supporting Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)			Indonesia, one of the countries with the most extensive tropical forests in the world, plays a crucial role in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). This research explores forestry policies that can be adopted in Indonesia to support the SDGs, particularly those related to sustainable forest management, climate change, and partnerships to achieve the goals. Using a qualitative approach, this research analyses existing forestry policies with a focus on implementation challenges at the local level and the interaction of global policies with socio-political dynamics at the regional level. The research findings indicate that adopting REDD+-based policies (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation) can be a strategic step in supporting environmental sustainability. Still, its success highly depends on the support of various stakeholders at the local level. It is essential to have synergy between the government, indigenous communities, and the private sector to ensure inclusive and sustainable forest management. The alignment between policies and local culture, especially the traditional forest management practices that local communities have carried out for generations. This is necessary to address various challenges that arise in the field implementation of policies. Thus, an inclusive and collaborative approach to implementing forestry policies in Indonesia becomes a critical factor in supporting the achievement of the SDGs, particularly in sustainable forest management. © The Authors, published by EDP Sciences, 2025.
Sustainable Forestry: From Monitoring and Modelling to Knowledge Management and Policy Science			This 527-page book in English titled "Sustainable Forestry: from Monitoring and Modelling to Knowledge Management and Policy Science" contains 29 individually authored chapters. Specific topics discussed include science is endogenous to sustainable forestry, the European Union sustainable forest management and climate change mitigation policies, application of criteria and indicators of sustainable resource management in the United States, indicators for biodiversity of tropical forests, cluster organization in forestry, modeling public support for wildland fire policy, economic conservation, vegetation diversity assessment in southern Belgium's permanent forest inventory, PractiSFM- an operational multi-resource inventory protocol for sustainable forest management, information and knowledge management for sustainable forestry, establishment management information system, decision support for sustainable forestry, an information retrieval system to support management of habitats and rare priority and protected species in Britain. The book highlights a list of contributors and their respective institutions. Each chapter contains a list of references. This book will be of use to those interested in forest management and wildlife conservation.
Sustainable intensification of dairy production can reduce forest disturbance in Kenyan montane forests			Increasing demand for food and the shortage of arable land call for sustainable intensification of farming, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa where food insecurity is still a major concern. Kenya needs to intensify its dairy production to meet the increasing demand for milk. At the same time, the country has set national climate mitigation targets and has to implement land use practices that reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from both agriculture and forests. This study analysed for the first time the drivers of forest disturbance and their relationship with dairy intensification across the largest montane forest of Kenya. To achieve this, a forest disturbance detection approach was applied by using Landsat time series and empirical data from forest disturbance surveys. Farm indicators and farm types derived from a household survey were used to test the effects of dairy intensification on forest disturbance for different farm neighbourhood sizes (r = 2-5 km). About 18% of the forest area was disturbed over the period 2010-2016. Livestock grazing and firewood extraction were the dominant drivers of forest disturbance at 75% of the forest disturbance spots sampled. Higher on-farm cattle stocking rates and firewood collection were associated with 1-10% increased risk of forest disturbance across farm neighbourhood sizes. In contrast, higher milk yields, increased supplementation with concentrated feeds and more farm area allocated to fodder production were associated with 1-7 % reduced risk of forest disturbance across farm neighbourhood sizes. More intensified farms had a significantly lower impact on forest disturbance than small and resource-poor farms, and large and inefficient farms. Our results show that intensification of smallholder dairy farming leads to both farm efficiency gains and reduced forest disturbance. These results can inform agriculture and forest mitigation policies which target options to reduce GHG emission intensities and the risk of carbon leakage.
Sustainable Land Management in Dynamic Agro-Ecosystems: An Integrated, Multi-Scale Socio-Ecological Analysis in Western Kenya Highlands			0
Sustainable Palm Oil: Dissecting a Global Debate			Palm oil expansion in tropical forest margins captures headlines, primarily out of concern that encroachment to tropical forest causes environmental problem and ignites social issues [1]. Sustainability has to be understood in the wider context of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), rather than as primarily a plot-level ecological concern about persistence of production, to make sense of the debate that has become a very polarized and find ways forward. Cascading ecological and social issues have caused a loss of trust, (threats of) consumer boycotts and multiple standards and certification responses. Diverse sustainability issues have come up as part of a public issue-attention cycle with five recognisable stages [2]: A) Agenda setting, B) Better and widely shared understanding of what is at stake, C) Commitment to common principles, D) Details of devils derailing operations, devolved to (newly created or existing) formal institutions that handle implementation and associated budgets, and E) Efforts to monitor and evaluate effects. In Indonesia two phases of new establishment of palm oil coexist within a forest transition gradient: (i) (industry-led) expansion into new forest margins with many social and ecological consequences; and (ii) (often farmerled) conversion of existing agroforestry and tree crop (often rubber-based) or pasture economies in mosaic landscapes. External consumer concerns refer to the expansion phase, rather than to production sustainability or issues of smallholder concern. However, certification standards are only partially adjusted to the latter. After a 'voluntary industry standards' phase of differentiation with and shifting blame to non-certified others [3], government involvement in Malaysia and Indonesia suggests that standards and certification can trickle down to enforceable good practice standards for all. This can learn from past ineffective policies that did not address the real issues in local context [4]. On the other hand, subnational jurisdictional entities are the scale at which oil palm production can be balanced with other goals, such as forest conservation and smallholder welfare. This needs a supportive and clear national policy support that combines clarity on forest protection (as in the now permanent moratorium), with support for risk-reducing diversified smallholder oil palm production systems [5,6] and international communication that acknowledges past problems but shows Indonesia is ready to move on, connecting all the dots of sustainable development goals.
Sustainable soil and land management: a systems-oriented overview of scientific literature			Healthy soil is vital for our wellbeing and wealth. However, increasing demand for food and biomass may lead to unsustainable soil and land management practices that threaten soils. Other degradation processes such as soil sealing also endanger soil resources. Identifying and accessing the best available knowledge is crucial to address related sustainability issues and promote the needed transition towards sustainable soil and land management practices. Such knowledge has to cover all knowledge domains, system knowledge, target knowledge, and transformation knowledge. However, a comprehensive overview of existing research addressing societal needs related to soil is still missing, which hinders the identification of knowledge gaps. This study provides a detailed analysis of scientific literature to identify ongoing research activities and trends. A quantitative and qualitative analysis of scientific literature related to sustainable soil and land management was conducted. A systems-oriented analytical framework was used that combines soil and land related societal challenges with related knowledge domains. Our analysis revealed a significant increase in scientific publications and related interest in soil and land use-related research, above the average increase of publications within all scientific fields. Different forms of reduction and remediation of soil degradation processes (e.g. erosion, contamination) have been studied most extensively. Other topic areas like land take mitigation, soil biodiversity increase, increase of ecosystem services provision and climate change mitigation and adaption seem to be rather recent concerns, less investigated. We could highlight the importance of context-specific research, as different regions require different practices. For instance, boreal, tropical, karst and peatland regions were less studied. Furthermore, we found that diversifying soil management practices such as agroforestry or including livestock into arable systems are valuable options for increasing biomass, mitigating/adapting to climate change, and improving soil related ecosystem services. A recent trend towards the latter research topic indicates the transition from a soil conservation-oriented perspective to a soil service-oriented perspective, which may be better suited to integrate the social and economic dimensions of soil health improvement alongside the ecological dimension.
Sustainable use of termite activity in agro-ecosystems with reference to earthworms. A review			Sustainable agriculture and agro-ecology justify the need to study and understand the role played by ecological processes, and soil biodiversity in particular, in agro-ecosystem functioning. A large number of studies have focused on earthworms in temperate and humid tropical ecosystems and have demonstrated their importance for improving soil biological, physical, and chemical properties in agro-ecosystems. Their "success" is so essential that earthworms are widely considered key species and relevant indicators of soil health in temperate ecosystems. In arid and sub-arid ecosystems, the role of "soil engineer" is usually attributed to termites, and especially fungus-growing termites in Africa and Asia. However, despite this recognition, significant effort is spent eradicating them in plantations because of their pest status. In this review, we discuss the status of termites ("pests" vs. "soil engineers") and question whether termites play similar roles to earthworms in arid-and sub-arid agroecosystems, with a focus on their influence on nutrient cycling and water dynamics. We argue that the dream of controlling natural interactions and ridding plantations of termites remains a costly legacy of the green revolution. We review the agricultural practices that have been used to reduce termite damage in plantations by restoring refuges to predators or by reorienting termite foraging activity towards organic amendments. Then, we show that the stimulation of termite activity can be used to improve key ecological functions in agroecosystems, such as increasing water availability to plants or producing fertility hot-spots. Finally, we suggest that more research on how termites can be used for improving ecosystem services, as is actually done with earthworms in temperate and humid tropical countries, could lead to a paradigm shift in our understanding of the impact of termites in tropical agro-ecosytems.
Sustaining agronomic productivity and quality of a vertisolic soil (vertisol) under soybean-safflower cropping system in semi-arid central India			Enrichment of soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks through sequestration of atmospheric CO2 in agricultural soils is important because of its impacts on improving soil quality and agronomic production, and also for adaptation to and mitigation of climate change. Thus, a 15-yr soil fertility management experiment was conducted in the semi-arid tropical region of central India to evaluate the impact of crop residue C input on soybean (Glycine max L.)-safflower (Carthamus tinctorius L.) cropping sequence and SOC sequestration in soils of Vertisolic order (Vertisols). Retention of crop residues of soybean/safflower, and application of farmyard manure (FYM) at 6 Mg (t) ha-1 alone or in combination with 20 kg N and 13 kg P ha-1 supplied through chemical fertilizers or comparatively higher dose of chemical fertilizer (60 kg N and 35 kg P ha-1) either maintained or increased the SOC stock. However, the combination of FYM and chemical fertilizer increased the profile SOC stock (69.9 Mg ha-1), overall SOC build up (37.1%) and also sequestered high amount of SOC (11.9 Mg C ha-1 or 0.79 Mg C ha-1 yr-1) compared with control and chemical fertilizer alone. Higher grain yield (2.10 and 1.49 Mg ha-1 of soybean and safflower, respectively) was obtained through the application of FYM at 6 Mg ha-1+N20P13. For every Mg C ha-1 increase in the root zone, there was 0.145 and 0.059 Mg ha-1 increase in grain yield of soybean and safflower, respectively. Stabilization of the SOC stock requires a minimum input of 3.47 Mg C ha-1 yr-1. Application of 40 kg N+26 kg P ha-1 through chemical fertilizer also maintained the SOC stock at the antecedent level based on the SOC stocks in 1992. Therefore, the combined use of organic manure (crop residues and FYM) along with chemical fertilizer is essential to enhancing the SOC sequestration in a soybean-safflower sequence under rainfed conditions on Vertisols in central India.
Sustaining conservation values in selectively logged tropical forests: The attained and the attainable			Most tropical forests outside protected areas have been or will be selectively logged so it is essential to maximize the conservation values of partially harvested areas. Here we examine the extent to which these forests sustain timber production, retain species, and conserve carbon stocks. We then describe some improvements in tropical forestry and how their implementation can be promoted. A simple meta-analysis based on >100 publications revealed substantial variability but that: timber yields decline by about 46% after the first harvest but are subsequently sustained at that level; 76% of carbon is retained in once-logged forests; and, 85-100% of species of mammals, birds, invertebrates, and plants remain after logging. Timber stocks will not regain primary-forest levels within current harvest cycles, but yields increase if collateral damage is reduced and silvicultural treatments are applied. Given that selectively logged forests retain substantial biodiversity, carbon, and timber stocks, this "middle way" between deforestation and total protection deserves more attention from researchers, conservation organizations, and policy-makers. Improvements in forest management are now likely if synergies are enhanced among initiatives to retain forest carbon stocks (REDD+), assure the legality of forest products, certify responsible management, and devolve control over forests to empowered local communities. © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Sustaining the jungles of Southeast Asia			0
Swidden agriculture in transition and its roles in tropical forest loss and industrial plantation expansion			Tropical forest and swidden agriculture are declining, while industrial tree plantations are continuously expanding due to a robust global demand for timber and pulp. However, little is known about the processes, trends and mechanisms of the tropical forest-swidden-plantation (TFSP) nexus. Global ongoing initiatives including the United Nations Collaborative Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries (UN-REDD Programme), not only have repeatedly emphasized the significance of conserving forests, reforestation and afforestation, but also pushed swidden agriculture to the forefront of a long-standing international debate of climate change and biodiversity. Many facets limit our understanding of swidden agriculture and its roles in forest loss and plantations expansion. The lack of geographic and demographic data and their dynamics across the tropics undoubtedly further aggravates this situation since the first appeals for eradication of shifting cultivation by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) in the late 1950s. Although recent studies have significantly enriched our knowledge of forest loss and plantation expansion, previous research has proceeded separately and has yet to be integrated under the umbrella of 'sustainable development of swidden agriculture'. Efforts are needed to investigate the dynamics of the TFSP nexus for the sake of a synergetic goal of climate mitigation, biodiversity conservation, and poverty alleviation.
Symphony for the native wood(s): Global reforestation as an opportunity to develop a culture of conservation			1. The stewardship of forests across multiple human generations has potential to lead to cultural innovations fostering sustainable uses. Nevertheless, positive culture-nature interactions are often disrupted due to colonial exploitation and a lack of intrinsic value ascribed to nature in capitalist economies. There is global recognition that restoring degraded ecosystems is critical to promote the welfare of people and nature by reducing the negative impacts of global climate change and diminishing biodiversity. However, with a focus on technical remedies, restoration and reforestation efforts generally fail to address the root causes of ecosystem degradation.2. In this perspective paper, we call for explicit incorporation of cultural values into global reforestation efforts. We focus on music as a cultural ecosystem service as music has been a prominent part of human history with clear sociological and psychological attributes that may invite mass interest and participation. We illustrate the value of musical linkages via three case studies from Europe, Africa and Hawaii focusing on native tree species, their wood, musical ecology and their interaction with culture.3. We show that multi-generational stewardship of native ecosystems in Europe has allowed the refinement of the violin to its current form, one that is culturally significant for millions of people and has created a multi-million dollar industry. This development stems from a 500-year tradition of craftsmanship handed down across generations and illustrates that ecocultural interactions can be a strong dynamo for development of unique commodities.4. In contrast, in regions where extirpation of native plant species was used as a deliberate colonization strategy, many ecocultural linkages face risk of extinction. Our case studies from Africa and Hawaii illustrate how native tree species of particular value for musical expression were nearly lost and along with loss of music, important cultural connections to nature.5. In the context of restoration, there is also evidence that music-based linkages can revitalize nature-culture interactions and promote restoration of native ecosystems. Incorporating native trees in global reforestation efforts is critical for ensuring that reforestation efforts capture the synergies needed for developing new ideologies that promote the well-being of co-dependent humans and all life.
SYNERGIES AND TRADE-OFFS Recognizing the many possible outcomes of community-based conservation			0
Synergies Between Tree Crops and Ecosystems in Tropical Agroforestry			Agroforestry combines tree crop cultivation with traditional farming, which ensures biodiversity conservation, food security, and climate change mitigation in the tropical regions. Notably, agroforestry systems reduce emissions of greenhouse gases and mitigate climate change issue through carbon sequestration. Trees in these systems capture and store carbon over extended periods, mitigating the greenhouse effect by decreasing atmospheric carbon dioxide gas concentrations while diminishing methane and nitrous oxide emissions. Furthermore, these systems offer vital habitat provisions with diverse vegetation, nurturing various species and fostering ecological equilibrium, acting as critical biodiversity corridors that connect fragmented habitats and facilitate genetic diversity. Beyond ecological benefits, trees within agroforestry systems serve as invaluable food resources and bear cultural significance deeply rooted in the history and heritage of local communities. Moreover, sustainable agroforestry practices improve soil health by enhancing soil organic carbon content, improving nutrient cycling, preventing erosion, addressing soil contaminants, and nurturing diverse soil biological communities. Additionally, agroforestry systems regulate microclimates, creating less stressful conditions for crops and livestock while providing numerous economic advantages, diversifying income sources, strengthening agricultural resilience, and contributing to local economies. Although they also aid in weed, pest, and disease control, their effectiveness may vary depending on specific design and management practices. This chapter delves into the intricate and mutually beneficial relationship between tree crops and ecosystems, highlighting their substantial advantages while acknowledging the challenges associated with implementing these synergies. © 2024 Scrivener Publishing LLC.
Synergy between land use and climate change increases future fire risk in Amazon forests			Tropical forests have been a permanent feature of the Amazon basin for at least 55 million years, yet climate change and land use threaten the forest's future over the next century. Understory forest fires, which are common under the current climate in frontier forests, may accelerate Amazon forest losses from climate-driven dieback and deforestation. Far from land use frontiers, scarce fire ignitions and high moisture levels preclude significant burning, yet projected climate and land use changes may increase fire activity in these remote regions. Here, we used a fire model specifically parameterized for Amazon understory fires to examine the interactions between anthropogenic activities and climate under current and projected conditions. In a scenario of low mitigation efforts with substantial land use expansion and climate change - Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5 - projected understory fires increase in frequency and duration, burning 4-28 times more forest in 2080-2100 than during 1990-2010. In contrast, active climate mitigation and land use contraction in RCP4.5 constrain the projected increase in fire activity to 0.9-5.4 times contemporary burned area. Importantly, if climate mitigation is not successful, land use contraction alone is very effective under low to moderate climate change, but does little to reduce fire activity under the most severe climate projections. These results underscore the potential for a fire-driven transformation of Amazon forests if recent regional policies for forest conservation are not paired with global efforts to mitigate climate change.
Synthesis and conclusions			This chapter provides an overview of the role of tropical forests in the international efforts to negotiate a new global climate treaty. Under the existing treaty, the Kyoto Protocol and its “flexible mechanisms” - particularly the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) - have succeeded in building a billion dollar market for emission reduction projects in developing countries. Since the decision to include efforts to reduce emissions from tropical deforestation and forest degradation (REDD) in the 2007 Bali Action Plan, considerable attention has focused on designing a REDD and REDD+ program for inclusion in the next global climate agreement. The positions taken by different countries on REDD are driven by their circumstances - from those with large areas of standing forest to those with few remaining forests, from those facing rapid rates of deforestation to those engaged in reforestation. The overarching issues to be decided in developing the framework of a REDD mechanism include: the scope of the forestry activities to be covered; the scale of accounting for forestry activities and the baseline for measuring reference emissions levels; the type of financing to be provided for REDD activities; how to address fundamental issues of capacity and governance; and the consideration of co-benefits. There is some convergence around the scope of a REDD mechanism, the need to ultimately undertake activities at a national scale, the likelihood that financing will be both fund and market based, and the potential to implement REDD in phases. However, many contentious issues remain, including how to set baselines and accounting rules for REDD/REDD+ and how to incorporate governance concerns. © Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012.
Synthesizing Global and Local Datasets to Estimate Jurisdictional Forest Carbon Fluxes in Berau, Indonesia			BackgroundForest conservation efforts are increasingly being implemented at the scale of sub-national jurisdictions in order to mitigate global climate change and provide other ecosystem services. We see an urgent need for robust estimates of historic forest carbon emissions at this scale, as the basis for credible measures of climate and other benefits achieved. Despite the arrival of a new generation of global datasets on forest area change and biomass, confusion remains about how to produce credible jurisdictional estimates of forest emissions. We demonstrate a method for estimating the relevant historic forest carbon fluxes within the Regency of Berau in eastern Borneo, Indonesia. Our method integrates best available global and local datasets, and includes a comprehensive analysis of uncertainty at the regency scale.Principal Findings and SignificanceWe find that Berau generated 8.91 +/- 1.99 million tonnes of net CO2 emissions per year during 2000-2010. Berau is an early frontier landscape where gross emissions are 12 times higher than gross sequestration. Yet most (85%) of Berau's original forests are still standing. The majority of net emissions were due to conversion of native forests to unspecified agriculture (43% of total), oil palm (28%), and fiber plantations (9%). Most of the remainder was due to legal commercial selective logging (17%). Our overall uncertainty estimate offers an independent basis for assessing three other estimates for Berau. Two other estimates were above the upper end of our uncertainty range. We emphasize the importance of including an uncertainty range for all parameters of the emissions equation to generate a comprehensive uncertainty estimate-which has not been done before. We believe comprehensive estimates of carbon flux uncertainty are increasingly important as national and international institutions are challenged with comparing alternative estimates and identifying a credible range of historic emissions values.
Systemic Conservation, REDD, and the Future of the Amazon Basin			0
Table_1_Assessing the impact of abiotic and biotic factors on seedling survival in an African montane forest.docx			Tree seedling dynamics underpin subsequent forest structure and diversity as different species/guilds respond variously to abiotic and biotic stresses. Thus, understanding differential seedling responses to stresses helps us to predict forest trajectories. Because forests vary in both environment and species composition, generalisations across tropical forests are difficult. Afromontane forests are important carbon stores, harbour high diversity and provide critical ecosystem services, yet they are vulnerable to climate change. Here, we investigate the importance of key abiotic and biotic factors on survival of seedling guilds along spatial and temporal scales in a montane forest in south-eastern Nigeria. We use data from 318 seedling plots censused every 3 months from 2017 to 2020 to identify seven key abiotic and four biotic factors influencing seedling survival. We used the Kaplan-Meier method to estimate the persistence time of 1,145 seedlings at community and guild levels. At the community level, newly recruited seedlings had a median survival time of 15 months and about 37% of the seedlings sampled where still alive after 24 months. Understory tree species survived significantly longer than the other growth form guilds and seedling survival did not differ across shade tolerance guilds. Conspecific adult density and steeper, more north facing slopes had a negative effect on tree seedlings survival. In addition, tree seedlings that recruited in October (end of wet season/beginning of dry) had lower survival probabilities compared to those that recruited in the other months. Except for initial height, seedling survival in lianas was not impacted by any of the abiotic and biotic variables tested. Our results suggest that under the current environment forest structure and diversity is changing, most noticeably lianas are increasing in abundance relative to trees. Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Table_1_Stretching the Habitat Envelope: Insectivorous Bat Guilds Can Use Rubber Plantations, but Need Understorey Vegetation and Forest Buffers.pdf			Effects of land-cover change on insectivorous bat activity can be negative, neutral or positive, depending on foraging strategies of bats. In tropical agroforestry systems with high bat diversity, these effects can be complex to assess. We investigated foraging habitat use by three insectivorous bat guilds in forests and rubber plantations in the southern Western Ghats of India. Specifically, we monitored acoustic activity of bats in relation to (1) land-cover types and vegetation structure, and (2) plantation management practices. We hypothesized that activity of open-space aerial (OSA) and edge-space aerial (ESA) bat guilds would not differ; but narrow-space, flutter-detecting (NSFD) bat guild activity would be higher, in structurally heterogeneous forest habitats than monoculture rubber plantations. We found that bat activity of all guilds was highest in areas with high forest cover and lowest in rubber plantations. Higher bat activity was associated with understorey vegetation in forests and plantations, which was expected for NSFD bats, but was a surprise finding for OSA and ESA bats. Within land-cover types, open areas and edge-habitats had higher OSA and ESA activity respectively, while NSFD bats completely avoided open habitats. In terms of management practices, intensively managed rubber plantations with regular removal of understorey vegetation had the lowest bat activity for all guilds. Intensive management can undermine potential ecosystem services of insectivorous bats (e.g., insect pest-control in rubber plantations and surrounding agro-ecosystems), and magnify threats to bats from human disturbances. Low-intensity management and maintenance of forest buffers around plantations can enable persistence of insectivorous bats in tropical forest-plantation landscapes. Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Table1_Quantifying Tree Diversity, Carbon Stocks, and Sequestration Potential for Diverse Land Uses in Northeast India.docx			In the modern era, rapid anthropogenic activities in the vicinity of the Himalayas disturb the carbon sequestration potential resulting in climate change. For the first time, this study estimates the biomass and carbon storage potential of Northeast Indias diverse land uses through a biomass estimation model developed for this region. The mean tree density in tropical, subtropical, and temperate forests was 539, 554, and 638 trees ha1, respectively. The mean vegetation carbon stock was the highest for temperate forests (122.09 MgCha1), followed by subtropical plantations (115.45 MgCha1), subtropical forests (106.01MgCha1), tropical forests (105.33 MgCha1), tropical plantations (93.00MgCha1), and temperate plantations (50.10 MgCha1). Among the forests, the mean soil organic carbon (SOC) stock up to 45cm depth was the highest for tropical forests (72.54MgCha1), followed by temperate forests (63.4MgCha1) and subtropical forests (42.58MgCha1). A strong relationship between the tree basal area and biomass carbon storage was found for all land-use types. The land-use transformation from agriculture to agroforestry, and grassland to plantations increased both vegetation carbon (VC) and SOC stocks. The corresponding increase in VC and SOC was 40.80 and 43.34MgCha1, respectively, in the former, and 83.18 and 97.64MgCha1 in the latter. In general, the landscape-level estimates were drawn from site-level estimates in a given land-use type, and therefore, the corresponding values might be overestimated. Nevertheless, the results provide baseline information on carbon stock which may serve as a reference for devising appropriate land-use change policies in the region. Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Tailor-made biochar systems: Interdisciplinary evaluations of ecosystem services and farmer livelihoods in tropical agro-ecosystems			Organic matter management is key to sustain ecosystem services provided by soils. However, it is rarely considered in a holistic view, considering local resources, agro-environmental effects and harmonization with farmers' needs. Organic inputs, like compost and biochar, could represent a sustainable solution to massive current challenges associated to the intensification of agriculture, in particular for tropical regions. Here we assess the potential of agricultural residues as a resource for farmer communities in southwestern India to reduce their dependency on external inputs and sustain ecosystem services. We propose a novel joint evaluation of farmers' aspirations together with agro-environmental effects of organic inputs on soils. Our soil quality evaluation showed that biochar alone or with compost did not improve unilaterally soils in the tropics (Anthroposol, Ferralsol and Vertisol). Many organic inputs led to an initial decrease in water-holding capacities of control soils (-27.3%: coconut shell biochar with compost on Anthroposol). Responses to organic matter inputs for carbon were strongest for Ferralsols (+33.4% with rice husk biochar), and mostly positive for Anthroposols and Vertisols (+12.5% to +13.8% respectively). Soil pH responses were surprisingly negative for Ferralsols and only positive if biochar was applied alone (between -5.6% to +1.9%). For Anthroposols and Vertisols, highest increases were achieved with rice husk biochar + vermicomposts (+7.2% and +5.2% respectively). Our socio-economic evaluation showed that farmers with a stronger economical position showed greater interest towards technology like biochar (factor 1.3 to 1.6 higher for farmers cultivating Anthroposols and/or Vertisols compared to Ferralsols), while poorer farmers more skepticism, which may lead to an increased economical gap within rural communities if technologies are not implemented with long-term guidance. These results advocate for an interdisciplinary evaluation of agricultural technology prior to its implementation as a development tool in the field.
Taking cultural landscapes into account: Implications for scaling up ecological restoration			Conceptual frameworks for landscape restoration commonly take an approach focused on ecological (biotic and abiotic) aspects. Yet the recent initiatives demanding that restoration be scaled up to restore millions of hectares of degraded land often encounter socio-cultural challenges too, such as competing land-use interests and low stakeholder engagement. Thus, consideration also needs to be given to cultural landscapes, broadly defined as regions that reflect the long-term interactions between people and the environment. Based on a literature survey we here identify and then discuss features from cultural landscapes-ecological restoration research, which can be relevant to ecological restoration upscaling. Overall, research encompassing cultural landscapes is revealed as less narrowly-focused than that on landscape ecology linked with ecological restoration: our selected studies quite frequently considered social and landscape aspects in addition to ecological aspects. Geographically, research is strongly biased towards Europe and North America, although the most ambitious restoration targets are in the tropics. Taking cultural landscapes into account could enhance restoration by (1) moving towards a transdisciplinary approach thereby offsetting the overemphasis on ecological aspects, and (2) mitigating issues of land use and stakeholder engagement. Further research, paying special attention to the tropics, should aim at integrative approaches that would contribute to scaling up restoration, not only in single large-scale projects but also through the sum of small but concerted actions.
Tamm Review: Deep fine roots in forest ecosystems: Why dig deeper?			While the number of studies dealing with fine root dynamics in deep soils layers (depth > 1 m) has increased sharply recently, the phenology, the morphology, the anatomy and the role of deep fine roots are still poorly known in forest ecosystems. This review summarizes the current knowledge on fine root production, mortality and longevity in deep soil layers, mycorrhizal association with deep roots, and the role of deep fine roots on carbon, water and nutrient cycling in forest ecosystems. Plant species are known to be more deeply rooted in tropical ecosystems than in temperate and boreal ecosystems, but deep-rooted species are common in a wide range of climates. Deep fine roots are highly plastic in response to changes in environmental conditions and soil resources. Recent studies show that functional traits can be different for deep and shallow roots, with a possible functional specialization of deep fine roots to take up nutrients. With higher vessel diameter and larger tracheid, the anatomy of deep fine roots is also oriented toward water acquisition and transport by increasing the hydraulic conductivity. Deep fine roots can have a great impact on the biogeochemical cycles in many forests (in particular in tropical areas where highly weathered soils are commonly very deep), making it possible to take up water and nutrients over dry periods and contributing to store carbon in the soil. The biogeochemical models in forest ecosystems need to consider the specificity of deep root functioning to better predict carbon, water and nutrient cycling as well as net ecosystem productivity.
Tamm Review: Re-imagining forestry and wood business: pathways to rural development, poverty alleviation and climate change mitigation in the tropics			Millions of people are dependent on tropical forests for livelihood. However, their dependence on meagre incomes from nontimber forest products (NTFPs) and payment for ecosystem services (PES) are leading to continuing poverty. It is doubtful if the program, Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD + ) has yet achieved much in its primary goal of forest conservation, and the chance of it helping to alleviate rural poverty is slim. Forest conservation per se hardly creates economic opportunities, beyond survival, for rural people. Our efforts for conserving forests and their biodiversity will remain less effective as long as there are so many enclaves of trenchant poverty within and around them in the landscapes and we continue to by-pass practical routes to poverty alleviation. Poverty can be alleviated only if local actions spur economic development in which local communities have a rightful and fair share and can earn rewards for their entrepreneurships.Wood is a renewable, recyclable, versatile and sustainable natural resource. The demands for wood products are rising in developing countries, as their economies grow. They also face endemic wood deficits. This provides opportunities to pro-actively develop commercial forestry as a path to rural development and poverty alleviation. That would also assist national climate change mitigation measures, because forests sequester carbon, wood products are largely carbon positive and timber- based options are on hand to substitute for high emission materials such as concrete, steel and aluminium used to build our living environments.To move along this path, the businesses of tree growing by small-growers and local value adding should be strengthened, catalysing the entrepreneurial spirits of local people. Central to this is the need to put in place strategies to improve the productivity of and value from small scale enterprises; yet there is a serious lack of research and application to serve this key need. Among other constraints faced by small-growers include, lack of transparent and legal rights to land ownership in several countries, layers of bureaucratic regulations and the current international forest certification systems which are cumbersome and unaffordable for small-growers. Actions are possible and needed for simplifying or removing road blocks on all these fronts, along with, importantly, the development of markets for diverse products. Growth of the forestry sector as an engine for rural development warrants far greater recognition and investment than has been the case so far. We need to reimagine and strengthen the role of forestry including commercial wood business - green growth - as an effective path to rural development and poverty alleviation.
Targeted reforestation could reverse declines in connectivity for understory birds in a tropical habitat corridor			Re-establishing connectivity between protected areas isolated by habitat clearing is a key conservation goal in the humid tropics. In northeastern Costa Rica, payments for environmental services (PES) and a government ban on deforestation have subsidized forest protection and reforestation in the San Juan-La Selva Biological Corridor (SJLSBC), resulting in a decline in mature forest loss and the expansion of tree plantations. We use field studies and graph models to assess how conservation efforts have altered functional connectivity over the last 25 years for four species of insectivorous understory birds. Field playback studies assessed how reforestation habitat quality affected the willingness of Myrmeciza exsul, Henicorhina leucosticta, Thamnophilus atrinucha, and Glyphorynchus spirurus to travel outside forest habitat for territorial defense. Observed travel distances were greatest in nonnative and native tree plantations with high understory stem density, regardless of overstory composition. In contrast, tree plantations with low stem density had travel responses comparable to open pasture for three of the four bird species. We modeled landscape connectivity for each species using graph models based on varying possible travel distances in tree plantations, gallery forests, and pastures. From 1986 to 2011, connectivity for all species declined in the SJLSBC landscape (5825 km2) by 14% to 21% despite only a 4.9% net loss in forest area and the rapid expansion of tree plantations over 2% of the landscape. Plantation placement in the landscape limited their potential facilitation of connectivity because they were located either far from forest cover or within already contiguous forest areas. We mapped current connectivity bottlenecks and identified priority areas for future reforestation. We estimate that reforestation of priority areas could improve connectivity by 2% with only a 1% gain in forest cover, an impressive gain given the small area reforested. Results indicate key locations where spatial targeting of PES within the SJLSBC study region would protect existing forest connectivity and enhance the connectivity benefits of reforestation. © 2016 by the Ecological Society of America.
Taxonomic and community composition of epigeal arthropods in monoculture and mixed tree species plantations in a deciduous forest of Ghana			Tropical forests provide several ecosystem services and functions and support approximately two-thirds of the world's biodiversity but are seriously threatened by deforestation. Approaches to counteract this menace have revolved around afforestation with several or a single tree species. We thus investigated how plantation forests with either a single or several tree species influenced arthropod taxonomic and community composition using pitfall traps to sample selected groups of epigeal arthropods (Araneae, Coleoptera, Orthoptera and Hymenoptera) and with environmental variables assessed simultaneously. Our results revealed 54 taxonomic groups with significantly higher taxonomic richness, activity density, and diversity in the mixed stands than in the monoculture stands. The significant differences in community composition were mainly driven by families including Lycosidae, Formicidae, Staphylinidae, Scotylidae, Hydrophilidae, Gryllidae and Scarabaeidae and were explained by distinct habitat characteristics (canopy openness, litter depth, deadwood volume, and tree height). While the diverse tree communities and heterogeneous vegetation structure offered food and habitat resources for diverse arthropod groups, the allelopathic nature coupled with homogenous stand characteristics of the Tectona grandis stands in the monoculture suppressed the growth of understorey vegetation that could otherwise serve as food and habitat resources for arthropods, which might have led to limited activities and diversity of arthropods in the monoculture plantation stands. The findings thus highlight the need to promote mixed tree plantations in degraded tropical areas, especially when restoring biodiversity is the prime management focus.
Teatime on Mount Kilimanjaro: Assessing climate and land-use effects on litter decomposition and stabilization using the Tea Bag Index			Decomposition is one of the most important processes in ecosystem carbon (C) and nutrient cycles and is a major factor controlling ecosystem functions. The functioning of Afromontane ecosystems and their ability to provide ecosystem services are particularly threatened by climate and land-use change. Our objectives were to assess the effects of climatic conditions (elevation and seasonality) and land-use intensity on litter decomposition and C stabilization in 10 ecosystems along the unique 3,000-m elevation gradient of Mt. Kilimanjaro. Tea Bag Index parameters (decomposition-rate-constant k and stabilization-factor S) were used to quantify decomposition of standardized litter substrate. Nine pairs of tea bags (green and rooibos tea) were exposed in each ecosystem during the short-wet, warm-dry, long-wet and cold-dry season. Decomposition rate increased from k=0.007 in savanna (SAV; 950-m elevation), up to a maximum of k=0.022 in montane cloud forest (2,100m). This was followed by a 50% decrease in (sub-)alpine ecosystems (>4,000m). SAV experienced the strongest seasonal variation, with 23-times higher S values in dry season compared with wet season. The conversion of SAV to maize monocultures (similar to 1,000m) and traditional agroforestry to large-scale coffee plantations (similar to 1,300m) increased mean k values, and stabilization factors were about one-third lower. Forests between 1,900 and 2,100m represent the zone of sufficient moisture and optimal temperature conditions. Seasonal moisture (lower slope) and temperature limitation (alpine zone) decreases litter decomposition. Mt. Kilimanjaro ecosystems are highly sensitive to land-use change, which accelerates ecosystem cycles and decreases C stabilization.
Temperature sensitivity of soil organic matter decomposition varies with biochar application and soil type			Biochar application has the potential to improve soil fertility and increase soil carbon stock, especially in tropical regions. Information on the temperature sensitivity of carbon dioxide (CO2) evolution from biochar-amended soils at very high temperatures, as observed for tropical surface soils, is limited but urgently needed for the development of region-specific biochar management targeted to optimize biochar effects on soil functions. Here, we investigated the temperature sensitivity of soil respiration to the addition of different rates of Miscanthus biochar (0, 6.25, 12.5, and 25 Mg ha(-1)) in two types of soils with contrasting textures. Biochar-amended soil treatments and their controls were incubated at constant temperatures of 20, 30, and 40 degrees C. Overall, our results show that: i) considering data from all treatments and temperatures, the addition of biochar decreased soil CO2 emissions when compared to untreated soils; ii) CO2 emissions from biochar-amended soils had a higher temperature sensitivity than those from biochar-free soils; iii) the temperature sensitivity of soil respiration in sandy soils was higher than that in clay soils; and iv) for clay soils, relative increases in soil CO2 emissions from biochar-amended soils were higher when the temperature increased from 30 to 40 degrees C, while for sandy soils, the highest temperature responses of soil respiration were observed when increasing the temperature from 20 to 30 degrees C. Together, these findings suggest a significantly reduced potential to increase soil organic carbon stocks when Miscanthus biochar is applied to tropical soils at high surface temperatures, which could be counteracted by the soil- and weather-specific timing of biochar application.
Temporal and environmental correlates of carbon stocks in a regenerating tropical forest			Questions Carbon dynamics in tropical forests is influenced by a variety of biotic and abiotic factors that act over temporal and spatial scales. At the local scale, carbon stock and dynamics can be determined by the environment and ecosystem diversity. Also, during forest regeneration, which is a temporal process, it is expected that those factors that influence carbon also change over time. Here we examine how carbon stock and dynamics are influenced by forest age, environment and functional diversity during forest regeneration. Using the relative effects of the different drivers of carbon dynamics, we attempt to discern the mechanisms (mass effect or niche complementarity) that explain those processes.Location We carried out this study in Atlantic Forest of different ages during natural regeneration in southern Brazil.Methods We measured environmental characteristics (soil physical and chemical attributes and canopy openness), estimated functional diversity and above-ground carbon and its dynamics over time. We examined univariate and multivariate predictors of carbon stock and dynamics using structural equation models.Results We found that age had the strongest influence on carbon stock, while environmental characteristics, functional and taxonomic diversities were much less important or unimportant. Our results suggest that the influence of time on tropical forest carbon dynamics overlaps and outweighs the effects due to environmental limits and mechanisms mediated by diversity (mass effects, niche complementarity).Conclusions Natural regeneration can be an effective strategy for restoring carbon sequestration and methods that use manipulation of regenerating forests with the hope of improving the process are unlikely to bring additional advantage in terms of carbon sequestration.
Temporal and spatial patterns of aboveground biomass and its driving forces in a subtropical forest: a case study			The accurate characterization of aboveground biomass (AGB) dynamics and their driving forces in sub-tropical forests is important to evaluate AGB's contribution to global carbon stocks. In order to estimate the effects of local variables on temporal and spatial patterns of AGB we investigated the variation of AGB in a 20-ha sub-tropical permanent plot. We found that the AGB was 153.7 Mg ha(-1) in 2005, and 149.3 Mg ha(-1) in 2010. During the five-year period, AGB changed due to tree mortality, growth (diameter at breast height, DBH) and recruitment. Medium-sized trees (DBH: 30-50 cm) were the largest contributor to total AGB. Both the tree species diversity index and the number of individuals within medium (DBH: 30-50 cm) and large (DBH: >50 cm) DBH ranges had significant positive effects on AGB. In addition, the abiotic factors such as elevation, slope, and convexity had negative significant relationships with AGB. The results indicate the importance of including forest community characteristics and environmental variables in forest carbon studies. This study also provides important data that can be used to develop and validate carbon cycling models for old-growth sub-tropical forests.
TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL VARIABILITY OF THE DIAMETER DISTRIBUTION IN A SECONDARY BRAZILIAN ATLANTIC FOREST SUGGESTS SITE-SPECIFIC MANAGEMENT PRACTICES			The diameter distribution of a forest makes it possible to understand its ecological processes and to define actions related to forest management aiming at forest conservation, biodiversity increase, production, and carbon sequestration, among others. This study aimed to identify variation in the diameter distribution in a secondary Atlantic Forest, as a function of sites, over 24 years. The diameter at 1.3 m in height (dbh) was measured for each tree over 5.0 cm dbh, in ten sites, from 1992 to 2016. It was analyzed the quadratic mean diameter (Dq), the Dq annual periodic increment (API(Dq)), the Liocourt's Quotient (q), and the diameter distribution with Meyer's exponential model. The average API(Dq )over 24 years was 0.03 cm year(-1), an average increase of 0.21%, with site variation ranging from 0.74% to -0.45%. The diameter distribution of the forest as a whole maintained the reverse J-shaped over 24-years. When the sites in each inventory year were analyzed, the variation in the diameter distribution was evident, and there were differences in the recovery capacity of the reverse J-shaped distribution from 1992 to 2016. The overall results indicate that, whenever possible, the management plan to recover the structure of the Atlantic Forest remnants should be site-specific, particularly in the mountainous region where the environmental conditions are quite diverse.
Temporal assessment of growing stock, biomass and carbon stock of Indian forests			The dynamics of terrestrial ecosystems depends on interactions between carbon, nutrient and hydrological cycles. Terrestrial ecosystems retain carbon in live biomass (aboveground and belowground), decomposing organic matter, and soil. Carbon is exchanged naturally between these systems and the atmosphere through photosynthesis, respiration, decomposition, and combustion. Human activities change carbon stock in these pools and exchanges between them and the atmosphere through land-use, land-use change, and forestry.In the present study we estimated the wood (stem) biomass, growing stock (GS) and carbon stock of Indian forests for 1984 and 1994. The forest area, wood biomass, GS, and carbon stock were 63.86 Mha, 4327.99 Mm(3), 2398.19 Mt and 1085.06 Mt respectively in 1984 and with the reduction in forest area, 63.34 Mha, in 1994, wood biomass (2395.12 Mt) and carbon stock (1083.69 Mt) also reduced subsequently. The Conifers, of temperate region, stocked maximum carbon in their woods, 28.88 to 65.21 t C ha(-1), followed by Mangrove forests, 28.24 t C ha(-1), Dipterocarp forests, 28.00 t C ha(-1), and Shorea robusta forests, 24.07 t C ha(-1). Boswellia serrata, with 0.22 Mha forest area, stocked only 3.91 t C ha(-1). To have an idea of rate of carbon loss the negative changes (loss of forest area) in forest area occurred during 1984-1994 (10yrs) and 1991-1994 (4yrs) were also estimated. In India, land-use changes and fuelwood requirements are the main cause of negative change. Total 24.75 Mt C was lost during 1984-1994 and 21.35 Mt C during 1991-94 at a rate of 2.48 Mt C yr(-1) and 5.35 Mt C yr(-1) respectively. While in other parts of India negative change is due to multiple reasons like fuelwood, extraction of non-wood forest products (NWFPs), illicit felling etc., but in the northeastern region of the country shifting cultivation is the only reason for deforestation. Decrease in forest area due to shifting cultivation accounts for 23.0% of the total deforestation in India, with an annual loss of 0.93 Mt C yr(-1).
Temporal patterns of storage and flux of N and P in young Teak plantations of tropical moist deciduous forest, India			Teak (Tectona grandis Linn. f.) ranks among the top five tropical hardwood species and is being promoted for use in plantations in its non-native range due to its high economic value. However, there is a general lack of data on ecosystem functioning of teak plantations. We aimed at understanding storage and flux of nutrients related to young plantations of teak. Cycling of nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) in a chronosequence of plantations (1, 5, 11, 18, 24 and 30 years) was studied in the Moist Deciduous Forest Region of North India with the objective of investigating the nutrient cycling pattern at younger age since the current trend of harvesting age of the species in several tropical countries is being drastically reduced for quick return from this high value crop. Standing state, nutrient uptake, nutrient return and nutrient retranslocation in these plantations were estimated by tree harvesting and chemical analysis methods. The range of total standing nutrient across all these plantations was 20.3 to 586.6 kg·ha-1 for N and 5.3 to 208.8 kg·ha-1 for P. Net uptake of N ranged from 19.4 to 88.9 kg·ha-1·a-1 and P from 3.8 to 18.1 kg·ha-1·a-1. Retranslocation of N and P among all the stands ranged from 8.7 to 48.0 kg·ha-1·a-1 and 0.01 to 3.5 kg·ha-1·a-1, respectively. Range of total nutrient return was 25.8 to 91.3 kg·ha-1·a-1 for N and 2.7 to 10.1 kg·ha-1·a-1 for P. N and P use efficiency was between 107.4 and 192.5 g dry organic matter (OM) g-1 N, and 551.9 and 841.1 g OM g-1 P, respectively. The turnover time ranged from 2.04-13.17 years for N and between 2.40-22.66 years for P. Quantity of N and P in the soil nutrient pool ranged from 2566.8 to 4426.8 kg·ha-1 and 372 to 520 kg·ha-1, respectively. Storage and flux of components in different plant parts of different aged plantations were assessed and depicted in compartment models. Percentage storage in soil, litter and vegetation ranged from 82% to 99%, 0.6% to 2.4% and 0.5% to 15% for N, respectively, and from 63% to 98%, 0.5% to 2% and 1% to 35% for P, respectively. This information could be useful in managing external nutrient manipulation to crops of different ages for optimum biomass production or carbon sequestration. © 2014 Northeast Forestry University and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Temporal variations in burn severity among various vegetation layers in subtropical Pinus Roxburghii (Chir Pine) forest of Hindu Kush mountain range			The Sub-tropical forests of Pinus roxburghii (chir pine) provide various ecosystem services and act as watershed for low lying regions. However, this species is prone to human induced fire primarily due to local communities' dependence for various resources exacerbated by the current dry conditions. The impact of fire across various vegetation layers and developmental stages has not been thoroughly studied. Bearing to this, the present study was conducted using composite burn index to assess the severity on various layers of vegetation and their longterm impact through a chronological approach. The impact of fire on 40 representative circular plots with a radius of 30 m, categorized into five forest strata: large and intermediate trees, seedlings/saplings, pole stage, shrubs, and soil were investigated and compared across four different time interval: unburnt (B0), burnt two years ago (B2), burnt five years ago (B5), and burnt 15 years ago (B15). The results were statistically proved using Kruskal-Wallis followed by Dunn's Post Hoc and Friedman test with the Holm correction in R Language. The study revealed significant variations in the average burn severity for each treatment, with shrubs having the highest average score of burn severity (average = 1.4) and soil showing the lowest (average = 0.408). The results of the Friedman test indicated non-uniform distribution of burn severity across different ecological treatments. This study is contributing significant insights into the effects of forest fires and their severity on different vegetation layers, which can be instrumental in devising and executing successful restoration strategies.
Temporal variations in carbon stock of Pinus roxburghii Sargent forests of Himachal Pradesh, India			The present study was conducted in Solan Forest Division of Himachal Pradesh covering an area of about 57,158 ha. The aim was to estimate and assess the temporal change in carbon stock of the Chil Working Circle, in two forest ranges of the Division, Solan and Dharampur, over the period of 1956-2011. The inventory data of the working plans of Solan Forest Division from 1956-1957, 1984-1985 and 2002-2003 were used in the present study while field data for biomass estimation was collected for the year 2011. The results showed a declining trend in carbon stock over 1956-1984 period, however, an increasing trend over 1984-2002 was observed, which showed a further increase for the period 2002-2011. These fluctuating trends in the forest carbon stock can be related to increasing anthropogenic pressure on forests and the subsequent introduction of a ban on green felling envisaging efficient forest management, both of which affect the forest carbon pool significantly.
Ten golden rules for reforestation to optimize carbon sequestration, biodiversity recovery and livelihood benefits			Urgent solutions to global climate change are needed. Ambitious tree-planting initiatives, many already underway, aim to sequester enormous quantities of carbon to partly compensate for anthropogenic CO2 emissions, which are a major cause of rising global temperatures. However, tree planting that is poorly planned and executed could actually increase CO2 emissions and have long-term, deleterious impacts on biodiversity, landscapes and livelihoods. Here, we highlight the main environmental risks of large-scale tree planting and propose 10 golden rules, based on some of the most recent ecological research, to implement forest ecosystem restoration that maximizes rates of both carbon sequestration and biodiversity recovery while improving livelihoods. These are as follows: (1) Protect existing forest first; (2) Work together (involving all stakeholders); (3) Aim to maximize biodiversity recovery to meet multiple goals; (4) Select appropriate areas for restoration; (5) Use natural regeneration wherever possible; (6) Select species to maximize biodiversity; (7) Use resilient plant material (with appropriate genetic variability and provenance); (8) Plan ahead for infrastructure, capacity and seed supply; (9) Learn by doing (using an adaptive management approach); and (10) Make it pay (ensuring the economic sustainability of the project). We focus on the design of long-term strategies to tackle the climate and biodiversity crises and support livelihood needs. We emphasize the role of local communities as sources of indigenous knowledge, and the benefits they could derive from successful reforestation that restores ecosystem functioning and delivers a diverse range of forest products and services. While there is no simple and universal recipe for forest restoration, it is crucial to build upon the currently growing public and private interest in this topic, to ensure interventions provide effective, long-term carbon sinks and maximize benefits for biodiversity and people.
Termite diversity is resilient to land-use change along a forest-cocoa intensification gradient in Ghana, West Africa			Cocoa is an important crop for Ghana's economy, contributing 25% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The crop, however, is mainly cultivated on forest-derived soils and is a major cause of land-use change. Termites are an important biological component of tropical ecosystems providing numerous ecosystem services. Previous studies have indicated that termites are sensitive to forest disturbance and decrease in richness and abundance across land-use intensification gradients, with consequences for the essential services that they provide. Native shade trees are often used to improve cocoa cultivation and may reduce the detrimental effects of land-use change on some aspects of biodiversity. The aim of this study was therefore to explore how termites respond to land-use change along a shade-tree gradient in Kakum National Park and surrounding cocoa farms in Ghana (from forest at 80% tree cover to cocoa with no shade cover, to the extreme of cultivated arable crop land). It was predicted that termite richness and abundance would decrease with decreasing shade cover, and with increasing distance from the forest edge. Thirty-four species from 29 genera were sampled, with Ancistrotermes crucifer being found in all the locations (47% of all encounters). Species richness and abundance differed marginally across the land-use gradient, as well as the distance from the forest edge; however, species richness did not show any significance with distance. All the same, termite communities were robust to the disturbance. Our findings suggest that though site influenced species richness and abundance, cocoa trees can play a crucial role in maintaining biodiversity and environmental quality in an agricultural landscape by providing a habitat for forest species that are not found in pastures or farm fields. However, we caution that the relatively low forest baseline of existing forest diversity may inflate the value of cocoa land, with those forests no longer representing undisturbed natural habitats: this highlights that shifting baselines may need to be accounted for when interpreting findings in the Anthropocene.
Termites and Ants in Burkina Faso (West Africa): Taxonomic and Functional Diversity along Land-Use Gradients; Ecosystem Services of Termites in the Traditional Zaï System			0
Terrestrial carbon sinks in China and around the world and their contribution to carbon neutrality			Enhancing the terrestrial ecosystem carbon sink (referred to as terrestrial C sink) is an important way to slow down the continuous increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration and to achieve carbon neutrality target. To better understand the characteristics of terrestrial C sinks and their contribution to carbon neutrality, this review summarizes major progress in terrestrial C budget researches during the past decades, clarifies spatial patterns and drivers of terrestrial C sources and sinks in China and around the world, and examines the role of terrestrial C sinks in achieving carbon neutrality target. According to recent studies, the global terrestrial C sink has been increasing from a source of (-0.2 +/- 0.9) Pg C yr(-1) (1 Pg=10(15) g) in the 1960s to a sink of (1.9 +/- 1.1) Pg C yr(-1) in the 2010s. By synthesizing the published data, we estimate terrestrial C sink of 0.20-0.25 Pg C yr(-1) in China during the past decades, and predict it to be 0.15-0.52 Pg C yr(-1) by 2060. The terrestrial C sinks are mainly located in the mid- and high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, while tropical regions act as a weak C sink or source. The C balance differs much among ecosystem types: forest is the major C sink; shrubland, wetland and farmland soil act as C sinks; and whether the grassland functions as C sink or source remains unclear. Desert might be a C sink, but the magnitude and the associated mechanisms are still controversial. Elevated atmospheric CO2 concentration, nitrogen deposition, climate change, and land cover change are the main drivers of terrestrial C sinks, while other factors such as fires and aerosols would also affect ecosystem C balance. The driving factors of terrestrial C sink differ among regions. Elevated CO2 concentration and climate change are major drivers of the C sinks in North America and Europe, while afforestation and ecological restoration are additionally important forcing factors of terrestrial C sinks in China. For future studies, we recommend the necessity for intensive and long term ecosystem C monitoring over broad geographic scale to improve terrestrial biosphere models for accurately evaluating terrestrial C budget and its dynamics under various climate change and policy scenarios.
Testing species abundance distribution models in tropical forest successions: Implications for fine-scale passive restoration			Tropical forests are recognized worldwide for providing ecosystem services that contribute greatly to biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. In this study, we hypothesize that tree species abundance distribution is determined by the commonness-rarity balance of species during tropical forest recovery through natural regeneration. We sampled 45 20 m x 50 m plots across three sites in secondary forests with different stand ages (5, 10, 15, and 20 years) after shifting cultivation, and an old-growth forest (> 100 years old) located in the Northern Amazon forest, Venezuela. We explored the variations in woody species abundance distribution and compositional similarity using a chronosequence approach. There was a clear pattern of increasing species abundance in forest successions, from second-growth to old-growth forests. Species abundance in the old-growth forest was much higher than in the second-growth forest. The niche-preemption model showed a high goodnessof-fit to the 5-year old second-growth forest, while 10- and 15-year old second-growth forests and the old-growth forest showed a significant fit to the lognormal model. Along the species-rank axis, the most common species accounted for 54% of the total proportional abundance at the earliest successional stage (5-year old), whereas the relative proportion of the most common species remained relatively stable at 22%-25% in the following successional stages (i.e., old-growth forest). Species dominance was lower in old-growth forest than those in second-growth forest, where there were seven species with the highest importance values within the community. There were obvious differences in relation to the old-growth forest, where rare species were present. The results we present here are crucial for designing and implementing proper, goal-oriented forest restoration strategies, and should aid future research.
Thailand forest cover and biomass estimation mapping under the APFNet greater mekong sub-region and Malaysia project			The Great Mekong Sub-region (GMS) containing one of the world's largest tropical forests which play a vital role in sustainable development and provide a range of economic, social and environmental benefits, including essential ecosystem services such as climate change mitigation and adaptation. However, the forest in this Sub-region is experiencing deforestation rates at high level due to human activities. The reduction of the forest area has negative influence to the environmental and natural resources issues, in particularly, more and severe disasters have been occurred due to global warming, the release of the greenhouse gases. Therefore, in order to conduct forest management in the Sub-region efficiently, the Forest Cover and Carbon Mapping in Greater Mekong Sub-region and Malaysia project was initialized by the Asia-Pacific Network for Sustainable Forest Management and Rehabilitation (APFNet) with the collaboration of various research institutions including Institute of Forest Resource Information Technique (IFRIT), Chinese Academy of Forestry (CAF) and the countries in Sub region and Malaysia comprises of Cambodia, the People's Republic of China (Yunnan province and Guangxi province), Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, Thailand, and Viet Nam. The main target of the project is to apply the intensive use of recent satellite remote sensing technology, establishing regional forest cover maps, documenting forest change processes and estimating carbon storage in the GMS and Malaysia. In this paper, the authors present the implementation of the project in Thailand as one of the participated countries in the project using satellite imagery, mainly from Landsat TM 5 and data products from the Geoscience Laser Altimeter System (GLAS) instrument onboard of the NASA Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation (ICESat) satellite with field survey data in forest area over the country. First, the test sites for forest cover mapping were selected in Trad, Lampang and Ubon Rachathani provinces. Then the forest cover maps for 2010 and 2005 were generated according to the main target of the project. For above ground biomass mapping, the data collection were conducted as field plot measurement following the GLAS footprints, which will be applied to biomass estimation. The result of the project will be contributed as efficient tools to support decision makers to clearly understand the dynamic change of the forest cover which could benefit sustainable forest resources management in Thailand and the whole Sub-region. Copyright © (2013) by the Asian Association on Remote Sensing.
The ‘No-Fire Bonus’ Scheme in Mountain Province, Cordillera Administrative Region, Philippines			The incidence and scale of forest fires are increasing in Southeast Asia. Apart from the contribution to climate change that occurs when forests turn from carbon sinks into carbon sources, forest fire also has significant social and economic impacts (FAO 2007). Although fire has a legitimate place in traditional agriculture and has been an important factor in the development of terrestrial ecosystems, concerns about its social and environmental impacts are growing (Walpole et al. 1993, 1994; Karki 2002; FAO 2006). As climate change is predicted to increase the frequency, persistence and magnitude of drought in the region’s tropical forests, the significance of fire management in attempts to reduce emissions from forestry can only increase. This case study from the Philippines reviews key design factors and impacts in a payment scheme to reduce fire incidence through local engagement. In 1996, the ‘No-Fire Bonus’ (NFB) scheme was launched in the fire-prone pine forests of Mountain Province, part of the Cordillera Administrative Region in northern Philippines and the ancestral domain of several indigenous groups. While the scheme involved payments for fire protection, it was not developed with attention to PES principles, where a clearly defined environmental service is conditionally traded between providers and buyers, as PES is largely a nascent concept in the Philippines. Nevertheless, the case provides important lessons about the operation and impacts of incentive payments for fire protection that are transferable to REDD schemes. © Luca Tacconi, Sango Mahanty and Helen Suich 2010. All rights reserved.
The Amazon in Transition: The Challenge of Transforming the World's Largest Tropical Forest Biome into a Sustainable Social-Ecological System			The Amazon is a major biome for helping to stabilize the water and temperature of its region and possibly even the whole planet. But increasingly it is subject to droughts leading to the possibility of a runaway drying into a far less diverse forest and even an emergent savannah. In essence this is a highly complex socio-ecological biome which is experiencing global interconnections over carbon emissions and food price spikes. All of this makes predictions of the tipping points for the Amazon extremely difficult to model or to manage. Turning these disturbance factors around requires regional and local scale commitment involving all communities and real incentives to conserve ecosystem services with appropriate safeguards and payments. This is a tall order as at the level of land use and forest conservation, the incentives are perverse. © The British Academy 2013. All rights reserved.
The biodiversity cost of carbon sequestration in tropical savanna			Tropical savannas have been increasingly viewed as an opportunity for carbon sequestration through fire suppression and afforestation, but insufficient attention has been given to the consequences for biodiversity. To evaluate the biodiversity costs of increasing carbon sequestration, we quantified changes in ecosystemcarbon stocks and the associated changes in communities of plants and ants resulting from fire suppression in savannas of the Brazilian Cerrado, a global biodiversity hotspot. Fire suppression resulted in increased carbon stocks of 1.2 Mg ha(-1) year(-1) since 1986 but was associated with acute species loss. In sites fully encroached by forest, plant species richness declined by 27%, and ant richness declined by 35%. Richness of savanna specialists, the species most at risk of local extinction due to forest encroachment, declined by 67% for plants and 86% for ants. This loss highlights the important role of fire in maintaining biodiversity in tropical savannas, a role that is not reflected in current policies of fire suppression throughout the Brazilian Cerrado. In tropical grasslands and savannas throughout the tropics, carbon mitigation programs that promote forest cover cannot be assumed to provide net benefits for conservation.
The Brazilian Forest Code and riparian preservation areas: spatiotemporal analysis and implications for hydrological ecosystem services			The Brazilian Forest Code (BFC) requires the preservation and restoration of forests in riparian preservation areas (RPAs). The total area in RPAs and the impacts of changes in the BFC on RPA requirements are uncertain due to lack of clarity about how RPAs are defined in practice. We reconstruct the history of the RPA rule, use a recent cadastral database (CAR) of the state of Rondonia to quantify the area of RPA by stream size and to document the impact of the 2012 changes in RPA requirements, and review the literature on hydrological ecosystem services (HES) in light of RPA rules. We find that most (64%) of the area in RPAs in the state of Rondonia was illegally deforested by 2017, and the 2012 regulations require restoration of only half of that cleared area. Most of the RPA is located along small streams (< 10 m wide) that were typically missing in previous assessments. As of 2017, 66% of the RPA along small streams was deforested, while most (70-95%) RPA along large streams (> 200 m wide) was forested. Current restoration requirements (5 m regardless of stream width) for very small properties (< 60 ha) are likely inadequate to restore HES. Preservation of forest along large streams remains important, but policy and management should also emphasize the preservation and restoration of forest along small streams because they account for most of the riparian preservation area, with important implications for humans and ecosystems.
The carbon sink of secondary and degraded humid tropical forests			The globally important carbon sink of intact, old-growth tropical humid forests is declining because of climate change, deforestation and degradation from fire and logging(1-3). Recovering tropical secondary and degraded forests now cover about 10% of the tropical forest area(4), but how much carbon they accumulate remains uncertain. Here we quantify the aboveground carbon (AGC) sink of recovering forests across three main continuous tropical humid regions: the Amazon, Borneo and Central Africa(5,6). On the basis of satellite data products(4,7), our analysis encompasses the heterogeneous spatial and temporal patterns of growth in degraded and secondary forests, influenced by key environmental and anthropogenic drivers. In the first 20 years of recovery, regrowth rates in Borneo were up to 45% and 58% higher than in Central Africa and the Amazon, respectively. This is due to variables such as temperature, water deficit and disturbance regimes. We find that regrowing degraded and secondary forests accumulated 107 Tg C year(-1) (90-130 Tg C year(-1)) between 1984 and 2018, counterbalancing 26% (21-34%) of carbon emissions from humid tropical forest loss during the same period. Protecting old-growth forests is therefore a priority. Furthermore, we estimate that conserving recovering degraded and secondary forests can have a feasible future carbon sink potential of 53 Tg C year(-1) (44-62 Tg C year(-1)) across the main tropical regions studied.
THE CARBON-SEQUESTRATION POTENTIAL OF A GLOBAL AFFORESTATION PROGRAM			We analyzed the changes in the carbon cycle that could be achieved with a global, large-scale afforestation program that is economically, politically, and technically feasible. We estimated that of the areas regarded as suitable for large-scale plantations, only about 345 million ha would actually be available for plantations and agroforestry for the sole purpose of sequestering carbon. The maximum annual rate of carbon fixation (1.48 Gt/yr) would only be achieved 60 years after the establishment of the plantations - 1.14 Gt by above-ground biomass and 0.34 Gt by below-ground biomass. Over the period from 1995 to 2095, a total of 104 Gt of carbon would be sequestered. This is substantially lower than the amount of carbon required to offset current carbon emissions (3.8 Gt/yr) in order to stabilize the carbon content of the atmosphere.
The case for improved forest management (IFM) as a priority REDD plus strategy in the tropics			We address the controversy over REDD+ financing for commercial loggers who reduce emissions by adopting improved forest management (IFM). We argue that REDD+ incentives should be available to commercial loggers who adopt IFM as long as carbon accounting is rigorous and safeguards are followed. Further, we argue that where full forest protection is not feasible, IFM should be advanced as a priority REDD+ strategy because it can (i) achieve robust emissions reductions without generating leakage or increasing the risk of non-permanence, (ii) generate a variety of local community benefits as a low-carbon development strategy, (iii) maintain native forest biodiversity, and (iv) reduce the likelihood of deforestation, particularly when forest management is community-based. We discuss solutions to some of the remaining challenges to creating incentives for IFM within a REDD+ mechanism. We encourage continued refinement of safeguards to ensure that verified climate benefits of IFM also generate social and biodiversity benefits. REDD+ financing is needed to catalyze the shift to IFM, but IFM should not be dependent (or at least not fully dependent) upon REDD+ financing for long-term financial viability. Measuring, monitoring, and validating emissions reductions from IFM have been a particular challenge, although new technologies and methods are promising. Technologies and methods used to account for avoided deforestation are usually not sensitive enough to detect changes in forest management practices. Funding is needed for research to develop and refine affordable methodologies for measuring, monitoring, and validating emissions reductions achieved through IFM.
THE CHALLENGE OF PARTICIPATORY RESTORATION IN RURAL AREAS			Restoration is a prominent field of research and of restoration projects that seek to recover degraded and dysfunctional ecosystems and the services they provide. Humanity's environmental crisis has increased awareness of the urgent need to conserve ecosystems and their biodiversity. Many countries and international organizations have set ambitious plans and restoration targets. This paper emphasizes on current themes such as landscape restoration, invasive species, novel ecosystems, and the necessary involvement of local communities in ecological restoration. It is focused mainly on tropical forest ecosystems. Another aim of this paper is a review of the results obtained in diverse restoration practices that concentrate on inducing secondary succession processes in tropical forests. It draws heavily on case studies from Mexico. Members of society should play an active role in restoration planning and implementation. Social participation is central to the success and sustainability of restoration projects. Traditional ecological knowledge is essential in many projects, and there should be careful consideration of the ethics involved. In the coming years, we will probably see a surge in the unassisted revegetation and reforestation of many abandoned rural areas making the understanding and managing of these restoration processes necessary and crucial. Finally, a set of guidelines that view restoration as a long-term social and ecological process is given.
The Changes in China's Forests: An Analysis Using the Forest Identity			Changes in forest carbon stocks are a determinant of the regional carbon budget. In the past several decades, China has experienced a pronounced increase in forest area and density. However, few comprehensive analyses have been conducted. In this study, we employed the Forest Identity concept to evaluate the changing status of China's forests over the past three decades, using national forest inventory data of five periods (1977-1981, 1984-1988, 1989-1993, 1994-1998, and 1999-2003). The results showed that forest area and growing stock density increased by 0.51% and 0.44% annually over the past three decades, while the conversion ratio of forest biomass to growing stock declined by 0.10% annually. These developments resulted in a net annual increase of 0.85% in forest carbon sequestration, which is equivalent to a net biomass carbon uptake of 43.8 Tg per year (1 Tg = 10(12) g). This increase can be attributed to the national reforestation/afforestation programs, environmentally enhanced forest growth and economic development as indicated by the average gross domestic product.
The Coffee Compromise: Is Agricultural Expansion into Tree Plantations a Sustainable Option?			In tropical regions, land-use pressures between natural forest, commercial tree plantations, and agricultural land for rural communities are widespread. One option is to increase the functionality of commercial plantations by allowing agroforestry within them by rural communities. Such land-sharing options could address wider societal and environmental issues and reduce pressure on natural forest. To investigate the trade-offs involved, we used InVEST to model the ecosystem services provided by growing coffee under commercial pine plantations in Indonesia against other land-use options. Pine-coffee agroforestry provided worse supporting and regulating services (carbon, sediment and nitrogen retention, catchment runoff) than natural forest; however, it provided greater provisioning services (product yield) directly to smallholders. Converting pine monoculture into pine-coffee agroforestry led to increases in all ecosystem services, although there was an increased risk to water quality. Compared with coffee and root crop monocultures, pine-coffee agroforestry provided higher levels of supporting and regulating services; however, product yields were lower. Thus, opening up pine plantations for agroforestry realises additional income-generating opportunities for rural communities, provides wider ecosystem service benefits, and reduces pressure for land-use change. Lower smallholder yields could be addressed through the management of shade levels or through Payments for Ecosystem Services schemes.
The combined effect of termite bioturbation and water erosion on soil nutrient stocks along a tropical forest catena in Ghana			In the tropical moist semi-deciduous forests of West Africa, soil catenas with extremely gravel-rich soil horizons at the summits and upper slopes and largely gravel-free profiles at the lower slope are common. Previous investigations have suggested that these gravel layers are the result of macro-invertebrates mining of fine-grained soil material from the subsoil leaving behind the gravel, to build galleries at the surface subsequently exposing it to water erosion transport downslope. We examined the indirect effect of this process on the distribution along a soil catena of crucial base cations (Ca2+, Mg2+, K+) and plant available phosphorous (P), which is often growth limiting in these tropical ecosystems. We found that the export of fine-grained soil material at the top of the catena reduces the soil stocks (to 1 m) of these elements by up to 60%, while the soil fertility downslope did not change significantly. This important long-term (100-1000 yr scale) reduction in soil fertility at the top of slopes resulting from bioturbation and water erosion is overlooked in contemporary literature, which primarily focus on the beneficial impact termites and ants have on ecosystem functioning in more level savannah landscapes. As the type of catena studied is widespread across tropical environments, this effect is likely ecologically substantial. Future research should aim at understanding such long-term consequences of bioturbation on landscape ecology as well as soil heterogeneity and fertility, so we do not overlook potential negative ecosystem effects.
The Contribution of Agroforestry Systems to Bird Conservation in the Andes			0
The contributions of dark microbial CO2 fixation to soil organic carbon along a tropical secondary forest chronosequence on Hainan Island, China			Nonphototrophic CO2 fixation by microorganisms can reduce soil pore CO2 to organic matter in the dark. Tropical forest restoration changes soil microbial community structure and organic carbon (SOC) storage. However, whether the capacity for dark CO2 fixation is altered and contributes to SOC accumulation during tropical forest restoration remains unclear. Here, in the topsoil and deep soil of a tropical forest restoration chronosequence, we investigated chemoautotrophic and heterotrophic microbes and pathways involved in dark CO2 fixation using a metagenome and quantified CO2 fixation rates with a 13C-CO2 labelling experiment. Tropical forest restoration altered the autotrophic CO2 fixation pathway abundance in the Ah horizon, which showed an increasing trend. Heterotrophic carboxylase gene abundance was influenced by soil layer and was more abundant in the B horizon. The main microbes involved in CO2 fixation belong to Acidobacteria, Proteobacteria, and Actinobacteria. 13C-CO2 labelling showed that the CO2 fixation rates across the restoration chronosequence ranged from 0.035 to 0.155 mu g C/g soil d-1, and the middle- and late-stage secondary forests exhibited higher rates compared to other stages. The microbial assimilation of CO2 into mineral-associated organic carbon was also observed and the rate exhibited a similar trend to that into SOC, indicating that dark CO2 fixation contributes to stable carbon formation. Tropical forest restoration influenced the CO2 fixation rate indirectly by changing microbial CO2 fixation gene abundance. Specifically, autotrophic pathways (Calvin, reductive citrate, and Wood-Ljungdahl cycles) and heterotrophic carboxylase genes (phosphoenolpyruvate and pyruvate carboxylases) were vital for CO2 fixation in the Ah and B horizons, respectively. Our results suggest that SOC formed by microbial CO2 assimilation contributes to the long-term soil carbon sequestration, especially in secondary forests, which have recovered to middle- and late-stages. The study highlights the importance of dark microbial CO2 fixation in soil carbon sequestration and provides a new understanding of tropical forest soil carbon processes.
The cost and distribution of forest conservation for national emissions reductions			Tropical forest conservation for carbon-emission reductions (REDD+) has historically been implemented in a highly localized, directed manner, which is quickly proving unamenable to the transition towards national-scale REDD+ implementation. National REDD+ forest conservation schemes would arguably ideally adopt more spatially dispersed, voluntary and, presumably, cost-efficient modes. Yet the actual benefit of doing so is uncertain, and the prospect of a renewed reliance on familiar, localized conservation schemes cannot be discounted. An ill-designed scheme threatens costly emission reductions and, ultimately, reduced commitments to emission reductions. Here, we integrate spatial projections of forest conversion and degradation with detailed field surveys of land-use revenues to model the cost efficiency of national conservation in Panama corresponding to three emission-reduction schemes: (i) disperse conservation amenable to voluntary, incentivised landholder participation, (ii) locally-concentrated, implicitly exogenous conservation interventions, and (iii) a middle-ground between these two. Each scheme meets national emission-reduction targets (ERTs) of 5–50% of business-as-usual emissions with minimal real land-use opportunity costs accounting for the uncertainties of land-use change. Real absolute opportunity costs are $4–$62 million for a 10% ERT and 20-year horizon but tend towards the lower quarter of this range. These costs are less than previously estimated and more amenable to current REDD+ funding levels, albeit still apparently a challenge to offset given available REDD+ funding and forest carbon-emission rates. While disperse conservation is invariably most economical according to our models, opportunity costs and efficiencies amongst schemes are relatively comparable for ERTs of ≤15%. This suggests that a continued reliance on REDD+ ‘projects’ during early REDD+ implementation may not entail undue inefficiencies. At ERTs of >15%, opportunity costs increase more rapidly than cost efficiencies decrease, albeit less markedly for the disperse conservation scheme, recommending it for intermediate ERTs. Avoided forest degradation underpins emission-reduction efficiencies, particularly for disperse schemes and at lower ERTs, where it accounts for slightly over ∼50% of avoided emissions. Still, conservation schemes preempt forest degradation less often than expected, considering its low economic value and large national extent, highlighting practical limits to efficient ‘spatial targeting’ of specific agricultural systems. Modelled REDD+ conservation occurs disproportionately in indigenous territories, where opportunity costs are low. Hence most projected forest change / land use in indigenous territories is incorporated within conservation schemes by the 20% ERT. This highlights potential equity issues for least-cost conservation as well as the importance of Amerindian participation in national REDD+ schemes. © 2018 Elsevier Ltd
The cost of restoring carbon stocks in Brazil's Atlantic Forest			Knowing which restoration approach provides the best returns on investment for accumulating carbon is essential to foster restoration planning, financing, and implementation. Here, we explored the cost-effectiveness and drivers of aboveground and soil carbon accumulation in restored forests across an agricultural landscape of Brazil's Atlantic Forest. The recovery of aboveground and soil carbon stocks, as well as the implementation and land opportunity costs, was assessed across chronosequences (10-60 years) of second-growth forests and mixed-species tree plantings and old growth, reference forest remnants. Plantations accumulated approximately 50% more aboveground carbon than second-growth forests throughout the chronosequence. When controlling for soil clay content, soil carbon stocks were higher in reference than in restored forests, but they were comparable between plantations and second-growth forests. After 60 years of stand development, recovery of total carbon stocks in both restoration approaches reached only half of the average stocks of reference forests. Total cost-effectiveness for carbon accumulation, including both implementation and land opportunity costs, was on average 60% higher for second-growth forests than for plantations (15.1 and 9.4 kgC US$(-1), respectively). Although tree plantations initially showed higher rates of carbon storage than second-growth forests, their higher implementation and land opportunity costs make them less cost-effective for carbon farming. Our results further suggest that, at current pricing levels, carbon markets alone have a limited potential to up-scale restoration efforts in Brazil's Atlantic Forest.
The costs of saving nature: Does it make "cents" ?			Clearing wild forests to grow food, fibre, and fuel products can deliver large financial gains. However, the benefits that people obtain from forests D known as ecosystem services D are rarely considered in economic calculations, partly because there are few markets onto which they can be traded. In some regions, the benefits delivered by nature might be more economically valuable. A new study maps where it is profitable to replace tropical forests with cropland and how this might change under future agricultural production and carbon prices. The findings address a major applied challenge by helping to identify sites where forest conservation can be economically viable.
The critical importance of considering fire in REDD+ programs			Fires are increasingly responsible for forest degradation in the humid tropics due to the expansion of fire-dependent agriculture, fragmentation, intensive logging practices and severe droughts. However, these forest fires have been largely overlooked by negotiations for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+). This paper examines how forest fires affect REDD+ schemes by compromising carbon permanence; undermining the potential of sustainable forest management and reforestation and regeneration activities in tropical countries; and threatening the additional benefits that can be accrued from REDD+, including biodiversity conservation and rural poverty alleviation. Narrowly focusing on avoiding deforestation, the sustainable management of forests or regeneration schemes will not always guarantee protection from fire occurrence, and investments in tropical forests may ultimately fail to achieve long-term emission reductions unless they also reduce the risk of forest fires. Integrating forest fire reduction into REDD+ presents many challenges, requiring: changes in agricultural practices that take place outside of the remaining forests; the monitoring and prediction of spatio-temporal patterns of forest fires across whole biomes; guarantees of additionality; avoiding leakage of fire-dependent agriculture; ensuring that responsibilities for fire management are fairly distributed; protection for rural livelihoods; and that any new activities result in positive outcomes for local people. (C) 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
The detrital input and removal treatment (DIRT) network: Insights into soil carbon stabilization			Ecological research networks functioning across climatic and edaphic gradients are critical for improving predictive understanding of biogeochemical cycles at local through global scales. One international network, the Detrital Input and Removal Treatment (DIRT) Project, was established to assess how rates and sources of plant litter inputs influence accumulations or losses of organic matter in forest soils. DIRT employs chronic additions and exclusions of aboveground litter inputs and exclusion of root ingrowth to permanent plots at eight forested and two shrub/grass sites to investigate how soil organic matter (SOM) dynamics are influenced by plant detrital inputs across ecosystem and soil types.Across the DIRT network described here, SOM pools responded only slightly, or not at all, to chronic doubling of aboveground litter inputs. Explanations for the slow or even negative response of SOM to litter additions include increased decomposition of new inputs and priming of old SOM. Evidence of priming includes increased soil respiration in litter addition plots, decreased dissolved organic carbon (DOC) output from increased microbial activity, and biochemical markers in soil indicating enhanced SOM degradation. SOM pools decreased in response to chronic exclusion of aboveground litter, which had a greater effect on soil C than did excluding roots, providing evidence that root-derived C is not more critical than aboveground litter C to soil C sequestration. Partitioning of belowground contributions to total soil respiration were predictable based on site-level soil C and N as estimates of site fertility; contributions to soil respiration from root respiration were negatively related to soil fertility and inversely, contributions from decomposing aboveground litter in soil were positively related to site fertility. The commonality of approaches and manipulations across the DIRT network has provided greater insights into soil C cycling than could have been revealed at a single site. (c) 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
The development of an expert system for decision making in forest resources managemant			Tropical forests are a repository of biodiversity which provides habitats for more than 50% of the earth,s plant and animal species, an important sink for carbon stores which provides many goods and ecosystem services and a critical contributor to livelihoods, mainly of the indigenous groups which are totally dependent on forests. Yet, forests are under pressure. Tropical forests are among the earth,s most threatened ecosystems, particularly threatened by human activities and climate change. Consequently, tropical forests are loosing capacity to provide basic goods and services that are essentials to human livelihood. Hence, every decision involving forest utilization should consider various criteria that are important for sustainable forest management. However, making decision about forest resources management often involves balancing conflicting, inadequate and incompatible values of many users and usage of a resource. One of the most fundamental and difficult task is the effective integration of environmental, economic and social values to achieve and maintain ecologically sustainable development. Therefore, an integrated technology such as an Analytical Hierarchy Process and expert systems is essential to be performed in making decision process for forest resources management because an AHP method is capable to capture both tangible and intangible criteria. This study places emphasis on the development of expert system for forest resources management to assist decision makers to select the best forest resources use based on Malaysian Criteria and Indicators [(MC&I)2002].
The development-driven forest transition and its utility for REDD+			Forest recovery is occurring in Panama and several other tropical countries following decades of deforestation. Theory on such 'forest transitions' describes urbanization and agricultural modernization as underling factors. Tropical country governments may seek to harness these factors to promote a tropical forest transition within the REDD+ scheme. Yet tropical forest transitions remain poorly described due to limited data and inappropriate modeling. To determine the nature of a tropical forest transition I derive canonical correlations of (a) socio-agrarian transformation observed via respondent-level census records and (b) forest-cover change observed via satellite imagery, for 82% of Panamanian counties over 1980-1990-2000-2008. The Panamanian forest transition centered on multi-decadal in situ shifts in employment from agriculture to off-farm activity, particularly by women. Agricultural modernization and decline were coincident but of lesser importance. Urbanization entailed increasingly connected small urban centers in otherwise rural landscapes. Net forest gains per decade were ~. 1.5-2% of the area of influence of the socio-agrarian transformations, which concentrate in economically and agriculturally favored regions. Governments may conceivably nurture forest transitions already underway via economic policies, but they cannot coordinate them. Even so, inefficiencies may be prohibitively high, and challenges significant. A history of failure of similar 'social engineering' endeavors urges caution in this respect. © 2015 Elsevier B.V.
The Dilemma of Maintaining Intact Forest Through Certification			Intact forests are natural and often extensive forests free from apparent anthropogenic degradation. Intact forests have important intrinsic and societal values, making their protection a high conservation priority. They are, however, vulnerable to being lost and degraded due to high opportunity costs and a lack of positive incentives to their preservation. Market-based mechanisms, such as voluntary certification, might provide a means to conserve intact forests while maintaining income through sustainable forest uses. Yet possibilities to ensure strict protection of large areas of intact forests through certification remain limited as long as premiums from certification are bound to the units of forest products that are sold. We explore challenges for incorporating intact forests into certification processes, and of maintaining intact forests within forest management units. To circumvent these challenges, it might be necessary to create a form of compensation payment scheme to overcome the foregone costs of intact forest preservation. Alternatively, certification systems might need to consider permitting some degree of regulated extraction in exchange for recognition and implementation of stringent forest preservation. This will require a re-evaluation of the way intactness is treated within current certification standards and the requirements for forestry within intact forests. Eventually, intact forest conservation and socially and economically viable forest management can only be reconciled on the landscape scale. © Copyright © 2019 Kleinschroth, Rayden and Ghazoul.
The drivers of tree cover expansion: Global, temperate, and tropical zone analyses			This paper uses new, high resolution satellite-derived data to explore recent cross-national differences in expanding tree cover. Increases in tree cover have concentrated in nations with recent histories of extensive deforestation, humid climates, high crop yields, and small numbers of farm workers. The associations of expanded tree cover with high yields for cereal crops and small populations of cultivators suggests a dynamic, sometimes referred to as a forest transition, in which urbanization and industrialization promote a long-term expansion in tree cover on certain types of land. The association of tree cover gains with tree cover losses and humid climates suggests a second dynamic, a churning, treadmill-like production of wood products from lands subjected to recurring harvests of wood products followed by tree cover gains in the recently harvested areas. The forest transition dynamic suggests that many smallholders would allow tree cover to expand on their lands if payments for environmental services were available. The salience of the treadmill dynamic of tree cover losses followed by tree cover gains underscores the importance of questions about the implications of commercial tree monocultures for biodiversity, carbon sequestration, and social justice. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
The ecohydrological function of the tropical forest rainfall interception: Observation and modeling			Forests provide important ecosystem services, several of them related to water. The interconnections between rainfall interception and the water cycle vary among the forest types. Tropical forests are one of the most relevant biodiversity shelters, with several endemic plant and animal species. These forests provide key ecohydrological services by directly acting on biogeochemical cycles and water supply. Understanding these interconnections is crucial for better planning forest conservation and reforestation initiatives, especially under climate change conditions. Therefore, a set of techniques and devices is required to monitor rainfall-forest interface processes in tropical forests as they are very complex ecosystems. In this chapter, we intend to assess rainfall-forest interface processes as well as some of the methods that have been used for quantifying rainfall interception in forests, contributing to the ecohydrological studies. © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
The Ecology and Conservation of the Hooded Capuchin (Sapajus Cay) in the Paraguayan Upper Parana Atlantic Forest			0
The ecology and economics of alien invasive species with a case study from the South African Fynbos			0
The ecology and ecosystem services of native trees: Implications for reforestation and land restoration in Mesoamerica			Tropical forests provide a variety of goods and services to humanity. Although efforts to protect and manage these forests have increased in recent decades, forest loss continues. The last decade and a half has seen considerable research on reforestation with native species in Mesoamerica, including both biophysical and social aspects. Advances in knowledge have led to increasingly sophisticated reforestation treatments as well as novel ways of deriving forest goods and services from human dominated landscapes.This Special Issue includes articles produced as the result of a conference held in Panama City, Panama in January 2010 with the goal to summarize the state of knowledge of native species reforestation and associated ecosystems services in Mesoamerica. The introduction concludes with a call for continued research, including a mechanistic understanding of tree interactions with the biophysical environment in order to advance or knowledge of ecosystem services and their interactions. Results from these and other studies aimed at socioeconomic aspects of reforestation are critical to land use planning. (C) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
The ecology of lianas and their role in forests			Recent studies have demonstrated the increasingly important role of lianas (woody vines) in forest regeneration, species diversity and ecosystem-level processes, particularly in the tropics. Mechanisms responsible for the maintenance of liana species diversity could yield new insights into the maintenance of overall species diversity. Lianas contribute to forest regeneration and competition, not only by competing directly with trees, but also by differentially affecting tree species and thus changing how trees compete among themselves. In addition, they contribute considerably to ecosystem-level processes, such as whole-forest transpiration and carbon sequestration. As the rate of tropical forest disturbance increases, they are likely to increase in relative abundance throughout the tropics and the importance of lianas to many aspects of forest dynamics will grow.
The economic value of tropical forests in meeting global climate stabilization goals			Non-technical summaryConserving tropical forests has many benefits, from protecting biodiversity, sustaining indigenous and local communities, and safeguarding climate. To achieve the ambitious climate goals of the Paris Agreement, forest protection is essential. Yet deforestation continues to diminish the world's forests. Halting this trend is the objective of the international framework for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation (REDD+). While previous studies have demonstrated the contribution of tropical forests to mitigate climate change, here we show that tropical forest protection can 'flatten the curve' of the costs of transition to climate stability, estimating tens of trillions of dollars in policy cost savings.Technical summaryThe pledges made by parties under the Paris Agreement are insufficient to limit global warming to well below 2 degrees C relative to pre-industrial levels. We use a global climate-economic model to quantify the economic benefits from rapidly deploying programs for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and increased reforestation (REDD+) given current delays in the implementation of climate policies around the world. REDD+ has been shown to have substantial greenhouse gas emissions mitigation potential in the fight against climate change and can thus play a critical role in closing the emissions gap, thereby enabling the achievement of more ambitious climate targets. Under our principal scenario, we estimate that REDD+ can contribute up to US$36 trillion in net policy cost savings by mitigating the adjustment costs of reaching a greenhouse gas emissions trajectory consistent with ambitious global climate stabilization goals. Investment in REDD+ has a high benefit-cost ratio; one dollar invested in REDD+ yields about US$5.4 in net policy cost savings. Realizing the full estimated potential for REDD+ reduces the risk-adjusted carbon price in 2030 by US$45/tCO(2).Social media summaryProtecting tropical forests is crucial to achieve ambitious climate stabilization goals while saving trillions of dollars in economic value.
The Economics of Biodiversity Additionality (BIOADD)			The Dasgupta Review on the economics of biodiversity illustrated the complex and embedded ecology-economy relationships and thereby the fundamental economic and societal value of biodiversity. The Review evidenced the unsustainable path of exploitation biodiversity and made plain the need to manage regeneration of natural capital in the global economy to ensure sustainability. For sustainability to be achieved efficiently requires trade-offs to be made, the relative economic values of biodiversity to be understood, and interventions to be evaluated according to "shadow prices". The UK government's aims in this regard are reflected in domestic (The Environment Act of 2021) and international commitments (e.g. the Kunming Declaration of the COP15 of the Convention on Biodiversity).  Economies must consider their impact on nature, yet biodiversity policy: e.g. Protected Areas (PAs); NBS for climate change mitigation (e.g. reforestation); and agricultural policies, therefore need to account for interactions in the economy, which can conspire to limit the success or additionality of interventions. Leakage, non-compliance, project failure and impermanence, or policy failures, all limit the success of area-based and other policies, questioning their additionality. Particularly prone are NBS to climate change, which can provide cost-effective solutions to net-zero commitments (UK Climate Act), and large gains in biodiversity. To understand the effectiveness of biodiversity policies requires an understanding of the economics of biodiversity additionality. BIOADD will develop the economics of biodiversity additionality from key perspectives. First, to guide the trade-offs required for sustainability and value biodiversity additionality, BIOADD estimates a Shadow Price of Biodiversity (SPB). Rather than reflecting Willingness to Pay for biodiversity (unreliable and controversial) SPB reflects the costs of meeting a societally determined target for biodiversity, such as net-gain or 30% protected areas, or staying within planetary boundaries. We will apply this theory to: i) Indonesian and Bolivian forests; ii) Nature Based Solutions (NBS) for mitigating climate change, in each case pricing the risk of non-additionality (e.g. failure, impermanence). The SPB will indicate the trade-offs and priorities for biodiversity and how targets can be met at least cost to society by targeting biodiversity rich and low-cost areas. Second, to understand the baseline against which additionality is measured, BIOADD will analyse the spatial economic factors that determine biodiversity regrowth in secondary forests in the Amazon rainforest, with focus on Bolivia.  Third, in Indonesia, the role of "policy layering": multiple overlapping policies, in hindering or improving biodiversity outcomes in tropical forests will be analysed.  These two case studies will use bespoke spatial data to identify economic and policy drivers of biodiversity additionality. Finally, together with CarbonPlan, an online tool that will be developed for the carbon offset market to allow different NBS to be valued and compared according to their impacts on biodiversity, the offset carbon emissions, and additionality risks (e.g. failure, impermanence).  The research is important for the UK as it: 1) implements domestic commitments to biodiversity net-gain in the Environment Act (2021) without leakage of biodiversity loss to other countries; 2) addresses how to meet commitments towards biodiversity the 30 by 30 target from the COP15; 3) helps to orientate development assistance towards halting deforestation and guide COP26 commitments on zero-deforestation by 2030; 3) assesses NBS as a potential means of meeting net-zero commitments; 4) illustrates where "free" renewable returns (Dasgupta 2020) from natural capital are most valuable and the economic processes determine them.
The 'ecosystem service scarcity path' to forest recovery: a local forest transition in the Ecuadorian Andes			Andean forests decreased in area over the past decade, and communities throughout the Andes are experiencing environmental degradation and soil fertility loss. But amid deforestation, forests returned to some Andean regions, producing local 'forest transitions', or net increases in forest cover. The mechanisms that drive these local transitions - often in part the actions of residents - are still little studied, but hold key information for creating successful forest and landscape restoration interventions. This paper investigates cloud forest cover dynamics in Intag, a region in northwest Andean Ecuador where people were actively reforesting by planting trees. We used remote sensing analysis of LANDSAT imagery (from 1991, 2001, and 2010) and household surveys and oral histories with residents of four communities. Results from remote sensing show that prior to reforestation projects (before 2001), deforestation rates were high (> 3%/year). But from 2001 to 2010 forest recovery surpassed deforestation - a local forest transition (net 3% forest cover). But although deforestation rates slowed precipitously (< 2%) people continued to clear forests in the highlands even as forests regrew around communities. This change in clearing rates and spatial redistribution of forest cover reflects people's reasons for planting trees - to restore water and other key ecosystem services perceive to be 'scarce'. The results point to a new 'path' by which forest transitions occur - the ecosystem service scarcity path - in which local demand for forest ecosystem services drive forest recovery.
The Effect of Dung Beetle Size on Soil Nutrient Mobilization in an Afrotropical Forest			Simple SummaryDung beetles are known to instigate and provide a number of services, which benefit humankind. In addition to feeding on mammal dung, dung beetles also use dung to form underground brood balls which are used for larval development. This process instigates several ecological functions, such as dung removal and nutrient cycling. Recent studies have highlighted the importance of dung removal in pastoral and natural habitats but the effect of dung beetle body size on the amount of nutrients transferred when dung is buried remains unclear. In this preliminary study, we investigate the role of African dung beetle body size in nutrient cycling. We analyzed the nutrient content of soil directly underneath dung pats using three treatments containing dung beetles of varying sizes and one control treatment without beetles over a 112-day period. Our data show that dung beetle body size has a significant effect on the quantity of macronutrients transferred over time and that dung beetle body size is an important factor in the type and amount of nutrients transferred.Despite recognition of its importance, little is known about functional aspects of soil macrofauna. Here, we investigated the effect of dung beetle body size on macronutrient movement (N, P, K, and C) from elephant dung into soil over 112 days in an Afrotropical forest. We report a large overall effect where more macronutrients are moved into soil over time when beetles are present compared to a control treatment. We also report a large effect of beetle body size on the amount of macronutrient movement, with larger dung beetles moving more nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and carbon from baseline measurements when compared to smaller sized dung beetles. The presence of smaller sized dung beetles showed a significant positive effect on potassium and phosphorus transfer only. We provide the first experimental evidence that the body size of African dungs directly influences the type of macronutrients recycled and discuss the importance of dung beetle body size for maintaining soil fertility.
The effect of ecological restoration methods on carbon stocks in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest			Restoring degraded areas is an effective strategy to reestablish the environmental services provided by the forests including global warming mitigation by carbon sequestration. Restoring lands is especially important in the Atlantic Forest, a global hotspot in Brazil threatened by deforestation. To successfully restore degraded lands, it is necessary to apply the most suitable method for each situation. However, studies comparing restoration techniques are scarce. This lack of information hampers the Atlantic Forest restoration and, given the original complexity of its ecological dynamics, restoration success is even more challenging in this ecosystem. This study aimed to assess carbon stocks (above and belowgmund), carbon content (%), and carbon isotope at 5-year old sites implemented by different restoration methods in southeastern Brazil. The restoration methods tested were active restoration (AR), assisted restoration (AsR), and passive restoration in an abandoned pasture (AP), which were compared to a nearby pasture (P) and a remaining forest fragment (RF). The assessed pools were: tree, coarse roots, fine roots, herbaceous, litter, standing dead wood, fallen dead wood, and soil (0-1 cm, 5-10 cm, 10-20 cm layers). Total carbon stock was higher on RF (152.304 Mg C ha(-1)), followed by the P (84.378 Mg C ha(-1)), AR (66.414 Mg C h(-1)) AsR (65.73 Mg C ha(-1)) and AP (65.581 Mg C ha(-1)). The restoration areas sites are still too young to show significant differences in total carbon stock as a result of different restoration methods. However, carbon stock and carbon content (%) differed among the pools according to the method and, in all cases, the largest carbon pool was soil, which shows the importance of sampling every pool for carbon stock and carbon content (%) estimation. Isotope analysis showed that carbon inputs in the soil had different sources, C3 or C4 plants, depending on the method. We concluded that these young secondary areas are already sequestering carbon, which helps mitigate global warming, and that monitoring every pool is important for a complete assessment, not only to restore secondary forests and understand growth but also for other land-uses such as pastures. Besides, the results obtained can be generalized to other tropical forest ecosystems with similar conditions (local and landscape), constituting a relevant contribution to forest restoration and carbon-sequestration related sciences.
The effect of traditional slash-and-burn agriculture on soil organic matter, nutrient content, and microbiota in tropical ecosystems of Papua New Guinea			Slash-and-burn agriculture followed by tillage and western style agriculture often lead to loss of soil organic matter and soil degradation. Traditional slash-and-burn agriculture affects large areas of land across the tropical zone. However, there are few detailed studies about this practice. To evaluate the effect of traditional slash-and-burn agriculture on soil properties (total C, N, P, and C fractions of soil and available P, Ca, Mg, K, NO3, pH, and microbial community biomass and composition), we studied a chronosequence represented by active gardens, abandoned gardens (5-10 years old), secondary forest in abandoned garden sites (20-40 years old), and primary forest with no evidence of cultivation for at least 60 years. No significant differences between individual succession stages were found in total C, N, and P and in C fractions, pH, conductivity, and microbial biomass. In addition, stocks of C, N, and P in the soil did not differ between succession stages. By contrast, the concentration of available P, Ca, Mg, K, and NO3 was highest in active gardens. Litter was absent in active gardens, and the highest amount of litter on the soil surface was found in primary forest. Our results show that traditional slash-and-burn agriculture had a strong effect on nutrient availability but no effect on the total CNP stocks and soil C fractions.
The Effects of Cropping Systems on Avian Communities in Cacao and Banana Agro-Forestry Systems of Talamanca, Costa Rica			Multispecies agro-forestry is generally lauded for providing ecosystem services, especially in tropical environments. Avian communities contribute to services such as biodiversity and pest management. Characterizing and evaluating avian community composition in similar cropping systems will help optimize management for ecosystem services. We examined the relationship between cropping system vegetation and avian communities in four shaded agro-forestry systems common to the Limon province of Costa Rica: abandoned and managed systems of cacao, cacao with banana, and banana. During two field seasons, we detected 2605 birds from 106 species and identified 2791 trees and shrubs from 62 morphospecies. We compared vegetation and avian species richness across systems with mixed-effects linear models. Canopy, understory, and groundcover vegetation differed among agro-forestry systems. More ground- and understory-foraging forest species were detected in agro-forestry systems lacking banana, whereas richness of agricultural generalist species was highest in systems with banana. Richness of understory- and ground-foraging species correlated with understory tree species richness and leaf litter. Our results indicate that shaded cacao and banana systems can have similar canopy-foraging species richness that includes both agricultural and woodland generalist species, but that interspersing banana with cacao can adversely influence understory forest bird community composition. Agro-forests with diverse understory vegetation support more understory-foraging bird species that have proven valuable in pest management.
The effects of forest conversion on annual crops and pastures: Estimates of carbon emissions and plant species loss in a Brazilian Amazon colony			The municipality of Theobroma in Rondonia, Brazil, covers 2165 km(2), of which 43% was deforested by 1993. Between 1973 and 1993, the national government continued to improve highway BR364 connecting the area to Brazil's south-central region and established a colony in Theobroma. During this period, 98% of the deforestation occurred. Some 1800 settler families continue to convert forest into pasture in a system based on the slash-and-burn agriculture and dual-purpose cattle production. Trends in carbon emissions and plant species losses during the 20-year history of Theobroma were analyzed by combining observed shifts in land-use types with estimates for the carbon stocks and plant species richness of each of these types. Carbon stocks declined from about 200 t ha(-1) in the forest to 28 t ha(-1) in the pasture and of 326 plant species encountered in the forest, only 20 remained in pastures (along with 66 species not found in forests). The effects of converting more than 93000 ha of forest into other uses over 20 years include approximate losses of 14 million tons of C to the atmosphere and substantial losses of plant species. Land use alternatives that would store more C include agroforestry and - given the strong incentives for settlers to convert lands into pasture - improving pasture management or developing silvopastoral systems. Plant species conservation may be improved with proposed ways to add private value to the forest. (C) 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
The effects of herbivore density on soil nutrients and tree growth in tropical forest fragments			The role of herbivores in nutrient cycling in tropical forest ecosystems remains poorly understood. This study investigates several aspects of nutrient cycling along a gradient in herbivore (Alouatta seniculus, red howler monkey) density among small landbridge islands in Lago Guri, Venezuela. Specifically, two contrasting hypotheses were addressed: (1) herbivores increase the availability of soil nutrients and subsequently primary productivity, and (2) herbivores decrease nutrient availability and primary productivity because they increase the dominance of non-preferred, nutrient-poor, tree species. Although C:N increased with herbivore density, the annual increase in basal area (an indicator of aboveground productivity) increased with herbivore density. According to an analysis of the tree communities on the study islands, herbivory may also be causing a shift in the tree community toward non-preferred species, and thus, over a longer time scale, both nutrient availability and productivity are expected to decline. The influence of herbivores on nutrient cycling and plant productivity has important implications for conservation and rates of carbon sequestration in tropical forests.
The effects of management practices on soil organic carbon stocks of oil palm plantations in Sumatra, Indonesia			The rapid increase in global production of and demand for palm oil has resulted in large-scale expansion of oil palm monoculture in the world's tropical regions, particularly in Indonesia. This expansion has led to the conversion of carbon-rich land-use types to oil palm plantations with a range of negative environmental impacts, including loss of carbon from aboveground biomass and soil. Sequestration of soil organic carbon (SOC) in existing oil palm plantations is an important strategy to limit carbon losses. The aim of this study was to investigate SOC stocks of oil palm plantations under different management systems. Soil samples were collected from three different management systems (best management practices (BMP), current management practices typical of large plantations (CMP) and smallholder management practices (SHMP)) in north Sumatra, Indonesia. Plantations were divided into four management zones that were sampled separately with four replicate profiles in the weeded circle, frond stack, harvesting path and interrow zones. All the soil samples were collected from five (0-5, 5-15, 15-30, 30-50 and 50-70 cm) soil depths. Soil samples were analysed for concentration of SOC, soil texture, soil bulk density and pH. Calculations of SOC stocks in the soils were undertaken according to the fixed-depth and equivalent soil mass approaches. Results showed that SOC stocks of plantations under BMP (68 t ha(-1)) were 31% and 18% higher than under CMP (57 t ha(-1)) and SHMP (46 t ha(-1)) respectively. In the BMP system, soils under the interrow zone that received enriched mulch and frond stack positions stored significantly more SOC than the harvesting path of the BMP system (77, 73 and 57 t ha(-1) respectively). BMP also had a 33% higher fresh fruit bunch yield compared to the SHMP system. This study shows that residue incorporation or retention as a part of BMP could be an effective strategy for increasing SOC stocks of oil palm plantations and confirms that these management practices could improve yields from SHMP systems.
The effects of restoring logged tropical forests on avian phylogenetic and functional diversity			Selective logging is the most prevalent land-use change in the tropics. Despite the resulting degradation of forest structure, selectively logged forests still harbor a substantial amount of biodiversity leading to suggestions that their protection is the next best alternative to conserving primary, old-growth forests. Restoring carbon stocks under Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) schemes is a potential method for obtaining funding to protect logged forests, via enrichment planting and liberation cutting of vines. This study investigates the impacts of restoring logged forests in Borneo on avian phylogenetic diversity, the total evolutionary history shared across all species within a community, and on functional diversity, with important implications for the protection of evolutionarily unique species and the provision of many ecosystem services. Overall and understorey avifaunal communities were studied using point count and mist netting surveys, respectively. Restoration caused a significant loss in phylogenetic diversity and MPD (mean pairwise distance) leaving an overall bird community of less total evolutionary history and more closely related species compared to unlogged forests, while the understorey bird community had MNTD (mean nearest taxon distance) that returned toward the lower levels found in a primary forest, indicating more closely related species pairs. The overall bird community experienced a significant loss of functional strategies and species with more specialized traits in restored forests compared to that of unlogged forests, which led to functional clustering in the community. Restoration also led to a reduction in functional richness and thus niches occupied in the understorey bird community compared to unlogged forests. While there are additional benefits of restoration for forest regeneration, carbon sequestration, future timber harvests, and potentially reduced threat of forest conversion, this must be weighed against the apparent loss of phylogenetic and functional diversity from unlogged forest levels, making the biodiversity-friendliness of carbon sequestration schemes questionable under future REDD+ agreements. To reduce perverse biodiversity outcomes, it is important to focus restoration only on the most degraded areas or at reduced intensity where breaks between regimes are incorporated.
The effects of the invasive species, Lantana camara, on regeneration of an African rainforest			Invasive plants adversely affect native communities by altering ecosystem function and disrupting natural regeneration. We investigate the effect of invasive Lantana camara L. (Verbenaceae) on forest regeneration in Kibale National Park, Uganda. We appraise the efficacy of cutting and uprooting Lantana for promoting native tree recruitment. Sample plots comprised three types: (i) currently invaded by Lantana; (ii) cleared of Lantana and now managed; and (iii) forest reference plots uninvaded by Lantana. Tree species numbering 51, 19 shrubs, and 17 herb species were identified. Lantana reduced tree, shrub, and herb cover and diversity, and suppressed tree regeneration. The short-term management of Lantana did not promote tree establishment. The tree community in cleared areas was not converging on uninvaded adjacent forest. Lantana is known to allelopathically suppress tree seedling establishment, but even at sites cleared of Lantana, tree species recruitment was poor. While insufficient time may have passed for tree recruitment, we argue that an increase in shrub and herb cover and diversity arrested forest tree regeneration. Sustained follow-up clearing of dense secondary shrubs and herbs and resprouted L. camara in cleared areas is key to ensuring long-term recovery of the forest tree community.
The enduring world forest carbon sink			The uptake of carbon dioxide (CO2) by terrestrial ecosystems is critical for moderating climate change1. To provide a ground-based long-term assessment of the contribution of forests to terrestrial CO2 uptake, we synthesized in situ forest data from boreal, temperate and tropical biomes spanning three decades. We found that the carbon sink in global forests was steady, at 3.6 +/- 0.4 Pg C yr-1 in the 1990s and 2000s, and 3.5 +/- 0.4 Pg C yr-1 in the 2010s. Despite this global stability, our analysis revealed some major biome-level changes. Carbon sinks have increased in temperate (+30 +/- 5%) and tropical regrowth (+29 +/- 8%) forests owing to increases in forest area, but they decreased in boreal (-36 +/- 6%) and tropical intact (-31 +/- 7%) forests, as a result of intensified disturbances and losses in intact forest area, respectively. Mass-balance studies indicate that the global land carbon sink has increased2, implying an increase in the non-forest-land carbon sink. The global forest sink is equivalent to almost half of fossil-fuel emissions (7.8 +/- 0.4 Pg C yr-1 in 1990-2019). However, two-thirds of the benefit from the sink has been negated by tropical deforestation (2.2 +/- 0.5 Pg C yr-1 in 1990-2019). Although the global forest sink has endured undiminished for three decades, despite regional variations, it could be weakened by ageing forests, continuing deforestation and further intensification of disturbance regimes1. To protect the carbon sink, land management policies are needed to limit deforestation, promote forest restoration and improve timber-harvesting practices1,3.Data from boreal, temperate and tropical forests over the past three decades reveal that the global forest carbon sink has remained steady during that time, despite considerable regional variation.
The essential role of biodiversity in the key axes of ecosystem function			Biodiversity is essential for maintaining the terrestrial ecosystem multifunctionality (EMF). Recent studies have revealed that the variations in terrestrial ecosystem functions are captured by three key axes: the maximum productivity, water use efficiency, and carbon use efficiency of the ecosystem. However, the role of biodiversity in supporting these three key axes has not yet been explored. In this study, we combined the (i) data collected from more than 840 vegetation plots across a large climatic gradient in China using standard protocols, (ii) data on plant traits and phylogenetic information for more than 2,500 plant species, and (iii) soil nutrient data measured in each plot. These data were used to systematically assess the contribution of environmental factors, species richness, functional and phylogenetic diversity, and community-weighted mean (CWM) and ecosystem traits (i.e., traits intensity normalized per unit land area) to EMF via hierarchical partitioning and Bayesian structural equation modeling. Multiple biodiversity attributes accounted for 70% of the influence of all the variables on EMF, and ecosystems with high functional diversity had high resource use efficiency. Our study is the first to systematically explore the role of different biodiversity attributes, including species richness, phylogenetic and functional diversity, and CWM and ecosystem traits, in the key axes of ecosystem functions. Our findings underscore that biodiversity conservation is critical for sustaining EMF and ultimately ensuring human well-being.
The estimated carbon stored in Underutilized Fruit Trees (UFTs) collection of Cibodas and Cibinong Botanic Gardens			Trees are the largest carbon stores in tropical forests, where each species has different biomass and carbon sequestration. Information on biodiversity potential is essential for the conservation of endangered species, especially underutilized species, such as Underutilized Fruit Trees (UFTs). These UFTs were collected from various regions in Indonesia, representing trees that generally grow in lowland to mountain forest ecosystems, then these trees were replanted in Cibodas Botanic Gardens and Cibinong Botanic Gardens as living collection. This research aims to determine the role of UFT in ecosystem function as carbon storage. Sampling carried out using a purposive sampling method to determine the UFT species. The allometric equations is used to determine biomass, while to determine carbon content the UFT species analysis using C/N analyzer. The research result show that the highest potential for carbon storage and absorption is found in Castanopsis argentea, while Eugenia uniflora wood has the highest carbon content, namely 45.86%. Syzygium pycnanthum wood has the lowest carbon content (35.76%). Considering the highest potential of UFT as a carbon stock, information about other species of UFTs is important for determining carbon in modelling carbon trading, since this species is widely cultivated on agroforestry land. © Published under licence by IOP Publishing Ltd.
The exceptional value of intact forest ecosystems			As the terrestrial human footprint continues to expand, the amount of native forest that is free from significant damaging human activities is in precipitous decline. There is emerging evidence that the remaining intact forest supports an exceptional confluence of globally significant environmental values relative to degraded forests, including imperilled biodiversity, carbon sequestration and storage, water provision, indigenous culture and the maintenance of human health. Here we argue that maintaining and, where possible, restoring the integrity of dwindling intact forests is an urgent priority for current global efforts to halt the ongoing biodiversity crisis, slow rapid climate change and achieve sustainability goals. Retaining the integrity of intact forest ecosystems should be a central component of proactive global and national environmental strategies, alongside current efforts aimed at halting deforestation and promoting reforestation.
The Fate of Forests and Its Consequences for Ecosystem Services Provision in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest			0
The fight against deforestation of tropical forests - the contribution of the blockchain-based contract management method to minimize illegal logging			Tropical forests play a distinctive role in climate and atmospheric gas balance stabilization. They store carbon in their biomass, support biodiversity, and provide ecosystem services such as protection of watersheds or reduction of soil erosion. Forests act as sources for timber and non-timber forest products and are the habitat of forest communities' inhabitants. Despite the importance of tropical forests, they continue to be devastated, causing 17% of global carbon emissions, loss of biodiversity, and climate change. Decades of efforts by governmental, non-governmental, and international organizations to reduce illegal deforestation worldwide have had limited success. In this paper, we analyze the opportunities to develop administrative methods for forest conservation based on the blockchain technology in combination with the economic activities of forest communities. The aim is to reduce the sale of illegally logged timber, to contribute to the reduction of illegal logging, and thereby to the mitigation of climate change. Based on this analysis, we propose a concept for tropical forest preservation through a blockchain-based contract management platform. This concept is based on field research of economic activities in Brazilian, Indian, and Thai forest communities. ©2022 World Scientific Publishing Company. All rights reserved.
The first report of composition and occurrence of myxomycete assemblages in protected and unprotected plantation forests: a comparative study in Thai Nguyen City, Northern Vietnam			Background and aims - In spite of the cosmopolitan distributions of myxomycetes, relatively few studies have been conducted in subtropical forests of Southeast Asia particularly in Northern Vietnam, where comprehensive reports of myxomycetes are lacking up to this date. Hence. a rapid biodiversity assessment was conducted in protected and unprotected plantation forests of Thai Nguyen City to compare the species composition of myxomycete communities between the two different forest management types.Methods - A total of 360 substrate samples were haphazardly collected within 5 m x 5 m plots established within three protected and three unprotected forests. The moist chamber cultures prepared from these samples were regularly checked for myxomycete fructifications over a period of 12 weeks. Analyses of diversity (species richness) and community composition were performed using the software EstimateS and the vegan package in R.Key results - The study yielded a total of 505 records representing 54 species belonging to 17 genera. All species recorded herein were new records for Northern Vietnam:, among them five were new for the entire country. The rarefaction curves showed higher numbers of myxomycete species to be expected for protected forest (43.0) in comparison to unprotected forests (39.4). However, calculations of species diversity indices showed higher values in unprotected forest than in protected forest. The species composition between the two forest types showed clear overlaps with many shared (56%) species.Conclusions - Forest conservation strategies do not affect freely dispersing myxomycetes implicating that spore dispersal of myxomycetes is caused not only by natural factors but also by anthropogenic activities. The production of high number of myxomycete species for this study seems to point out that the subtropical forests of Vietnam harbours many undiscovered myxomycete species for Southeast Asia.
The Functional Structure of Tropical Plant Communities and Soil Properties Enhance Ecosystem Functioning and Multifunctionality in Different Ecosystems in Ghana			Plant functional traits are useful in tracking changes in the environment, and play an important role in determining ecosystem functioning. The relationship between plant functional traits and ecosystem functioning remains unclear, although there is growing evidence on this relationship. In this study, we tested whether the functional structure of vegetation has significant effects on the provision of ecosystem services. We analysed plant trait composition (specific leaf area, leaf carbon and nitrogen ratio, isotopic carbon fraction, stem dry matter content, seed mass and plant height), soil parameters (nutrients, pH, bulk density) and proxies of ecosystem services (carbon stock, decomposition rate, invertebrate activity) in twenty-four plots in three tropical ecosystems (active restored and natural forests and an agroforestry system) in Ghana. For each plot, we measured above-ground biomass, decomposition rates of leaves and invertebrate activity as proxies for the provision of ecosystem services to evaluate (i) whether there were differences in functional composition and soil properties and their magnitude between ecosystem types. We further aimed to (ii) determine whether the functional structure and/or soil parameters drove ecosystem functions and multifunctionality in the three ecosystem types. For functional composition, both the leaf economic spectrum and seed mass dimension clearly separated the ecosystem types. The natural forest was more dominated by acquisitive plants than the other two ecosystem types, while the non-natural forests (agroforest and restored forest) showed higher variation in the functional space. The natural forest had higher values of soil properties than the restored forest and the agroforestry system, with the differences between the restored and agroforestry systems driven by bulk density. Levels of ecosystem service proxies and multifunctionality were positively related to the functional richness of forest plots and were mainly explained by the differences in site conditions. Our study demonstrated the effects of functional forest structure on ecosystem services in different forest ecosystems located in the semi-deciduous forest zone of Ghana.
The future of tropical forests under the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals			In September 2015, member states of the United Nations unanimously adopted the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)-a set of 17 ambitions for the post-2015 global development agenda. The goals do not offer a prescriptive plan but establish levers of policy action that seek to improve the three pillars of sustainable development: society, environment, and the economy. To facilitate achieving the SDGs, it will be critical to identify context-specific opportunities and challenges for implementation. Tropical regions of the world currently host not only the highest levels of biodiversity but also some of the highest rates of urbanization and development globally. Moreover, tropical forest deforestation is a globally significant issue; it has adverse impacts on biodiversity, climate systems, and socioeconomic equality. Here, we provide a rapid overview and qualitative assessment of the academic and policy literature on development and tropical forests, using the framework of the SDGs to examine issues broadly relevant to both tropical forests and sustainable development. Our assessment gathers existing knowledge and reveals critical knowledge gaps. In doing so, we identify key synergies between SDGs and tropical forests. We also suggest potential pathways of influence to improve social, environmental, and economic conditions in these rapidly developing regions of the world.
The geospatial modelling of carbon sequestration in Oluwa Forest, Ondo State, Nigeria			The study assessed the amount of carbon being sequestrated in the Ondo State Afforestation Project in Oluwa Forest, south - west of Nigeria, with the view to determine the above ground biomass (AGB) and belowground biomass (BGB), estimate the total carbon content and evaluate the CO2 sequestered. Geospatial techniques and the non-destructive field observation method were used. The results showed that a total of 359 megatons of CO2 was estimated to have been sequestered using the non-destructive field measurements. In addition, the rate of change in land use land cover between 1984 and 2015 was determined. A geospatial database derived from field measurements was developed to monitor carbon content of the forest.
The Global Decline of Dung Beetles			The main threats to insects are the expansion and intensification of agriculture, resulting in the loss or degradation of their habitats; excessive chemical contamination; the spread of invasive species; and global climate change. In the tropics, massive deforestation and agricultural intensification and expansion play a major role in the loss of biodiversity. The same threats apply to the dung beetles which have co-evolved for many millions of years in close association with the vertebrates whose dung they exploit. The extinction or scarcity of dung producers, especially mammalian herbivores and omnivores, can result in significant, detrimental changes in the composition of dung beetle assemblages. By manipulating, redistributing and degrading feces, dung beetles play a major role in the functioning of ecosystems. Their contributions include the replenishment of soil nutrients through the burial of feces, soil bioturbation that facilitates plant growth, and also the secondary dispersal of seeds. These ecological functions render important ecosystem services to humans, such as the biological control of livestock pests, reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from livestock, and soil enrichment through nutrient replenishment and the boosting of soil organic matter levels. Numerous studies have reported the decline of dung beetles in various parts of the world, especially in the last 30years. The gradual abandonment of traditional mixed grazing in Europe has led to the depletion of the trophic resources available to dung beetles. This abandonment has led to the reforesting of the landscape, which is detrimental to species of open habitats. These environmental changes have coincided with the increased use of veterinary parasiticides, whose residues often retain their insecticidal properties after defecation. Some residues can cause the near-immediate death of dung beetles while other residues can cause a greater or lesser degree of paralysis of the muscles of adults. This reduces their ability to locate feces, as well as decreasing female fertility and causing significant mortality of larvae, leading to a gradual and sometimes rapid decline in the number of individuals. The routine use of these parasiticides over long periods results in the decimation of exposed dung beetle populations and a reduction in their overall functional efficiency, leading in the long term to the accumulation of dry dung on the ground. The same effects have been observed on dung beetles after the regular use of some selective herbicides to prevent the invasion of pastures by bushy vegetation and forest trees. The massive destruction and degradation of tropical forests has badly impacted their particularly diverse dung beetle faunas. Many forest dwelling dung beetles are in a precarious situation as most species have been unable to adapt to the grossly simplified grassy pasture habitats or the remaining fragmented and/or degraded forest habitats. In addition, the elimination or population crashes of many large forest mammals due to intensive hunting have resulted in the loss or scarcity of their feces for exploitation by forest dung beetles. The newly pastured areas and other simplified ecosystems are home to a very impoverished fauna, partly made up of exotic species intentionally introduced to compensate for the deficiency of ecosystem services. However, these introduced species can become invasive and compete with native dung beetles. © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
The global potential for increased storage of carbon on land			Constraining the climate crisis requires urgent action to reduce anthropogenic emissions while simultaneously removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Improved information about the maximum magnitude and spatial distribution of opportunities for additional land-based removals of CO2 is needed to guide on-the-ground decision-making about where to implement climate change mitigation strategies. Here, we present a globally consistent spatial dataset (approximately 500-m resolution) of current, potential, and unrealized potential carbon storage in woody plant biomass and soil organic matter. We also provide a framework for prioritizing actions related to the restoration, management, and maintenance of woody carbon stocks and associated soils. By comparing current to potential carbon storage, while excluding areas critical to food production and human habitation, we find 287 petagrams (PgC) of unrealized potential storage opportunity, of which 78% (224 PgC) is in biomass and 22% (63 PgC) is in soil. Improved management of existing forests may offer nearly three-fourths (206 PgC) of the total unrealized potential, with the majority (71%) concentrated in tropical ecosystems. However, climate change is a source of considerable uncertainty. While additional research is needed to understand the impact of natural disturbances and biophysical feedbacks, we project that the potential for additional carbon storage in woody biomass will increase (+17%) by 2050 despite projected decreases (-12%) in the tropics. Our results establish an absolute reference point and conceptual framework for national and jurisdictional prioritization of locations and actions to increase land-based carbon storage.
The Gordian knot of mangrove conservation: Disentangling the role of scale, services and benefits			Mangrove forests are among the most threatened tropical ecosystems. Their role as providers of important ecosystem services such as coastal protection, carbon storage and nursery habitats for economically important species is increasingly acknowledged. But mangrove destruction continues, and we might have to face the prospect of a world deprived of the services offered by mangrove ecosystems. Mangrove transformation and destruction is often caused by mismatches in mangrove system management. These root in interests that focus on selected ecosystem services only, but also result from a problem of fit between the spatial scales at which ecosystem services are provided, and those at which their benefits are realized. We argue that a combination of the ecosystem services concept with a careful approach to the issue of scales will help to overcome these problems and improve the management of mangrove systems. Drawing on two case studies from Indonesia and Brazil, we illustrate the relevance of our findings for different ecosystem services. (C) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
The history and di scourse of kachung forest			0
The impact of cashew (Anacardium occidentale L.) on biological activity, nutrient cycling and carbon sequestration in tropical soil			The capacity of trees to act as a long-term reservoir for the sequestration of atmospheric carbon is crucial for mitigating the adverse effects of climate change. Quantifying biomass and carbon accumulation is crucial for sustainable land management practices in tropical regions. Cashew, an important tree crop in tropical areas, can sequester carbon while providing farmers a means of subsistence. This study aims to evaluate the carbon sequestration potential of cashew plantations in weathered tropical soils and their impact on soil fertility and biological activity, highlighting the dual benefits of enhancing agricultural sustainability and mitigating climate change. This study reports on the soil and biomass sequestration capacity of cashew plantations raised on weathered tropical soil in India. According to the study, biomass carbon sequestered by a 20-year-old cashew plantation on extensively weathered lateritic soil can range from 42.93 to 50.41 Mg C ha-1, or 157.56 to 184.99 Mg CO2 equivalents. The total quantity of carbon sequestered in the upper 60 cm layer of the soil in a 20-year-old cashew crop ranged from 99.52 to 104.61 Mg ha-1. The soil carbon accumulation was two to three times greater than carbon stored in biomass during the twentieth year of the crop. Overall, a 19% to 37% increase in nutrient content was observed in a 20-year-old cashew plantation compared to the initial nutrient content. The study demonstrated that the plantation of cashew in weathered tropical soil can lead to the sequestration of carbon in soil and biomass and improve fertility and biological activity.
The Impact of Forest Disturbance on the Fine Root System of a Tropical Forest on Sulawesi, Indonesia			0
The impact of land reclamation and management practices on the dynamics of soil organic carbon in the arid region of North-western China as simulated by CENTURY model			Large-scale reclamation in arid land over North-western China during the past 50 years has converted the natural desert landscape into anthropogenic oasis, particularly in the lower part of watersheds. Drastic human activities may have caused the change in soil organic carbon (SOC) in anthropogenic oasis. Fubei farm, a typical anthropogenic oasis at the lower part of Sangong river watershed reclaimed 50 years ago, is selected as the representative area to assess the dynamics of SOC before and after the land reclamation and to analyse the effect of different management practices on soil carbon pools. Based on field investigation, history of crop rotations, and past farm practices in Fubei farm, land management practices were divided into five categories, corresponding five periods, 0 - 1958, 1959 - 1984, 1985 - 1992, 1993 - 1998 and 1999 - 2008. This study employs the CENTURY model to investigate the effects of land reclamation and management practices in oasis agriculture on the dynamic of SOC at different periods. CENTURY model (Version 4. 0) was run based on a monthly time step, and simulated three conceptual SOC pools, namely active, slow, and passive pools, represented fast, medium, and slow rates of turnover of carbon in the soil profile, respectively. The model successfully simulated the soil total organic carbon (TOC) dynamics of the top layer soil (0-20 cm) in the different periods in the study area. The model was run for 1950a to reach steady state which assumes the land was a natural desert shrub with low-intensity grazing. In the equilibrium state, the proportions of active, slow, and passive organic carbon pools in soil TOC were 3.78%, 61.41%, and 34.81%, respectively, indicating that soil TOC in the study area was dominated by the slow and passive carbon pools. Model simulation showed that soil TOC increased rapidly in the first 2 years of oasis agriculture when the natural desert shrubland with its weak nutrient recycling was replaced by annual crops with better nutrient recycling. Over the 50 years' cultivation (1959 -2008), the mean change in soil TOC exhibited complex ways. TOC increased rapidly in the first 2 years (1959 - I960) after shrubland reclamation, and declined slowly during the period 1961 -1984 and then decreased rapidly from 1985 to 1992. Between 1993 and 1998, it remained relatively stable, and climbed rapidly again during 1999 - 2008. The trend in soil TOC showed "N" shape, i. e., increase, decrease, then increase. Soil TOC is greater (7.74%) in 2008 than in 1958 under the natural desert shrub. The improvements of land management practices such as ploughing being replaced with no tillage, straw being crushed before returning it to soil, and reasonable application of fertilizers, played a key role in the change in soil TOC. Especially, soil carbon sequestration was obviously increased since protective management practices were implemented in 1993. The results were different from the conclusions that loss of soil organic carbon would happen due to reclamation and continuous farming in tropical forests, semi-arid grasslands of northern China and Nigerian semiarid Savannah.
The impact of land use/land cover change on ecosystem services in the central highlands of Ethiopia			Ecosystems provide a wide range of services that are important for human-well being. Estimating the multiple services obtained from ecosystems is vital to support decision-making processes at different levels. This study analyzes land use/land cover (LU/LC) dynamics over four decades (i.e., 1973, 1986, 2001, 2015) to assess its impact on ecosystem services. Ecosystem Service Values (ESV) was determined using LU/LC analysis and established global data base. LU/LC analysis showed that forest cover reduced by 54.2% during study period; and settlement, bare land, shrub land and cultivated land increased considerably. The study indicates that due to forest cover change from 1973 to 2015, approximately US$ 3.69 million of ecosystem services values was lost. Among the ecosystem services reduced were: nutrient cycling, provision of raw material and erosion control. The use of LU/LC data along with established global ESV data sets reduce the costs of ground data collection, and help in tracking of past environmental changes and acquisition of quick and reliable results that can be used for decision making processes. We believe that the results obtained can be helpful in designing payment for environmental services and rural development policies.
The impact of multiple driving factors on forest ecosystem services in karst desertification control			In the fragile karst desertification ecosystem, forests are the providers of eco-multifunctionality. And the ecosystem service (ES) supply capacity of forests is directly or indirectly affected by various driving factors. The aim of this study is to explore the driving role of forest spatial structure, species diversity, and functional diversity on ecosystem services. In this study, four forest types, namely, broad-leaved monoculture forest (planted economic forest) (F1), broad-leaved mixed forest (F2), coniferous and broad-leaved mixed forest (F3), and coniferous mixed forest (F4), were investigated in karst plateau mountain (KPM), karst plateau canyon (KPC), and karst mountain canyon (KMC) landforms. Variance analysis, correlation analysis and redundancy analysis were used to compare the differences of spatial structure, species diversity, functional diversity, and ES of different forest types and to clarify the driving role of spatial structure, species diversity, and functional diversity on ES. The results showed that the wood supply service of F3 was at least 4.27% higher than that of other forest types; carbon sequestration and oxygen release are at least 4.57 and 3.89% higher; the water holding capacity of litter and soil is higher by 6.24 and 2.26%, respectively; the soil OC, TN, TP, and TK were higher than 6.01, 1.22, 25.55, and 13.34%, respectively. The coniferous mixed forest and broadleaved mixed forest with a more complete spatial structure has a higher level of diversity, which can generate more wood and provide more soil nutrient sources, as well as stronger regulation capacity. Spatial structure affects plant productivity through interspecific relationships; soil fertility is restricted by the level of diversity; gas and water regulation are influenced by both spatial structure and diversity levels. There is a progressive driving relationship among spatial structure, diversity, and ES. In forest management, it is helpful to improve the forest ecosystem's functioning by adjusting the forest structure using close-to-natural management measures.
The impact of plantation establishment on avian ecological and functional diversity			Conversion of tropical and sub-tropical forest to plantation agriculture poses a significant threat to Madagascar's unique biodiversity and ecosystem functioning, yet little research effort has been dedicated to studying its effects. By comparing avian diversity, community composition, and functional diversity metrics between secondary forest and plantation habitats in the Sambirano eco-region of Madagascar, this study simultaneously explored the impact of plantation establishment on forest communities and the conservation value of low-intensity, closed-canopy fruit plantations. Plantation habitats were found to maintain ecologically and functionally rich assemblages of birds. However, these assemblages were highly modified compared to the secondary forest and with significantly lower functional evenness. Closed-canopy plantations acted as a middle ground between open-canopy plantation and secondary forest. These results suggest that preservation of secondary forest will be essential to conservation efforts, but closed-canopy plantation may present a viable compromise between conservation and human development objectives.
The impacts of agricultural and urban land-use changes on plant and bird biodiversity in Costa Rica (1986-2014)			Costa Rica is recognized worldwide for its nature conservation policy following the traditional land-sparing approach. However, concerns have been raised about the opposite trends of the agricultural land cover changes driven by the option to expand old and new export crops after the country's external debt crisis of the 1980s. We study what happened during the last 20 years by applying landscape ecology metrics to the REDD+ land cover maps of 1986, 2001, and 2014, and statistically testing these indicators with the locations of species richness of plants and birds recorded by INBio. Our results confirm that deforestation has been reversed and most of the biodiversity considered is housed in forestland, but also that the expansion of export monocultures and urban sprawl have fragmented and isolated these tropical forests. Ecological connectivity values decreased 13% across the territory, all crops are negatively correlated with bird and plant locations, and the metropolitan expansion caused a detrimental impact on coffee agroforestry. All these outcomes are consistent with the growing deficit of the Costa Rican physical trade balance due to a faster increase of tropical exports than the growing imports of staple food, with a loss of soil organic matter filled by high doses of agrochemicals imported. Overcoming these environmental problems require a new land-sharing approach to nature conservation aimed at improving ecological connectivity through an agroecology approach combined with land-use planning to preserve the remaining green belt of the shade coffee plantations as a buffer green infrastructure in the metropolitan area.
The implementation costs of forest conservation policies in Brazil			Tropical forest conservation is considered a low-cost option for climate change mitigation. But mitigation cost assessments have featured opportunity costs, neglecting policy implementation costs. Here we use official data to identify the Brazilian federal government's operational and institutional budgets related to forest conservation policies implemented from 2000 to 2014. We distinguish the allocated and executed budgets of these policies, and provide scenario-based estimates of their cost-effectiveness. On average, Brazil spent US$ 1 billion/year on forest conservation policies at the federal level. Brazil's substantial reduction in annual forest loss after 2004 was accompanied by a higher operational budget execution of disincentive-based policy instruments, and an absolute increase in both allocated and executed institutional budgets. The post-2004 successful mitigation effort represented additional implementation costs to the Brazilian federal government of US$ 308–923/ha of avoided deforestation, or US$ 0.87–2.60/tCO2 of avoided emissions. Factoring in also approximate municipal and state expenditures, these costs increase to US$ 385–1153/ha or US$ 1.09–3.25/tCO2. We conclude that implementations costs are non-trivial in size, including compared to estimates of land users' opportunity costs. This has important implications for REDD + policy design, in the sense that implementation costs need to be adequately considered. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
The Importance of Defining 'Forest': Tropical Forest Degradation, Deforestation, Long-term Phase Shifts, and Further Transitions			While research continues on the causes, consequences, and rates of deforestation and forest degradation in the tropics, there is little agreement about what exactly is being lost, what we want back, and to whom the 'we' refers. Particularly unsettling is that many analyses and well-intended actions are implemented in fogs of ambiguity surrounding definitions of the term 'forest'-a problem that is not solely semantic; with development of markets for biomass carbon, vegetation classification exercises take on new relevance. For example, according to the basic implementation guidelines of the Kyoto Protocol, closed canopy natural forest could be replaced by monoclonal plantations of genetically engineered exotic tree species and no deforestation would have occurred. Following these same guidelines, carbon credits for afforestation could be available for planting trees in species-rich savannas; these new plantations would count towards a country moving towards the 'forest transition,' the point at which there is no net 'forest' loss. Such obvious conflicts between biodiversity conservation and carbon sequestration might be avoided if 'forest' was clearly defined and if other vegetation types and other ecosystem values were explicitly recognized. While acknowledging that no one approach to vegetation classification is likely to satisfy all users at all scales, we present an approach that recognizes the importance of species composition, reflects the utility of land-cover characteristics that are identifiable via remote sensing, and acknowledges that many sorts of forest degradation do not reduce carbon stocks (e. g., defaunation) or canopy cover (e. g., over-harvesting of understory nontimber forest products).
The importance of insects on land and in water: a tropical view			Tropical insects are astonishingly diverse and abundant yet receive only marginal scientific attention. In natural tropical settings, insects are involved in regulating and supporting ecosystem services including seed dispersal, pollination, organic matter decomposition, nutrient cycling, herbivory, food webs and water quality, which in turn help fulfill UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Current and future global changes that affect insect diversity and distribution could disrupt key ecosystem services and impose important threats on ecosystems and human wellbeing. A significant increase in our knowledge of tropical insect roles in ecosystem processes is thus vital to ensure sustainable development on a rapidly changing planet.
The importance of local forest benefits: Economic valuation of Non-Timber Forest Products in the Eastern Arc Mountains in Tanzania			Understanding the spatial distribution of the quantity and economic value of Non-Timber Forest Product (NTFP) collection gives insight into the benefits that local communities obtain from forests, and can inform decisions about the selection of forested areas that are eligible for conservation and enforcement of regulations. In this paper we estimate transferable household production functions of NTFP extraction in the Eastern Arc Mountains (EAM) in Tanzania, based on information from seven multi-site datasets related to the behaviour of over 2000 households. The study shows that the total benefit flow of charcoal, firewood, poles and thatch from the EAM to the local population has an estimated value of USD 42 million per year, and provides an important source of additional income for local communities, especially the poorest, who mainly depend on subsistence agriculture. The resulting map of economic values shows that benefits vary highly across space with population density, infrastructure and resource availability. We argue that if further restrictions on forest access to promote conservation are considered, this will require additional policies to prevent a consequent increase in poverty, and an enforced trade-off between conservation and energy supply to rural and urban households. Crown Copyright (C) 2013 Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
The importance of native trees for forest bird conservation in tropical farmland			Trees in farmland provide valuable ecosystem services that enhance agricultural productivity and income, as well as supporting biodiversity such as birds. A better understanding of the benefits of farmland trees for birds, specifically the relative value of native and exotic trees, is essential in developing effective management options, particularly within tropical regions with intense cultivation pressure. In farmland in central Uganda, neither total bird species richness nor richness of forest visitors (non-forest dependent) were related to any measures of tree cover, whereas richness of forest-dependent bird species showed a positive relationship with the number of native tree species. The density of 10 out of 17 forest-dependent bird species within farmland showed at least one significant relationship with measures of tree cover; variables relating to native trees typically had more, and stronger, positive effects on bird density than exotic trees. The combined density of 17 forest-dependent bird species on farmland was positively related to both the total number of native trees and number of large native trees. Increasing the density of forest-dependent bird species by 1 birdha-1 within a farmland site is predicted to require c. one to two large native trees, or c. 30 native trees of all sizes, per ha. Despite comprising c. 40% of all trees, exotics exerted little positive influence on forest birds, possibly because these offer poorer resources in terms of foraging, nesting and shelter. While numerous previous studies in the tropics have considered the value, for birds, of tree cover in farmland, few have focused on tree size or species composition. This study suggests that the retention or planting of native trees is an important tool for conserving forest birds within farmland, will provide additional ecosystem services, and should be encouraged through, for example, agricultural development schemes, extension advice and demonstration farms.
The influence of floral resources and microclimate on pollinator visitation in an agro-ecosystem			As agriculture expands to meet the needs of a growing global population, natural ecosystems are threatened by deforestation and habitat fragmentation. Tropical agroforestry systems offer a sustainable alternative to traditional agriculture by providing food for production while also supporting biodiversity and ecosystem services. Previous studies have shown that these systems may even improve crop pollination, but the mechanisms of how these improvements occur are still poorly understood. Using coffee as a focal crop, we explored how microclimatic conditions affected nectar traits (sugar and caffeine concentration) important for pollinator visitation. We also studied how microclimate, floral traits, floral availability at the coffee plant level, availability of floral resources provided by other plant species in the agroecosystem ("neighborhood floral availability"), and the presence of other bees affected the amount of time bees spent foraging on coffee flowers and the proportion of coffee pollen carried on their bodies. We explored these factors using the two dominant coffee species farmed on Puerto Rico, Coffea canephora and C. arabica, under sun and shade management. We found that high nectar sugar concentration and temperature were important predictors of short floral visits (<15s), while increased numbers of bees and open coffee flowers were important predictors of longer floral visits (16-180 seconds). High nectar caffeine concentration was an important predictor of longer visits on C. arabica flowers while the opposite was observed for C. canephora flowers. For both species, high coffee floral availability was the main predicting factor for the proportion of coffee pollen on the bees' bodies. Surprisingly, neither neighborhood floral availability nor the type of coffee plantation (agroforest/shade or sun) were important predictors of bee visitation. These results suggest non-coffee flowering plants in coffee plantations were neither competitors nor facilitators of coffee plants for pollinators. Additionally, most of the bees surveyed were carrying >= 80 % pollen from one species (C. arabica or C. canephora), likely resulting in little heterospecific pollen deposition between Coffea and non-Coffea flowers. Shade trees in coffee plantations do not detract from pollinator visitation to coffee flowers, suggesting that the provision of multiple ecological and wildlife conservation benefits by shade trees is not in conflict with a grower's ability to maximize the benefits of insect pollination on fruit production.
The Influence of Plant-Insect Interactions and Incentive-Based Environmental Policy on Tropical Forest Restoration			0
The Influence of Various Silvicultural Treatments and Forest Operations on Tree Species Biodiversity			Purpose of ReviewBiodiversity is one of the most important features of forest ecosystems. One of the goals of Sustainable Forest Management is to reduce biodiversity disturbance, which can occur as a consequence of timber harvesting. The aim of this review was to define which silvicultural systems and forest operations can have an influence on forest tree biodiversity by summarising the findings of nearly 60 papers published in the last ten years (2013-2022).Recent FindingsIn natural forest ecosystems characterised by a high level of structural complexity, such as uneven-aged tropical forests, selective logging and retention forestry are, in general, suitable forms of intervention that have a limited impact on tree biodiversity. Forest operations, in particular, should be of low intensity and try to simulate as much as possible small-scale natural disturbances. Thinning has proved to be a valid treatment for managing tree biodiversity. However, it is important to shape the magnitude of thinnings according to the management aims. Limited removal is recommended in interventions for maintaining the current structure, and more extensive removal is appropriate in cases when a change in species composition is expected, e.g. in the conversion of planted coniferous stands to uneven-aged mixed or broadleaved stands. In addition, coppicing is suitable for maintaining tree biodiversity due to its effectiveness in fostering the presence of light-demanding tree species. Findings show that it is important to establish the right rotation age, considering that an excessively short period between coppicing interventions can be detrimental to functional biodiversity.Skid trails and landing sites represent suitable areas for the initial establishment of natural regeneration. However, generally, the level of biodiversity on these sites declines with time as a consequence of soil compaction, thus highlighting the importance of the forest infrastructure network planning.In uneven-aged tropical forests, selective logging and retention forestry are the most suitable options for maintaining tree biodiversity. Thinning and coppicing help to manage biodiversity, whilst intensive thinning helps to change species composition. Skid trails and landing sites can support natural regeneration. Recommendations and management options were developed, as well as possible future research directions. The authors recommend that future studies should investigate how much tree biodiversity depends on different levels of harvesting technology applied within the same silvicultural treatment.
The interaction of land-use history and tree species diversity in driving variation in the aboveground biomass of urban versus non-urban tropical forests			Understanding the drivers of aboveground biomass (AGB) variation in present-day tropical forests can contribute to management strategies that help mitigate against CO2-driven climate change and provide other services related to high AGB. Higher tree diversity can lead to higher woody productivity and carbon storage, but how diversity interacts with land-use history is less certain. We assessed variation in AGB across forests with different land-use histories and surrounding landscapes in southeastern Brazil and how AGB relates to tree diversity per se, while controlling for important factors such as mean functional trait values, stem density and soil fertility. Our findings indicate that aboveground biomass of forests is dependent on land-use history and the landscape matrix in which they occur (urban or non-urban). We found that tree diversity, measured as the average evolutionary divergence among close relatives, shows a strong positive relationship to AGB, but only in old-growth, non-urban forests. This suggests that higher niche complementarity leads to higher AGB in certain ecological contexts. Forests in an urban matrix, and those that regenerated from cropland (in an urban or non-urban matrix), showed weak or insignificant relationships between AGB and diversity, and forests that regenerated from completely denuded landscapes, including soil removal, actually showed a negative relationship between diversity and AGB. Meanwhile, across all forest classes, the abundance-weighted mean wood density of tree species present showed a consistent positive correlation with AGB, indicating the ubiquity of mass-ratio effects on AGB. Overall, our study suggests that strategies for conservation and restoration should account for past land-use and the matrix where forests are inserted, as the distribution of carbon stocks and biodiversity may need to be considered separately. © 2021
The invasive Tradescantia zebrina does not inhibit germination of the native Hymenaea courbaril but does modulate its growth			BackgroundInvasive plant species can modify ecosystem structure and function, potentially leading to the loss of native species, environmental and biotic homogenisation, changes in nutrient cycling, impairment of ecosystem services, and decrease in the rate of regeneration of plant recruits.AimsWe assessed the effects of the non-native and invasive vine Tradescantia zebrina on the germination and development of the native tree Hymenaea courbaril in north-eastern Brazil. We hypothesised that the invasive species would negatively impact the germination and development, and, via competition, the growth of the native species.MethodsWe conducted a germination experiment for six months in seven forest patches. Seeds of H. courbaril were cultivated in four possible combinations of two treatments: under a cover with and without T. zebrina, and on soil that originated from places with and without T. zebrina present.ResultsNeither T. zebrina cover or soil affected the germination or biomass of H. courbaril during the experiment. H. courbaril seedlings were taller and had longer roots when cultivated in soil that originated from places with T. zebrina.ConclusionsT. zebrina presence alters soil properties in a way that triggers morphological responses in H. courbaril, which can be associated to a perceived competition context.
The large-scale potential of regenerating Cerrado and Atlantic Forests for atmospheric carbon removal			Understanding changes in aboveground biomass (AGB) stocks in regenerating tropical forests for the purposes of environmental restoration is essential to determine the ecosystem services provided by forests and to support international forest restoration agreements and the UN Decade of Ecological Restoration. This Postdoctoral (PD) grant aims to support research within the Nature Based Solutions component of the project supported by Shell-FAPESP. The selected candidate will collaborate with researchers from the RestoreC project at FAPESP-Shell POLI-USP Research Center for Gas Innovation at the University of São Paulo. Summary of the program and projects can be found on the RCGI website (http://www.rcgi.poli.USP.br/).This PD grant will aim to quantify the large-scale potential of annual carbon removals by forest restoration in the Cerrado and Atlantic Forest biomes as a basis for prioritizing different locally assessed restoration strategies. The PD fellow will be crucial to analyze information derived from special high and moderate resolution remote sensing (including LIDAR) combined with geoprocessing methods and field-based inventory data to obtain large-scale information about regenerating areas in both biomes, their age under different environmental and climatic conditions to produce C accumulation curves and map the potential of these phytophysiognomies to sequester and accumulate carbon. (AU)
The legitimacy of incentive-based conservation and a critical account of social safeguards			Incentive-based conservation has become a significant part of how tropical forests are being governed. Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) is a mechanism to mitigate climate change that many countries have started to implement. REDD+, however, is criticized for its potential negative impacts on local populations and Indigenous people. To prevent and mitigate the negative impacts, safeguards are increasingly being used to prevent and shift the focus toward 'non-carbon' elements of forest conservation. We discuss the legitimacy of these types of projects from a stakeholder perspective. Using a normative framework, we assess the Ecuadorian Socio Bosque conservation program, concentrating more specifically on the level of input and output legitimacy. Results show that Socio Bosque in its current form has shortcomings in both input and output legitimacy. We argue that an encompassing conception of legitimacy, including input and output criteria, particularly from a local stakeholder perspective, is essential for the future success of incentive-based conservation and particularly for REDD+ projects. © 2014 Elsevier Ltd.
The Lifecycle of Wood from Tropical Forests in Costa Rica			0
The Missing Skill Set in Community Management of Tropical Forests			0
The nature of a 'forest transition' in Thua Thien Hue Province, Central Vietnam - A study of land cover changes over five decades			Informed from historical case studies of land cover change and development in northern countries, forest transition (FT) theories have a tendency to precast specific conclusions. Considering the case of a so-called FT in Th.a Thien Hue Province in tropical Central Vietnam, we investigated 1.) whether such a 'FT' indeed reflects a resurgence of genuine forest, 2.) whether the land cover changes can be explained through conventional 'pathways' of FT, and 3.) in which ways the changes may or may not portend 'sustainable development'. Using satellite imagery and topographic maps, we produced maps for twenty land cover types for the years 1966, 1973, 1979, 1988, 1998, 2008, 2016 and 2019 and analysed land cover change over time. We contextualize these results with reference to the historical and scientific literature on Vietnam, and find that 1.) the forestlands represent a historically rich bio-cultural landscape; 2.) considerable forest destruction resulted from the Second Indochina War rather than classical degradation pathways; 3.) in the post-war period altered forestland spaces and re-emerging land uses interacted with state-led re-territorialization and socialist plans for land resource development, influencing shifts in forest cover; 4.) during 1979-1988 state-led intensive timber logging in remaining rainforests (causing widespread forest degradation) somewhat paradoxically (in terms of conventional FT models and theories) coincided already with a slight increase in lower-biomass tree cover; 5.) after 1988 logging in natural forests was officially prohibited (logging bans), and forestry shifted to a reliance on wood produced in acacia-based plantations (largely on lands officially allocated to households); and 6.) this shift went along with a significant state-led restructuring and development of land use policies and the promotion of forest-relevant economic industries. 'Restoration' of tree cover mainly consisted of the expansion of exotic tree plantations, but - at least intermittently - this may also have mitigated impacts on natural forests. We conclude with some reflections on the FT-outcome, its 'sustainability', and future trajectories and possibilities of land cover changes in TTHP.
The negative effect of Chinese fir (Cunninghamia lanceolata) monoculture plantations on soil physicochemical properties, microbial biomass, fungal communities, and enzymatic activities			Considerable natural or secondary forests have been converted to plantations in response to the growing needs for timber, paper, and fuel. Soil fungal communities are sensitive to ecosystem transformation and play an important role in aboveground-belowground linkages and biogeochemical cycling. However, the effect of forest conversion on fungal community structure and functions and driving mechanisms remains unclear. We investigated the response of soil fungal communities and the corresponding change in soil physicochemical biological properties and enzymatic activities to the natural broad-leaved forest (NBF) converted to the Chinese fir (Cunninghamia lanceolata) plantation (CFP) in subtropical China with ITS rRNA amplicon sequencing. Soil physicochemical properties, microbial biomass, fungal alpha diversities, and enzymatic activities decreased with forest conversion, including pH, soil water content, soil organic carbon, available phosphorus, total nitrogen, nitrate nitrogen, microbial biomass carbon and nitrogen, urease, protease, and acid phosphatase. Fungal community composition and structure were also strongly affected by forest conversion. Ascomycota had a higher read abundance in the NBF, but Basidiomycota showed a higher read abundance in the CFP. The read abundance of saprotroph and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi increased with forest conversion, while that of ectomycorrhizal fungi decreased. Some fungal guilds-dung saprotrophs, lichenized fungi, endophytes, and lichen parasites-were even nearly lost in the CFP. These changes in fungal communities are all closely correlated to soil physicochemical properties, microbial biomass, and enzymatic activities. Overall, our study emphasizes the negative effect of the NBF conversion to the CFP on C, N, and P cycling mediated by fungi-and recommends replacing monoculture coniferous forests with mixed forests in reforestation to improve soil degradation.
The opportunities and challenges associated with developing rubber plantations as carbon sinks in China			Rubber plantations are among the most important in the world's tropical regions. They play a positive role in carbon sequestration and in delaying climate change, supplying strategic resources of natural rubber (NR), and aiding in poverty alleviation and rural revitalisation. This paper reviews six methods of research on carbon sinks in rubber plantations: the biomass inventory method, the biomass conversion factor continuous function method, the trade potential of carbon sinks method, the calculation method for carbon storage of rubber latex, the eddy covariance method, and the remote sensing image model method. This study clarifies the carbon sink assessment and enhancement model for rubber plantations and describes the composition of the carbon pool, which includes the aboveground and belowground vegetation biomass carbon pools, litter carbon pool, latex carbon pool, and soil carbon pool. It also examines influencing factors such as tree age, global climate change, and human disturbance, as well as improvement pathways including afforestation, fertilisation, irrigation, and tapping, and evaluation methods like field surveys, positional observations, remote sensing monitoring, and model simulation. Research on carbon sequestration in rubber plantations faces challenges, including the unclear dynamics of carbon sources and sequestration, uncertain spatial and temporal patterns, and the long-term lack of accurate monitoring of carbon sinks and technologies for increasing sinks and reducing emissions. Future research should focus on the methodology of rubber plantation carbon sequestration projects, the dynamics of carbon sequestration, and the spatial allocation pattern of carbon sequestration in rubber plantations.
The political economy of net-zero transitions: Policy drivers, barriers, and justice benefits to decarbonization in eight carbon-neutral countries			This study examines the political economy of decarbonization in eight countries over the period 2000 to 2021/ 2022 that have already achieved a national net-zero transition. These countries are Bhutan, Suriname, Panama, Guyana, Comoros, Gabon, Madagascar, and Niue. It utilizes an analytical method of a rich, interdisciplinary and systematized literature review integrated with thematic analysis. For each of these countries, the study examines the drivers and political motivation behind net-zero progress, including the timeline of events; the barriers and challenges that had to be overcome; and the benefits of decarbonization and its impacts on equity and justice. The main objectives of the study are to broaden the evidence base on low-carbon transitions beyond often and even overstudied countries that are Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, Democracies, or WEIRD countries, and to offer new empirical data on the strategy of energy policies in the real world, examining the first eight countries to achieve net-zero success in the modern era. It finds that all eight countries used a similar mix of nine policy interventions involving land use, renewable energy, and waste management. Common barriers included vulnerability to the effects of extreme climate events either in the form of natural disasters (i.e. landslides and floodings) or ecosystems degradation (i.e. ocean acidification, coastal erosion and forests loss). Despite these barriers, achieving net-zero emissions positively impacted marginalized communities by providing a more equitable distribution of climate benefits, mitigating adverse health effects and reducing social inequalities, particularly in low-income areas.
The potential ecological costs and cobenefits of REDD: a critical review and case study from the Amazon region			The United Nations climate treaty may soon include a mechanism for compensating tropical nations that succeed in reducing carbon emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, source of nearly one fifth of global carbon emissions. We review the potential for this mechanism [reducing emissions from deforestation and degradation (REDD)] to provoke ecological damages and promote ecological cobenefits. Nations could potentially participate in REDD by slowing clear-cutting of mature tropical forest, slowing or decreasing the impact of selective logging, promoting forest regeneration and restoration, and expanding tree plantations. REDD could also foster efforts to reduce the incidence of forest fire. Potential ecological costs include the accelerated loss (through displaced agricultural expansion) of low-biomass, high-conservation-value ecosystems, and substitution of low-biomass vegetation by monoculture tree plantations. These costs could be avoided through measures that protect low-biomass native ecosystems. Substantial ecological cobenefits should be conferred under most circumstances, and include the maintenance or restoration of (1) watershed functions, (2) local and regional climate regimes, (3) soils and biogeochemical processes, (4) water quality and aquatic habitat, and (5) terrestrial habitat. Some tools already being developed to monitor, report and verify (MRV) carbon emissions performance can also be used to measure other elements of ecosystem function, making development of MRV systems for ecological cobenefits a concrete possibility. Analysis of possible REDD program interventions in a large-scale Amazon landscape indicates that even modest flows of forest carbon funding can provide substantial cobenefits for aquatic ecosystems, but that the functional integrity of the landscape's myriad small watersheds would be best protected under a more even spatial distribution of forests. Because of its focus on an ecosystem service with global benefits, REDD could access a large pool of global stakeholders willing to pay to maintain carbon in forests, thereby providing a potential cascade of ecosystem services to local stakeholders who would otherwise be unable to afford them.
The potential for carbon sequestration through reforestation of abandoned tropical agricultural and pasture lands			Approximately half of the tropical biome is in some stage of recovery from past human disturbance, most of which is in secondary forests growing on abandoned agricultural lands and pastures. Reforestation of these abandoned lands, both natural and managed, has been proposed as a means to help offset increasing carbon emissions to the atmosphere. In this paper we discuss the potential of these forests to serve as sinks for atmospheric carbon dioxide in aboveground biomass and soils. A review of literature data shows that aboveground biomass increases at a rate of 6.2 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1) during the first 20 years of succession, and at a rate of 2.9 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1) over the first 80 years of regrowth. During the first 20 years of regrowth, forests in wet life zones have the fastest rate of aboveground carbon accumulation with reforestation, followed by dry and moist forests. Soil carbon accumulated at a rate of 0.41 Mg ha(-1) yr(-1) over a 100-year period, and at faster rates during the first 20 years (1.30 Mg carbon ha(-1) yr(-1)). Past land use affects the rate of both above- and belowground carbon sequestration. Forests growing on abandoned agricultural land accumulate biomass faster than other past land uses, while soil carbon accumulates faster on sites that were cleared but not developed, and on pasture sites. Our results indicate that tropical reforestation has the potential to serve as a carbon offset mechanism both above- and belowground for at least 40 to 80 years, and possibly much longer. More research is needed to determine the potential for longer-term carbon sequestration for mitigation of atmospheric CO2 emissions.
The potential for natural forest regeneration in tropical regions			Extensive forest restoration is a key strategy to meet nature-based sustainable development goals and provide multiple social and environmental benefits. Yet achieving forest restoration at scale requires cost-effective methods. Tree planting in degraded landscapes is a popular but costly forest restoration method, which often results in less biodiverse forests when compared to natural regeneration techniques under similar conditions. Here, we assess the current spatial distribution of pantropical natural forest (from 2000-2016) and use this information to present the first model of the potential for natural regeneration across tropical forested countries and biomes at 30-meter spatial resolution. We estimate that 215 million hectares - an area greater than the entire country of Mexico - have potential for natural forest regeneration, representing an above-ground carbon sequestration potential of 23.4 Gt CO2 (range 21.1-25.7 Gt) over 30 years. Five countries (Brazil, Indonesia, China, Mexico, and Colombia) account for 52% of this estimated potential, showcasing the need for targeting restoration initiatives that leverage natural regeneration potential. Our results facilitate broader equitable decision-making processes that capitalise on the widespread opportunity for natural regeneration to help achieve national and global environmental agendas. Copyright: Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Open Access
The potential of agricultural soils of the upper St. Joseph river watershed to sequester carbon			This paper assesses the potential to sequester C in soils under different land use systems in the Upper St. Joseph River Watershed by evaluating land use and management options that lead to an increase in soil C concentration above the Current levels. Under the present land use systems, the Current soil organic carbon (SOC) sequestration rate calculated for different, soil/crop management practices, ranges between 37.8 and 56.0 Gg yr(-1) (I Gg = 10(9) g = one thousand metric ton). Losses of SOC are primarily due to plow tillage estimated at 12.8 to 20.2 Gg C. The SOC sequestration potential is estimated at 67.8 to 102.0 Gg C yr(-1) through adoption of improved land use and soil/crop management practices. Conversion from plow till to no-till with continuous or rotational cropping system contributes 52% of the total SOC sequestration potential. Restoration of wetlands, incorporation of pasture/hay into the rotation cycle, and conversion to Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) contribute about 48% of the total sequestration potential. (C) 2004 by The Haworth Press, Inc. All rights reserved.
The potential of REDD plus for carbon sequestration in tropical forests: Supply curves for carbon storage for Kalimantan, Indonesia			We study the potential of tropical multi-age multi-species forests for sequestering carbon in response to financial incentives from REDD+. Following existing carbon crediting schemes, the use of reduced impact logging techniques (RIL) allows a forest manager to apply for carbon credits whereas conventional logging (CL) does not. This paper is the first to develop a Hartman model with selective cutting in this setting that takes additionality of carbon sequestration explicitly into account. We apply the model using data for Kalimantan, Indonesia, for both private and government forest managers. The latter have a lower discount rate and are exempt from taxes. RIL leads to less damages on the residual stand than CL and has lower variable but higher fixed costs. We find that a system of carbon credits through REDD+ can increase carbon stored per hectare by 15.8% if the forest is privately managed and by 22% under government management if the carbon price equals the average 2015 price in the European Union's Emission Trading Scheme. Interestingly, awarding carbon credits to carbon stored in end-use wood products does not increase the amount of carbon stored, nor Land Expectation Value. (C) 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
The present and future of grassland restoration			Grasslands contribute greatly to biodiversity and human livelihoods; they support 70% of the world's agricultural area, but are heavily degraded by human land use. Grassland restoration research and management receives less attention than forests or freshwater habitats, although grasslands are critical for sustaining ecosystems multifunctionality and capacity to support biodiversity. In this article, we introduce a Special Issue which considers major trends and prospects in grassland restoration. We identified three key topics: First, restoration must confront widespread seed and site limitations, and new monitoring methods, including remote sensing techniques, are critical for restoration projects. Second, we highlight that restored grasslands typically require ongoing disturbance management and that research is required to determine optimal approaches for implementing this management during restoration. Third, global and regional restoration agendas should be harmonized with site-level goals, and syntheses of current knowledge and research needs must guide grassland restoration across scales. We also identify research gaps to be filled, and challenges which grasslands face in the future: (1) a need for careful target vegetation selection and climate-adaptive restoration; (2) lack of knowledge in dynamics and restoration of several regions and grassland types, including drylands and (sub)tropical regions; (3) increased importance of species arrival sequence, and high stochasticity of species establishment; and finally (4) issues of post-restoration management to guarantee long-term sustainability of restored sites. A new generation of research and restoration projects to bridge these gaps is necessary to mitigate environmental challenges spanning localities to the globe as we commence the UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration.
The rain-runoff response of tropical humid forest ecosystems to use and reforestation in the western ghats of India			The effects of forest degradation and use and establishment of tree-plantations on degraded or modified forest ecosystems at multi-decadal time-scales using tree-plantations on the streamflow response are less studied in the humid tropics when compared to deforestation and forest conversion to agriculture. In the Western Ghats of India (Uttar Kannada, Karnataka State), a previous soil hydraulic conductivity survey linked with rain IDF (intensity-duration-frequency) had suggested a greater occurrence of infiltration-excess overland within the degraded forest and reforested areas and thus potentially higher streamflow (Bonell et al., 2010). We further tested these predictions in Uttar Kannada by establishing experimental basins ranging from 7 to 23. ha across three ecosystems, (1) remnant tropical evergreen Forest (NF), (2) heavily-used former evergreen forest which now has been converted to tree savanna, known as degraded forest (DF) and (3) exotic Acacia plantations (AC, Acacia auriculiformis) on degraded former forest land. In total, 11 basins were instrumented (3 NF, 4 AC and 4 DF) in two geomorphological zones, i.e., Coastal and Up-Ghat (Malnaad) and at three sites (one Coastal, two Up-Ghat). The rainfall-streamflow observations collected (at daily and also at a 36. min time resolutions in the Coastal basins) over a 2-3. year period (2003-2005) were analysed.In both the Coastal and Up-Ghat basins, the double mass curves showed during the rainy season a consistent trend in favour of more proportion of streamflow in the rank order DF>AC>NF. These double mass curves provide strong evidence that overland flow is progressively becomes a more dominant stormflow pathway. Across all sites, NF converted 28.4±6.41 stdev% of rainfall into total streamflow in comparison to 32.7±6.97 stdev% in AC and 45.3±9.61 stdev% in DF.Further support for the above trends emerges from the quickflow ratio Q F/. Q for the Coastal basins. There are much higher values for both the DF and AC land covers, and their rank order DF. >. AC. >. NF. The quickflow response ratio Q F/. P is also the highest for the DF basin, and along with the Q F/. Q ratio, can exceed 90%. The corresponding delayed flow response ratios, Q D/. P clearly show the largest Q D yields as a proportion of event precipitation from the Forest (NF1). The application of linear model supported these differences (e.g. 10-36% difference between NF and DF, p<. 0.001) in the storm hydrologic response of the Coastal basins. The exception was Q F/. P where there was a higher uncertainty connected with inter-basin mean differences. Cross-correlation plots for rain-streamflow and corresponding lag regression models for three storm events in the Coastal basins suggested the existence of alternative stormflow pathways with multiple lags with peaks between ∼12 and 24. h in NF, compared to respective bimodal peaks at ∼1 and 16. h in AC and ∼1 and 12. h in DF. The long time lags for NF are suggestive of deep subsurface stormflow and groundwater as the contributing sources to the storm hydrograph. The short time lags in DF and AC are indicative of overland flow and so 'memory' of the previous degraded land cover is retained in AC as supported by previous hydraulic conductivity data. As potential and actual evapotranspiration is likely to be depressed during the monsoon, differences in streamflow and run-off responses between land-cover types is largely attributed to differences in soil infiltration and hydrologic pathways. Enhancing infiltration and reducing run-off in managed ecosystems should be explored in the terms of the context of other ecosystem services and biodiversity. © 2012 Elsevier B.V..
The relationship of woody plant size and leaf nutrient content to large-scale productivity for forests across the Americas			Ecosystem processes are driven by both environmental variables and the attributes of component species. The extent to which these effects are independent and/or dependent upon each other has remained unclear. We assess the extent to which climate affects net primary productivity (NPP) both directly and indirectly via its effect on plant size and leaf functional traits. Using species occurrences and functional trait databases for North and South America, we describe the upper limit of woody plant height within 200 × 200 km grid-cells. In addition to maximum tree height, we quantify grid-cell means of three leaf traits (specific leaf area, and leaf nitrogen and phosphorus concentration) also hypothesized to influence productivity. Using structural equation modelling, we test the direct and indirect effects of environment and plant traits on remotely sensed MODIS-derived estimates of NPP, using plant size (satellite-measured canopy height and potential maximum tree height), leaf traits, growing season length, soil nutrients, climate and disturbances as explanatory variables. Our results show that climate affects NPP directly as well as indirectly via plant size in both tropical and temperate forests. In tropical forests NPP further increases with leaf phosphorus concentration, whereas in temperate forests it increases with leaf nitrogen concentration. In boreal forests, NPP most strongly increases with increasing temperature and neither plant size nor leaf traits have a significant influence. Synthesis. Our results suggest that at large spatial scales plant size and leaf nutrient traits can improve predictions of forest productivity over those based on climate alone. However, at higher latitudes their role is overridden by stressful climate. Our results provide independent empirical evidence for where and how global vegetation models predicting carbon fluxes could benefit from including effects of plant size and leaf stoichiometry. © 2019 The Authors. Journal of Ecology © 2019 British Ecological Society
The response of plant functional traits to aridity in a tropical dry forest			Drylands are experiencing an overall increase in aridity that is predicted to intensify in the future due to climate change. This may cause changes in the structure and functioning of dryland ecosystems, affecting ecosystem services and human well-being. Therefore, detecting early signs of ecosystem change before irreversible damage takes place is important. Thus, here we used a space-for-time substitution approach to study the response of the plant community to aridity in a Tropical dry forest (Caatinga, Brazil), and infer potential consequences of climate change. We assessed plant functional structure using the community weighted mean (CWM) and functional diversity, measured through functional dispersion (FDis), along a 700 km climatic gradient. We studied 13 functional traits, reflecting strategies associated with establishment, defense, regeneration, and dispersal of the most abundant 48 plant species in 113 sampling sites. Spearman correlations were used to test the relation between aridity and single-trait functional metrics. Aridity was a major environmental filter of the plant community functional structure. We found a higher abundance of species with deciduous leaves, zoochorous dispersal, fleshy fruits, chemical defense exudation and spinescence, and crassulacean acid metabolism towards more arid sites, at the expense of species with evergreen and thicker leaves, autochory dispersal, and shrub growth-form. The FDis of leaf type and thickness decreased with aridity, whereas FDis of fruit type, photosynthetic pathway, and defense strategies increased. Our findings provide functional indicators to early detect climate change impacts on Caatinga structure and functioning, to timely adopt preventive measures (e.g. conservation of forest remnants) and restoration actions (e.g. introduction of species with specific functional traits) in this threatened and unique ecosystem. © 2020 Elsevier B.V.
The restoration of termite diversity in different reforestated forests			In this study we compare the richness, abundance and guild composition between two different reforestations in the meridional part of the Amazon. We test the hypothesis that the termite community is affected by the identity of the tree species used in reforestation. More precisely, we test whether the reforestation of a native species of fig (Ficus sp) is more efficient in restoring biodiversity than reforestation of exotic teak trees (Tectona grandis). We sampled the termite community in these reforested areas and three other different "control" areas: active pastures, abandoned pastures (secondary forests) and mature pristine forest. We found that the distance of reforestation from the nearest primary forest had no effect on termite biodiversity, at the scale studied. But, as expected, richness and the abundance were higher in the mature forest, intermediate in reforestation areas, and lower in secondary forest and pastures. In fact, the only studied habitat with biodiversity comparable to the mature forest was the fig plantations. The guild composition in reforested areas was also similar to that of the mature forest. The diversity and abundance of humivorous termites was particularly pronounced in the reforestation areas compared with pasture or secondary forests. The humivorous guild provides important functional services, since its action makes nitrogen and other nutrients available to the plants along ecological succession. Our results show that reforestation is a valuable strategy in restoring termite diversity and recovering the ecosystem services they provide.
The role of chronic anthropogenic disturbances in plant community assembly along a water availability gradient in Brazil's semiarid Caatinga region			The effects of anthropogenic disturbances on the structure and function of seasonally dry tropical forests (SDTFs) are mediated both by disturbance type and intensity, and the environmental conditions, including climate. In a climate change scenario, the interaction between low water availability and chronic anthropogenic disturbances may potentially have drastic consequences on SDTF dynamics and the ecosystem services it provides. We hypothesized that in these naturally stressed systems, the effects of human disturbance are strongest in the most water-stressed sites, implying a worrisome synergism between harsh abiotic conditions (lower precipitation, higher temperature) and human effects, ultimately resulting in a less developed community structure and reduced diversity. By integrating information for the adult and regenerating vegetation strata in 21 sites distributed across climatic, plant cover and disturbance gradients in the Caatinga (seasonally dry tropical) forest of Brazil, we analyzed the individual and combined effects of chronic anthropogenic disturbances, as measured through the Cattle Pressure Index and the Human Activity Index, along climate gradients, on community structure, diversity, and composition. As expected, the Cattle Pressure Index was negatively related to diameter at ground level, basal area, and diversity in the adult stratum, whereas for the regenerating stratum, litter stock had the strongest effect on vegetation structure. Climatic factors were poor predictors of the variation in the three true diversity measures (0D, 1D, and 2D) of the regenerating community. Our results revealed important cross-site differences in both vegetation strata over a small range of climatic variation. We conclude that the most stressful conditions associated with a very low precipitation regime enhance the effects on chronic disturbances, gradually driving SDTF communities into new alternative states and rendering these environments more prone to desertification. © 2023 Elsevier B.V.
The role of forest provisioning ecosystem services in coping with household stresses and shocks in Miombo woodlands, Zambia			This paper investigates the use of forest provisioning ecosystem services (FPES) in coping with stresses and shocks in rural households of Miombo woodland systems. It assesses the influence of socioeconomic factors (wealth and gender) in households coping decisions. The study employs a mixed methods approach by combining focus groups meetings, in-depth interviews, and interviews of 244 households stratified by household wealth classes and gender of household heads in Copperbelt Pt ovince, Zambia. The results show that households face multiple shocks and that FPES are the most widely used coping strategy used by households facing idiosyncratic shocks, by households, followed by kinship. A higher proportion of poor and intermediate households rely on FPES to cope with various shocks than their wealthier counterparts. When stratified by gender, more male-headed households used FPES than female headed households. With respect to coping with household food stresses, charcoal production and sale is the most widely used strategy, followed by off-farm activities and remittances, in designing forest management strategies aimed at reconciling forest conservation and rural development, such as reduction of emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) schemes, it is vitally important that alternate coping strategies are made available to rural households to reduce pressure on forests. (C) 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
THE ROLE OF FORESTS IN THE CARBON CYCLE: MECHANISMS OF CARBON ABSORPTION AND STORAGE			Forests play a key role in the carbon cycle, acting as major carbon sinks and important carbon stores on Earth. This article examines how forest ecosystems perform photosynthesis, the process by which they capture carbon from the atmosphere and convert it into organic matter. Particular attention is paid to the various mechanisms of carbon assimilation, such as the transformation of carbon into biomass, roots and soil, as well as its long-term storage. One of the main factors influencing the efficiency of carbon absorption is the forest type. For example, tropical forests, due to their high biomass and species diversity, absorb significantly more carbon compared to temperate and boreal forests. The influence of climatic conditions, such as temperature and rainfall, on the process of photosynthesis and tree growth is also considered. Forest age also plays an important role: young forests accumulate carbon faster, while old forests can reach a state where carbon accumulation slows down. The article also highlights the importance of preserving and restoring forest ecosystems as a strategic approach to combating climate change. Increasing forest area and implementing sustainable forest management practices can significantly increase their capacity to absorb carbon, as well as improve other ecosystem services such as maintaining biodiversity and protecting soil from erosion. Importantly, forest destruction caused by logging and land tenure change releases significant amounts of carbon into the atmosphere, exacerbating the problem of climate change. © 2024, Gnedenko Forum. All rights reserved.
The Role of Integrated Organic Cycle Farming in Tropical Agroforestry Systems for Sustainable Food Production			Tropical ecosystems are rich in natural resources, biodiversity, cultural diversity, and natural beauty. In tropical ecosystems, biological, environmental, and social-cultural productivity are the highest globally, but their economic value is relatively low. In several tropical countries, approaches to national development remain traditional, being based solely on the exploitation of natural resources, leading to relatively low food security and sovereignty. Agroforestry can help protect food access by (1) directly providing nutrients from tree products, such as nuts, fruits, green leafy vegetables, and promote staple food production; (2) increasing peasant revenue through the sale of excess tree products and staples; (3) providing cooking fuel; and (4) supporting various ecosystem services, such as pollination. These effects should also improve nutrition and probiotic ecosystems. Agroforestry needs to be managed in ways that reflect natural ecosystems, such as through integrated organic cycle systems. It is a natural system of land and biological resource management that can improve value to environmental, economy, socio-cultural outcomes, and healthiness. This system is multifunctional and multi-prolific, that effectively and efficiently combines production and conservation aspects. A like natural forest ecosystems, it is to hope that each unit of land can deliver various products simultaneously, such as meal, housing, fibre, manure, energy, clean water, oxygen, cure ingredients, spirituality, and nature tourism. Such a management of tropical natural resources is expected to be both more dignified and sustainable. This chapter elucidates the importance of agroforestry systems for food security in Indonesia using the integrated bio-cycle method, a nature-oriented framework for land management. © 2022, The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
The role of natural regeneration to ecosystem services provision and habitat availability: a case study in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest			Natural regeneration provides multiple benefits to nature and human societies, and can play a major role in global and national restoration targets. However, these benefits are context specific and impacted by both biophysical and socioeconomic heterogeneity across landscapes. Here, we investigate the benefits of natural regeneration for climate change mitigation, sediment retention and biodiversity conservation in a spatially explicit way at very high resolution for a region within the global biodiversity hotspot of the Atlantic Forest. We classified current land-use cover in the region and simulated a natural regeneration scenario in abandoned pasturelands, areas where potential conflicts with agricultural production would be minimized and where some early stage regeneration is already occurring. We then modeled changes in biophysical functions for climate change mitigation and sediment retention, and performed an economic valuation of both ecosystem services. We also modeled how land-use changes affect habitat availability for species. We found that natural regeneration can provide significant ecological and social benefits. Economic values of climate change mitigation and sediment retention alone could completely compensate for the opportunity costs of agricultural production over 20 yr. Habitat availability is improved for three species with different dispersal abilities, although by different magnitudes. Improving the understanding of how costs and benefits of natural regeneration are distributed can be useful to design incentive structures that bring farmers' decision making more in line with societal benefits. This alignment is crucial for natural regeneration to fulfill its potential as a large-scale solution for pressing local and global environmental challenges.
The role of palaeoecology in reconciling biodiversity conservation, livelihoods and carbon storage in Madagascar			Planting trees is proposed as an important climate mitigation tool, but can be detrimental to biodiversity and livelihoods if not carefully planned and managed, with landscape history and livelihoods in mind. In Madagascar, deforestation is of concern, and a threat to forest-adapted biota. However, much of Madagascar's landscape harbours ancient mosaic and open ecosystems that are home to unique suites of flora and fauna and provide a wide range of ecosystem services. Though guidelines for ecologically and socially responsible reforestation are emerging, the potential role of landscape history and palaeoecology has been generally underemphasised. Here, using Madagascar as a case study, we argue that forest restoration projects need a sound understanding of landscape history that includes a greater integration of palaeoecological data. This would help establish the former composition and extent of forests and also investigate the antiquity of open and mosaic ecosystems. When economic interests are strong, information from palaeoecology and environmental history can help reduce biases when identifying appropriate locations and suites of species for forestation. Furthermore, a reflective approach to landscape history can contribute to restoration projects that integrate cultural and livelihood considerations. A transdisciplinary approach that considers local needs and cultural context can facilitate the design and implementation of restoration projects that share benefits equitably. Underpinning this ambition is a more comprehensive consideration of ecosystem service benefits in a changing climate that includes accurate carbon storage calculations, as well as other ecosystem services including water provision, soil formation and erosion prevention, grazing resources, medicine and cultural components.
The role of phosphorus dynamics in tropical forests - a modeling study using CLM-CNP			Tropical forests play a significant role in the global carbon cycle and global climate. However, tropical carbon cycling and the feedbacks from tropical ecosystems to the climate system remain critical uncertainties in the current generation of carbon-climate models. One of the major uncertainties comes from the lack of representation of phosphorus (P), currently believed to be the most limiting nutrient in tropical regions. Here we introduce P dynamics and C-N-P interactions into the CLM4-CN (Community Land Model version 4 with prognostic Carbon and Nitrogen) model and investigate the role of P cycling in controlling the productivity of tropical ecosystems. The newly developed CLM-CNP model includes all major biological and geochemical processes controlling P availability in soils and the interactions between C, N, and P cycles. Model simulations at sites along a Hawaiian soil chronosequence indicate that the introduction of P limitation greatly improved the model performance at the P-limited site. The model is also able to capture the shift in nutrient limitation along this chronosequence (from N limited to P limited), as shown in the comparison of model simulated plant responses to fertilization with the observed data. Model simulations at Amazonian forest sites show that CLM-CNP is capable of capturing the overall trend in NPP (net primary production) along the P availability gradient. This comparison also suggests a significant interaction between nutrient limitation and land use history. Model experiments under elevated atmospheric CO2 ([CO2]) conditions suggest that tropical forest responses to increasing [CO2] will interact strongly with changes in the P cycle. We highlight the importance of two feedback pathways (biochemical mineralization and desorption of secondary mineral P) that can significantly affect P availability and determine the extent of P limitation in tropical forests under elevated [CO2]. Field experiments with elevated CO2 are therefore needed to help quantify these important feedbacks. CO2 doubling model experiments show that tropical forest response to elevated [CO2] can only be predicted if the interactions between C cycle and nutrient dynamics are well understood and represented in models. Predictive modeling of C-nutrient interactions will have important implications for the prediction of future carbon uptake and storage in tropical ecosystems and global climate change.
The role of plant diversity in the functioning of ecosystems: from mechanisms to real-world applications			0
The role of wild palms in agroforestry systems in the Neotropics: A review			Wild palms are among the most important plants in the Neotropics due to their wide distribution, species richness and cultural relevance for humans. In addition to their presence in forests, these plants also occur in anthropogenic systems throughout their range of distribution, but their role in these systems is often overlooked. We explored databases of scientific publications to attain a panorama about the presence of wild palm species in agroforestry systems (AFS), their management and their role in those systems. Our keywords in the search engines were names of palm genera that occur in the Americas and types of agroforestry practices. We gathered and analysed information from 154 studies. For each record, we registered: study sites, management actions, agroforestry practices and uses. We identified 65 species belonging to 24 genera managed in AFS, mainly including agrisilvicultural and silvopastoral systems, homegardens and agroforests. We identified traits phylogenetically determined such as stem height, number and length of leaves, and fruit size that influence the presence of wild palms in AFS. Furthermore, we point out three major ways that favour the presence and management of palms in AFS: (1) the management of the canopy and the raise of palms in the understorey, (2) intentional enhancement or cultivation and (3) tolerance of palms during deforestation/fragmentation. We emphasize that a change in the vision of palms as key components of agroforestry would favour future research and plans to improve their performance in these systems while ensuring their conservation.Read the free Plain Language Summary for this article on the Journal blog.Debido a su amplia distribuci & oacute;n, riqueza de especies y la relevancia cultural de las mismas, las palmas silvestres son uno de los grupos de plantas m & aacute;s importantes del Neotr & oacute;pico. Adem & aacute;s de estar presentes en los bosques, pueden encontrarse en sistemas de origen antr & oacute;pico en todo su rango de distribuci & oacute;n; no obstante, su papel en estos sistemas es subestimado. Buscamos informaci & oacute;n en art & iacute;culos publicados en bases de datos cient & iacute;ficas para obtener un panorama acerca de la presencia de las especies de palmas silvestres en sistemas agroforestales (SAF), su manejo y el papel que desempe & ntilde;an en tales sistemas. Nuestras cadenas de b & uacute;squeda incluyeron los g & eacute;neros de palmas distribuidos en la regi & oacute;n Neotropical y descriptores de pr & aacute;cticas agroforestales. Reunimos y analizamos un total de 154 estudios. Para cada registro anotamos la especie involucrada, el sitio del estudio, las acciones de manejo, las pr & aacute;cticas agroforestales y los usos m & aacute;s populares. Identificamos 65 especies pertenecientes a 24 g & eacute;neros, los cuales son manejados en SAF tales como sistemas silvoagr & iacute;colas y silvopastoriles, huertos caseros y agrobosques. Identificamos que rasgos tales como la longitud del tallo, el n & uacute;mero y la longitud de las hojas y el tama & ntilde;o de los frutos, los cuales est & aacute;n filogen & eacute;ticamente determinados, influencian la presencia de las especies de palmas en los SAF. Asimismo, se & ntilde;alamos tres v & iacute;as principales que favorecen la presencia y el manejo de estas plantas en dichos sistemas: (1) el manejo de doseles y cuidado de las palmas en el sotobosque, (2) el cultivo o aumento intencional, y (3) la tolerancia de las palmas durante procesos de deforestaci & oacute;n o fragmentaci & oacute;n de los bosques. Enfatizamos que un cambio de visi & oacute;n de las palmas como un componente clave para la agroforester & iacute;a favorecer & iacute;a futuras investigaciones y planes para mejorar su desempe & ntilde;o en estos sistemas, a la vez que contribuir & iacute;a a su conservaci & oacute;n.
The socio-ecological implications of shifting patterns of cropland use in northeast China			Globally, mid -latitude Mollisol regions are vital breadbasket areas, but their ecosystems are being exhausted by overproduction. Understanding the evolution of agricultural practices and the associated consequences across different socio-ecological contexts is crucial for planning future crop production. Most studies to date have focused mainly on tropical regions, and have concentrated on fixed effects while overlooking spatiotemporal heterogeneity. We present an important case study from northeast China, using shifting patterns of cropland expansion, intensification and specialization from 2000 to 2019 to demonstrate how agricultural practices have evolved and encroached on natural resources. The locational Gini coefficient, revised universal soil loss equation, modified InVEST models, and geographically and temporally weighted regression model were applied to estimate the underlying socio-ecological implications. The results indicated that, cropland expansion (+44.22 %) and specialization were prominent, with grain cultivation increasing to almost 87 % while crop diversity was drastically reduced. Cropland intensification revealed a homogenizing transition, with an increase in machinery power (+97.25 %) and fertilizer (+28.80 %) applications. In the northern Songnen Plain and Sanjiang Plain, alongside expansion, cropland distributions have changed, with the majority of intensification and specialization indicators being pushed to higher latitudes. For example, maize production has driven soybean production to the Lesser Khingan Mountains, and rice has been transferred from the Liaohe Plain to Sanjiang Plain. During 2000-2019, some social indicators, including rural household income, grain production and inequality of agricultural development, improved, but not necessarily in relation to the changes in cropland use. Cropland expansion was beneficial to grain production, but detrimental to spatial equality. Water stress and pollution were identified as major ecological threats as a result of cropland expansion. Carbon sequestration also experienced an expansion -driven increase, but at the expense of crucial local ecosystems with higher carbon densities. Although the overall quality of natural habitats had improved, these habitats were threatened by most of the changes witnessed on the plains. Soil loss was sensitive to expansion in hilly reclaimed areas, but in Songnen Plain and Liaohe Plain, where conservation tillage has been promoted, intensification and specialization pressures were mitigated. A northwards shift of cropland distribution is currently a primary driver of the intensifying socioecological implications, representing the ongoing adaption of farming in marginal areas. The intensification and specialization of agricultural practices in Mollisol regions should be the focus for addressing the necessary future reconciliation of agriculture and nature.
The stability of tropical rainforest margins, linking ecological, economic and social constraints of land use and conservation — an introduction			Tropical rainforests disappear at an alarming rate causing unprecedented losses in biodiversity and ecosystem services (Hughes et al. 1997, Noble & Dirzo 1997, Tilman et al. 2001, Achard et al. 2002) with Southeast Asia showing the highest rates of deforestation of any major tropical region (Sodhi et al. 2004). Despite an increased recognition of the value of these goods at national and international levels, rainforests continue to be seriously threatened by various forms of encroachments such as low-intensity harvesting of non-timber forest products by the rural poor, large-scale plantation forestry by the state or private actors, and the conversion of forested land by smallholder farmers. Transformation of ecosystems and changes in land use affect important ecosystem services and ultimatively human well-being (Robertson & Swinton 2005). © 2007, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
The Structure, Distribution, and Biomass of the World's Forests			Forests are the dominant terrestrial ecosystem on Earth. We review the environmental factors controlling their structure and global distribution and evaluate their current and future trajectory. Adaptations of trees to climate and resource gradients, coupled with disturbances and forest dynamics, create complex geographical patterns in forest assemblages and structures. These patterns are increasingly discernible through new satellite and airborne observation systems, improved forest inventories, and global ecosystem models. Forest biomass is a complex property affected by forest distribution, structure, and ecological processes. Since at least 1990, biomass density has consistently increased in global established forests, despite increasing mortality in some regions, suggesting that a global driver such as elevated CO2 may be enhancing biomass gains. Global forests have also apparently become more dynamic. Advanced information about the structure, distribution, and biomass of the world's forests provides critical ecological insights and opportunities for sustainable forest management and enhancing forest conservation and ecosystem services.
The Utility of Spatially-Patterned Restoration Methods in California Inland Grasslands			0
The Value of Forest Ecosystem Services to Developing Economies			0
The value of local ecological knowledge to guide tree species selection in tropical dry forest restoration			Forest restoration projects involving active planting should prioritize species that are useful to local communities, while also considering species' threat status and resistance to local stress factors, but scientific knowledge on these criteria is scarce, especially in understudied tropical ecosystems. We hypothesized that local ecological knowledge can help to fill this gap. Through interviews with 47 local experts and 197 randomly selected households in 8 rural communities of the tropical dry forests of northwestern Peru and southern Ecuador, we identified the species perceived as most useful, most threatened, and most resistant to local stress factors. To better understand the studied local ecological knowledge, we also explored the following research questions and their implications for species selection decisions: (1) How does species' potential usefulness compare to their active use? (2) How does species' perceived threat status relate to their usefulness? (3) Does local knowledge on species' resistance to local stress factors corroborate scientific knowledge? We found large differences between the potential and active use of species and illustrate how data on both can yield useful insights. Furthermore, we found that species' perceived threat status was mainly linked to their usefulness for construction wood, and that the vast majority of local perceptions on species' threat status and stress resistance coincided with scientific knowledge. Our findings illustrate the large potential of local ecological knowledge for improving species selection strategies and thereby increasing the success of forest restoration efforts worldwide.
Theory and application of medium-term successional dynamics in secondary tropical forest			There is a growing need to restore extensive areas of degraded habitat in tropical areas to forest in order to conserve biodiversity, mitigate the impacts of climate change (through carbon sequestration), reduce erosion and loss of topsoil, and provide for human livelihoods, yet little is known about how well tropical forest restoration strategies work beyond the first few years of establishment. This long-term experiment aims to address two key questions about tropical forest recovery.  First, the research compares natural forest recovery to two different forest restoration approaches (a low and high intensity approach) to assess how the degree of human intervention affects the rate of tropical forest recovery.  Second, the study evaluates the importance of the proximity of restored sites to remnant forest patches, which can serve as a source for colonizing plants and animals.  Results of this study will provide critical guidance to land managers and policy makers on how to most effectively invest limited resources to improve the outcomes of the millions of hectares of tropical forest restoration being undertaken globally. The study will provide training for graduate and undergraduate students, and new inquiry-based learning program will actively engage high school students in the research. Over a decade ago, 13 experimental sites were established over a 100 square kilometer area in southern Costa Rica, each site with a range of surrounding forest cover. Each site has three experimental treatments: 1. no tree planting and natural recovery; 2. planting tree islands of three sizes (low intensity); and 3. planting the entire plot with trees (high intensity). Researchers will collect data on metrics to assess the next phase of forest succession, including measuring soil nutrients, local microclimate, seed dispersal, tree growth, and the establishment and survival of forest seedlings.  In addition, plots will be used by collaborating scientists to study other facets of forest recovery such as insect community dynamics, and bird and bat behavior. The data will be used to address several questions about mid-stage forest recovery and how the pattern of recovery can change over time including: the effect of restoration interventions on within- and across-site biodiversity; the degree to which manipulations of initial conditions result in convergent or divergent successional trajectories from reference forest; and the relative importance of local- versus landscape-scale processes on forest recovery.
Thermally buffered microhabitats recovery in tropical secondary forests following land abandonment			Given the dramatic loss of tropical forests and accelerating climate change, secondary forest regeneration is increasingly recognised as being an important method for reversing losses in biodiversity and carbon stocks. The recolonisation of biodiversity within secondary forests depends in part upon the recovery of forest structure, including the range of microhabitats used by diverse local communities. Here, we investigate the return of critical microhabitats along a successional gradient of secondary forest in the Tropical Andes of Colombia. We measured the abundance of live (bromeliads, tree ferns and moss) and dead (deadwood and leaf litter) microhabitats across three landscapes, each encompassing primary, and young (4–18 yr old) and old secondary forests (19–35 yr old). Considering the increasing rate of climate warming in the region, we also explored whether these microhabitats provide thermally buffered microclimates. We found that secondary forests have different composition and lower complexity of microhabitats than primary forests, but microhabitats appear to be recovering towards primary forest levels. Furthermore, in all forest types, microhabitats had lower maximum temperatures and higher minimum temperatures, thereby serving as thermal buffers that reduced exposure to extreme temperatures. These benefits exist despite ambient temperatures in secondary forests surpassing those of primary forests by 1–2 °C on average. The protection of secondary forest and promotion of further forest regrowth in the Tropical Andes should represent an urgent investment for conservation, and the value of these forests for offering critical microhabitats and buffered microclimates under climate change should not be overlooked. © 2016 Elsevier Ltd
Thinning Effects on the Tree Height-Diameter Allometry of Masson Pine (Pinus massoniana Lamb.)			The stem height-diameter allometric relationship is fundamental in determining forest and ecosystem structures as well as in estimating tree volume, biomass, and carbon stocks. Understanding the effects of silvicultural practices on tree height-diameter allometry is necessary for sustainable forest management, though the impact of measures such as thinning on the allometric relationship remain understudied. In the present study, the effects of thinning on tree height-diameter allometry were evaluated using Masson pine height and diameter growth data from a plantation experiment that included unthinned and thinned treatments with different intensities. To determine whether thinning altered the height-diameter allometry rhythm, the optimal height-diameter model was identified and dummy variable methods were used to investigate the differences among model parameters for different thinning treatments. Periodic (annual) allometric coefficients were calculated based on height and diameter increment data and were modeled using the generalized additive mixed model (GAMM) to further illustrate the response of tree height-diameter allometry to different thinning treatments over time. Significant differences were detected among the parameters of the optimal height-diameter model (power function) for different thinning treatments, which indicated that the pattern of the height-diameter allometry relationship of Masson pine was indeed altered by thinning treatments. Results also indicated a nonlinear trend in the allometric relationship through time which was significantly affected by thinning. The height-diameter allometric coefficient exhibited a unimodal convex bell curve with time in unthinned plots, and thinning significantly interfered with the original trend of the height-diameter allometric coefficient. Thinning caused trees to increase diameter growth at the expense of height growth, resulting in a decrease of the ratio of tree height to diameter, and this trend was more obvious as the thinning intensity increased.
Thinning temporarily stimulates tree regeneration in a restored tropical forest			When an ecosystem undergoing restoration does not follow the desired trajectory, management interventions may be warranted. Where the initial steps towards restoration include tree planting at high densities, reduction of stand basal area (BA) by overstory thinning is a potential adaptive management tool to stimulate natural regeneration, although it can also damage young plants. We ask how tree regeneration in a restored tropical forest responds to different intensities of thinning. We applied two intensities of thinning to a 22-yr-old restored forest in southeastern Brazil and then sampled seedlings and saplings before and over an eight year period after thinning; unthinned plots were retained as controls. Thinning impacts on the woody understory were negligible, far below annual mortality in control plots. Positive responses to thinning were stronger in the treatment with low remaining basal area (ca. 30% below the reference forests), with increases in seedling density, numbers of recruits, and seedling-to-sapling and sapling-to-tree transitions. Understory dynamics were clearly intensified by gap opening, with a pulse of natural regeneration in the first years after thinning. These changes, however, were not simultaneous and did not usually persist over time. Rarefied richness of the understory increased over time after all treatments and changes in species composition of saplings were enhanced by thinning. Our study gives support to selective timber harvests from restored tropical forests insofar as thinning did not threaten the understory and stimulated natural regeneration. Frequency and intensity of thinning operations, however, should be locally adjusted based on monitoring data.
Threats to intact tropical peatlands and opportunities for their conservation			Large, intact areas of tropical peatland are highly threatened at a global scale by the expansion of commercial agriculture and other forms of economic development. Conserving peatlands on a landscape scale, with their hydrology intact, is of international conservation importance to preserve their distinctive biodiversity and ecosystem services and maintain their resilience to future environmental change. We explored threats to and opportunities for conserving remaining intact tropical peatlands; thus, we excluded peatlands of Indonesia and Malaysia, where extensive deforestation, drainage, and conversion to plantations means conservation in this region can protect only small fragments of the original ecosystem. We focused on a case study, the Pastaza-Marañón Foreland Basin (PMFB) in Peru, which is among the largest known intact tropical peatland landscapes in the world and is representative of peatland vulnerability. Maintenance of the hydrological conditions critical for carbon storage and ecosystem function of peatlands is, in the PMFB, primarily threatened by expansion of commercial agriculture linked to new transport infrastructure that is facilitating access to remote areas. There remain opportunities in the PMFB and elsewhere to develop alternative, more sustainable land-use practices. Although some of the peatlands in the PMFB fall within existing legally protected areas, this protection does not include the most carbon-dense (domed pole forest) areas. New carbon-based conservation instruments (e.g., REDD+, Green Climate Fund), developing markets for sustainable peatland products, transferring land title to local communities, and expanding protected areas offer pathways to increased protection for intact tropical peatlands in Amazonia and elsewhere, such as those in New Guinea and Central Africa which remain, for the moment, broadly beyond the frontier of commercial development. © 2017 The Authors. Conservation Biology published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of Society for Conservation Biology.
Threshold responses of soil organic carbon concentration and composition to multi-level nitrogen addition in a temperate needle-broadleaved forest			Responses of soil organic carbon (SOC) cycling and C budget in forest ecosystems to elevated nitrogen (N) deposition are divergent. Little is known about the N critical loads for the shift between gain and loss of SOC storage in the old-growth temperate forest of Northeast China. The objective of this study was to investigate the nonlinear responses of SOC concentration and composition to multiple rates of N addition, as well as the microbial mechanisms responsible for SOC alteration under N enrichment. Nine rates of urea addition (0, 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 100, 120, 140 kg N ha(-1) year(-1)) with 4 replicates for each treatment were conducted. Soil samples in the 0-10 cm mineral layer were taken after 3 years of N fertilization. Soil aggregate size distribution and SOC physical fractionation were performed to examine SOC dynamics. Phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) technique was used to measure the abundance and structure of microbial community. Three years of N addition led to significant increases in the concentrations of soil particulate organic C and aggregate-associated organic C fractions only. The responses of total N and each labile SOC fraction to the rates of N addition followed Gaussian equations, with the N critical loads being estimated to be between 80 and 100 kg N ha(-1) year(-1). The change in SOC concentration (Delta SOC) was positively correlated with the changes in aggregate associated OC (r(2) > 0.80) and POC concentrations (r(2) > 0.50). Significant correlations among the concentrations of labile SOC fractions, the percentages of soil aggregates, and the abundances of microbial PLFAs were observed, which implies a close linkage between microbial community structure and SOC accumulation and stability. Our results suggest that increase in soil moisture and shift of microbial community structure could control the critical N load for the switch between C accumulation and loss. The current N deposition rate (similar to 11 kg N ha(-1) year(-1)) to the northeast China's forests is favorable for soil C accumulation over the short term.
To pay or not to pay? Monitoring performance and enforcing conditionality when paying for forest conservation in Mexico			Paying landowners to conserve forests is a promising new strategy to protect biodiversity and ecosystem services. However to succeed with this approach, programme managers need reliable monitoring data to make informed payment decisions. This includes withholding payment from landowners who do not meet conservation objectives. The monitoring method used for the Monarch Butterfly Conservation Fund compared aerial photographs and conducted field sampling to identify forest changes. The comparison of aerial photographs showed that 161 hectares of forest were degraded in the central core zone of the Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve in Mexico between 2001 and 2003. As a result, payment was withheld from one of 13 landowners. Analysis of high resolution (0.6 m) digital aerial photographs did not detect finer scale changes, despite obtaining an average pixel resolution 1000 times greater than Landsat satellite imagery. This suggests that current payment for ecosystem services programmes are underestimating environmental change and overpaying non-compliant participants. In addition, selecting a decision rule to enforce payment conditionality raised new questions about how much ecosystem degradation should be permitted before withholding payment. Sound decisions about withholding payment cannot be developed until the marginal value of ecosystem services is better understood. Until then, payment thresholds can be based on specific policy objectives.
To What Extent Are Cattle Ranching Landholders Willing to Restore Ecosystem Services? Constructing a Micro-Scale PES Scheme in Southern Costa Rica			Deforestation and the unsustainable management of agricultural and livestock production systems in tropical mountain areas have caused fragmented and degraded landscapes. Payment for ecosystem services (PES) could be an effective policy instrument with which to reduce deforestation and restore disturbed ecosystems. The national-scale PES program in Costa Rica is recognized as being successful; however, its financial resources have been mostly dedicated to forest protection, and much less to reforestation projects. This paper aims to construct a micro-scale PES scheme by using primary data generated through spatial modeling and socio-economic and stated preference surveys (choice experiment) in southern Costa Rica. The results suggest that, on average, landholders would agree to implement restoration projects on their own private pasturelands if an appropriate holistic place-based approach was applied encompassing biophysical, social, economic, and institutional aspects. Willingness-to-accept values allow payments to be linked to cattle farmers' estimates of specific ecosystem services (ES) and land opportunity costs. The economic valuation of three ESs (erosion control, water availability, and biodiversity) allows construction of a layered payment scheme, which could encourage the development of a potential partnership between national and local institutions and NGOs as alternative buyers of ESs, reduce transaction costs, and improve household well-being.
Too rare for non-timber resource harvest? Meso-scale composition and distribution of arborescent palms in an Amazonian sustainable-use forest			Arborescent palms can provide an important source of non-timber forest products (NTFPs) within tropical forest REDD+ frameworks. To identify the NTFP potential of arborescent palms, we examined meso-scale patterns of abundance and distribution within a sustainable-use protected area in the eastern Brazilian Amazon. To understand the environmental correlates of observed patterns we evaluated the effects of topography, hydrography and geographic space on the presence, density and biomass of adult arborescent palms. Adult palms were sampled in 30 (250 × 20 m) plots systematically distributed within a 25-km2 grid. Topographic and hydrographic variables were derived from a remotely sensed digital elevation model. Spatial correlations in the explanatory and response variables were examined using Mantel tests and GLMs. To test for evidence of dispersal limitation, semi-variograms were used to examine spatial patterns in GLM residuals. Adult arborescent palms were rare occurring in only 12 of the 30 plots. In total, we recorded 118 individuals from six species (Bactris maraja, Euterpe oleracea, Iriartella setigera, Oenocarpus bacaba, Oenocarpus bataua and Oenocarpus minor). This corresponded to a mean live aboveground biomass per plot of 0.85 Mg ha−1 (range: 0–28.1 Mg ha−1). Hydrographic and topographic variables suggest that environmental conditions are suitable for E. oleracea, an economically important species. The presence, biomass, and density of palms were uncorrelated with geographic distances among plots. The hydrographic model significantly explained variation in palm presence and biomass, whereas density was only explained by the topographic model. Our findings indicate that arborescent palms are currently too rare to be efficiently harvested as NTFPs in the study area. Yet, comparisons with published estimates suggest that there is significant potential for agroforestry to facilitate the commercialization of palm NTFPs for community based extractive activities. © 2016 Elsevier B.V.
Top Canopy Height and Stem Size Variation Enhance Aboveground Biomass across Spatial Scales in Seasonal Tropical Forests			Tropical forests are biologically diverse and structurally complex ecosystems that can store a large quantity of carbon and support a great variety of plant and animal species. However, tropical forest structure can vary dramatically within seemingly homogeneous landscapes due to subtle changes in topography, soil fertility, species composition and past disturbances. Although numerous studies have reported the effects of field-based stand structure attributes on aboveground biomass (AGB) in tropical forests, the relative effects and contributions of UAV LiDAR-based canopy structure and ground-based stand structural attributes in shaping AGB remain unclear. Here, we hypothesize that mean top-of-canopy height (TCH) enhances AGB directly and indirectly via species richness and horizontal stand structural attributes, but these positive relationships are stronger at a larger spatial scale. We used a combined approach of field inventory and LiDAR-based remote sensing to explore how stand structural attributes (stem abundance, size variation and TCH) and tree species richness affect AGB along an elevational gradient in tropical forests at two spatial scales, i.e., 20 m x 20 m (small scale), and 50 m x 50 m (large scale) in southwest China. Specifically, we used structural equation models to test the proposed hypothesis. We found that TCH, stem size variation and abundance were strongly positively associated with AGB at both spatial scales, in addition to which increasing TCH led to greater AGB indirectly through increased stem size variation. Species richness had negative to negligible influences on AGB, but species richness increased with increasing stem abundance at both spatial scales. Our results suggest that light capture and use, modulated by stand structure, are key to promoting high AGB stocks in tropical forests. Thus, we argue that both horizontal and vertical stand structures are important for shaping AGB, but the relative contributions vary across spatial scales in tropical forests. Importantly, our results highlight the importance of including vertical forest stand attributes for predicting AGB and carbon sequestration that underpins human wellbeing.
Toward a whole-landscape approach for sustainable land use in the tropics			Increasing food production and mitigating climate change are two primary but seemingly contradictory objectives for tropical landscapes. This special feature examines synergies and trade-offs among these objectives. Four themes emerge from the papers: the important roles of both forest and agriculture sectors for climate mitigation in tropical countries; the minor contribution from deforestation-related agricultural expansion to overall food production at global and continental scales; the opportunities for synergies between improved food production and reductions in greenhouse gas emissions through diversion of agricultural expansion to already-cleared lands, improved soil, crop, and livestock management, and agroforestry; and the need for targeted policy and management interventions to make these synergistic opportunities a reality. We conclude that agricultural intensification is a key factor to meet dual objectives of food production and climate mitigation, but there is no single panacea for balancing these objectives in all tropical landscapes. Place-specific strategies for sustainable land use emerge from assessments of current land use, demographics, and other biophysical and socioeconomic characteristics, using a whole-landscape, multisector perspective.
Toward an integrated monitoring framework to assess the effects of tropical forest degradation and recovery on carbon stocks and biodiversity			Tropical forests harbor a significant portion of global biodiversity and are a critical component of the climate system. Reducing deforestation and forest degradation contributes to global climate-change mitigation efforts, yet emissions and removals from forest dynamics are still poorly quantified. We reviewed the main challenges to estimate changes in carbon stocks and biodiversity due to degradation and recovery of tropical forests, focusing on three main areas: (1) the combination of field surveys and remote sensing; (2) evaluation of biodiversity and carbon values under a unified strategy; and (3) research efforts needed to understand and quantify forest degradation and recovery. The improvement of models and estimates of changes of forest carbon can foster process-oriented monitoring of forest dynamics, including different variables and using spatially explicit algorithms that account for regional and local differences, such as variation in climate, soil, nutrient content, topography, biodiversity, disturbance history, recovery pathways, and socioeconomic factors. Generating the data for these models requires affordable large-scale remote-sensing tools associated with a robust network of field plots that can generate spatially explicit information on a range of variables through time. By combining ecosystem models, multiscale remote sensing, and networks of field plots, we will be able to evaluate forest degradation and recovery and their interactions with biodiversity and carbon cycling. Improving monitoring strategies will allow a better understanding of the role of forest dynamics in climate-change mitigation, adaptation, and carbon cycle feedbacks, thereby reducing uncertainties in models of the key processes in the carbon cycle, including their impacts on biodiversity, which are fundamental to support forest governance policies, such as Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation.
Towards accurate mapping of forest in tropical landscapes: A comparison of datasets on how forest transition matters			Tropical forests represent half of the Earth's remaining forest area, but they are shrinking at high rates, which poses a threat to their multiple ecosystem services. As a response, international environmental agreements and related programs require information about tropical forested landscapes. Despite the increasing quantity and quality of remote sensing-based data, the effective monitoring of forests in the tropics still faces operational challenges: (a) applicability at local levels, with lack of reference or cloud-free information; (b) overcoming geographical, ecological, or biophysical variability; (c): stratification, distinguishing forest categories related to functionality and disturbance history. We conducted an extensive ground verification campaign through 36 landscapes in 9 regions of Zambia, Ecuador and Philippines, which constitute a gradient of pantropical deforestation contexts or forest transitions. We collected over 16,000 ground control points and digitized over 18,000 ha with details on land use and forest disturbance history. We trained a random forest algorithm and generated high-resolution (30 m) binary forest maps covering ~15 Mha, building on 39 optical (Landsat-8), radar (Sentinel-1) and elevation bands, indices and textures. We validated the quality of the outputs across the studied deforestation gradient and compared them to (a): 3 national land cover maps used for international reporting, (b): 4 global forest datasets (Global Forest Change, Copernicus Land Cover, JAXA and TanDEM-X Forest/Non-Forest). Our method generated highly accurate (92%) forest maps for the studied regions when compared to the global datasets, which generally overestimated forest cover. We achieved accuracies similar to the national maps, following a standardized method for all countries. The difficulties in delineating forest increased in more advanced stages of deforestation, with recurring struggles to distinguish non-forest tree-based systems (e.g. perennials, palms, or agroforestry), shrublands and grasslands. Regrowth forests were repeatedly misclassified across contexts, countries and datasets, in contrast to reference or degraded forests. Our results highlight the importance of in situ verification as accompanying method to establish efficient forest monitoring systems, especially in areas with higher rates of forest cover change and in tropical regions of advanced deforestation or early reforestation stages. These are precisely the areas where current REDD+ or Forest Landscape Restoration initiatives take place.
Towards data-driven tropical forest restoration: Uncovering spatial variation, interactions and historical management effects on nutrients along soil depth gradients			Data scarcity hinders global conservation initiatives, and there is a pressing demand for spatially detailed soil and species data to restore human-altered tropical forests. We, therefore, aimed to generate foundational soil environment and habitat suitability data and high-resolution soil maps to aid restoration efforts in a critical ecosystem of the threatened Indo-Burma Biodiversity Hotspot region, i.e., Tarap Hill Reserve (THR) in Bangladesh. Using multiple soil depths and vegetation data, we answered three major questions. (QI) How do spatial distribution and the relationships between soil physicochemical properties (i.e., pH, sand, silt, and clay percentages, organic carbon, and nutrients – N, P, K, Ca, Mg, Fe, and Zn) vary from surface to deeper soils (top 1 m)? (QII) How do different forest management interventions, i.e., old-growth forests (OGF), mixed plantations (MXP), and mono-specific plantations (MOP), influence soil properties, nutrients, and carbon in different soil depths? (QIII) Which spatial interpolation methods are best suited for making more accurate soil property predictions at different depths? Our analyses reveal decreasing availability of critical nutrients like N, P, Mg, and Fe from surface to subsurface soils, while pH, soil organic carbon, and clay content increased with depth. Several soil properties showed significant interactions, although the strength of the interactions changed from surface to deeper soils. Besides, forest management interventions significantly influenced soil functionality by having higher nutrient availability and soil organic carbon in OGF than MXP and MOP. Predictive performances of the deterministic and geostatistical interpolation methods varied for different soil properties in different soil depths, and soil maps revealed substantial heterogeneity in the distribution of soil properties across space and along depths. This study represents a pioneering step in data-driven tropical forest restoration, and our novel findings and high-resolution soil maps could guide future studies focusing on species habitat preferences, restoration ecology, and spatial conservation planning in the Indo-Burma Biodiversity Hotspot region and elsewhere in the tropics. © 2024 Elsevier B.V.
Towards more effective integration of tropical forest restoration and conservation			Conservation and restoration interventions can be mutually reinforcing and are converging through an increased focus on social dimensions. This paper examines how to more effectively integrate the complementary goals of conservation and restoration of tropical forests. Forest conservation and restoration interventions are integral components of a broad approach to forest ecosystem and landscape management that aims to maintain and restore key ecological processes and enhance human well-being, while minimizing biodiversity loss. The forest transition model provides a useful framework for understanding the relative importance of forest conservation and restoration interventions in different regions. Harmonizing conservation and restoration presents serious challenges for forest policy in tropical countries, particularly regarding the use and management of secondary forests, fallow vegetation, and forests degraded by logging and fire. Research to implement restoration more effectively in tropical regions can be stimulated by transforming questions that initially focused on conservation issues. Examination of papers published in Biotropica from 2000-2018 shows that most studies relevant to tropical forest conservation do not address forest restoration issues. Forest restoration studies, on the other hand, show a consistent association with conservation issues. There is much scope for further integration of conservation and restoration in research, practice, and policy. Securing a sustainable future for tropical forests requires developing and applying integrated approaches to landscape management that effectively combine knowledge and tools from multiple disciplines with practical experience and engagement of local stakeholders. in Portuguese is available with online material.
Towards productive landscapes: Trade-offs in tree-cover and income across a matrix of smallholder agricultural land-use systems			One of the main causes of tropical forest loss is conversion to agriculture, which is constantly increasing as a dominant land cover in the tropics. The loss of forests greatly affects biodiversity and ecosystem services. This paper assesses the economic return from increasing tree cover in agricultural landscapes in two tropical locations, West Java, Indonesia and eastern Bangladesh. Agroforestry systems are compared with subsistence seasonal food-crop-based agricultural systems. Data were collected through rapid rural appraisal, field observation, focus groups and semi-structured interviews of farm households. The inclusion of agroforestry tree crops in seasonal agriculture improved the systems' overall economic performance (net present value), even when it reduced understorey crop production. However, seasonal agriculture has higher income per unit of land area used for crop cultivation compared with the tree establishment and development phase of agroforestry farms. Thus, there is a trade-off between short-term loss of agricultural income and longer-term economic gain from planting trees in farmland. For resource-poor farmers to implement this change, institutional support is needed to improve their knowledge and skills with this unfamiliar form of land management, sufficient capital for the initial investment, and an increase in the security of land tenure. (C) 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Towards Sustainability of Tropical Forests: Implications for Enhanced Carbon Stock and Climate Change Mitigation			Tropical forests constitute almost half of the global forest cover, account for 35% of the global net primary productivity and thereby have potential to contribute substantially to sequester atmospheric CO₂ and offset climate change impact. However, deforestation and degradation lead by unsustainable management of tropical forests contribute to the unprecedented species losses and limit ecosystem services including carbon sequestration. Sustainable forest management (SFM) in the tropics may tackle and rectify such deleterious impacts of anthropogenic disturbances and climatic changes. However, the existing dilemma on the definition of SFM and lack of understanding of how tropical forest sustainability can be achieved lead to increasing debate on whether climate change mitigation initiatives would be successful. We reviewed the available literature with a view to clarify the concept of sustainability and provide with a framework towards the sustainability of tropical forests for enhanced carbon stock and climate change mitigation. We argue that along with securing forest tenure and thereby reducing deforestation, application of reduced impact logging (RIL) and appropriate silvicultural system can enhance tropical forest carbon stock and help mitigate climate change.
Tracking carbon within the trees			0
Trade-offs among forest value components in community forests of southwestern Amazonia			Contemporary conservation interventions must balance potential trade-offs between multiple ecosystem services. In tropical forests, much attention has focused on the extent to which carbon-based conservation provided by REDD+ policies can also mitigate biodiversity conservation. In the nearly one-third of tropical forests that are community owned or managed, conservation strategies must also balance the multiple uses of forest products that support local livelihoods. Although much discussion has focused on policy options, little empirical evidence exists to evaluate the potential for trade-offs among different tropical forest value components. We assessed multiple components of forest value, including tree diversity, carbon stocks, and both timber and nontimber forest product resources, in forest communities across the trinational frontier of Brazil, Peru, and Bolivia. We installed 69 0.5-ha vegetation plots in local communities, and we characterized 15 components of forest value for each plot. Principal components analyses revealed two major axes of forest value, the first of which defined a trade-off between diversity of woody plant communities (taxonomic and functional) versus aboveground biomass and standing timber volume. The second axis described abundance of commercial species, with strong positive loadings for density of timber and nontimber forest products, including Brazil nut (Bertholletia excelsa) and copaiba oil (Copaifera spp.). The observed trade-off between different components of forest value suggests a potential for management conflicts prioritizing biodiversity conservation versus carbon stocks in the region. We discuss the potential for integrative indices of forest value for tropical forest conservation.
Trade-offs between biodiversity conservation and economic development in tropical forests			Biodiversity conservation and poverty alleviation are two of humanity's most significant challenges. Historically these problems have been tackled in isolation, yet it is becoming increasingly clear that they are inextricably linked and need to be dealt with together. Human well-being depends not only on the provision of food and water, but also on the preservation of other ecosystem services, including the conservation of species and ecosystems and the many benefits we derive from them. Nevertheless, balancing environmental and economic goals is difficult, and win-win solutions (where economic development and biodiversity conservation can occur in the same place) are very rare. Progress towards a sustainable economy requires meeting two challenges; first that we stand up to the problem of combining development and conservation goals, and second that we maximise our efficiency in devising strategies that satisfy both goals. In areas where there is strong competition for land it is vital that we understand the social and economic cost of taking conservation action. By embracing the human dimension of land-use planning this project will help provide the piece of the jigsaw necessary to lift conservation away from being an academic exercise to address real-world issues. Arguably the greatest cost of conservation action is the cost to society when protecting wildlife means lost economic opportunities / what economists call 'opportunity costs'. Yet how incompatible are different economic land-uses with the protection of native species? How much more money could potentially be made in any given landscape? Providing answers to these questions is an urgent task in the Brazilian Amazon, where aggressive economic growth and high rates of deforestation threaten the chance of sustainable development in the remaining forest. Understanding the overlap between biodiversity and economic land value is therefore key to developing more sustainable forest management, and is the primary aim of this research. During my earlier work in the Brazilian Amazon I showed that dung beetles and birds were both excellent indicators of human disturbance in forest ecosystems. I shall combine existing data on these species with new field studies, to understand the conservation value of different agricultural (e.g. soybean, cattle pastures, perennial crops) and forestry (e.g. selective logging and plantation forestry) land-uses. Work will be conducted in five areas of the Amazon, and will help determine the importance of different ecological and social factors that may influence economic land-use choices. I will also collect information on the potential increase in profits that could be gained from each area of land if it was put to a more productive use. These potential improvements in income are the opportunity costs to society by interventions to conserve wildlife (e.g. reserves and parks) and/or inefficient land-uses. Comparing conservation value with the cost of foregoing economic opportunities (e.g. moving from shade to sun coffee plantations) will allow me to quantify the trade-offs between immediate human needs and nature conservation. A range of outcomes are possible: some forms of land-use may incur limited ecological losses but allow significant economic gains, while other forms of intensification may be less compatible with conservation goals. The results of this project will provide a very practical step in addressing the call by the international community, articulated in the Rio Convention on Biological Diversity, for a unified approach to managing entire ecosystems. Specifically I will develop a tool for guiding strategic land-use planning that is able to identify both inefficiencies in current and planned land-uses, as well as methods of income generation that require minimal additional deforestation or habitat degradation.
Trade-offs between carbon stocks and timber recovery in tropical forests are mediated by logging intensity			Forest degradation accounts for 70% of total carbon losses from tropical forests. Substantial emissions are from selective logging, a land-use activity that decreases forest carbon density. To maintain carbon values in selectively logged forests, climate change mitigation policies and government agencies promote the adoption of reduced-impact logging (RIL) practices. However, whether RIL will maintain both carbon and timber values in managed tropical forests over time remains uncertain. In this study, we quantify the recovery of timber stocks and aboveground carbon at an experimental site where forests were subjected to different intensities of RIL (4, 8, and 16trees/ha). Our census data span 20years postlogging and 17years after the liberation of future crop trees from competition in a tropical forest on the Guiana Shield, a globally important forest carbon reservoir. We model recovery of timber and carbon with a breakpoint regression that allowed us to capture elevated tree mortality immediately after logging. Recovery rates of timber and carbon were governed by the presence of residual trees (i.e., trees that persisted through the first harvest). The liberation treatment stimulated faster recovery of timber albeit at a carbon cost. Model results suggest a threshold logging intensity beyond which forests managed for timber and carbon derive few benefits from RIL, with recruitment and residual growth not sufficient to offset losses. Inclusion of the breakpoint at which carbon and timber gains outpaced postlogging mortality led to high predictive accuracy, including out-of-sample R-2 values >90%, and enabled inference on demographic changes postlogging. Our modeling framework is broadly applicable to studies that aim to quantify impacts of logging on forest recovery. Overall, we demonstrate that initial mortality drives variation in recovery rates, that the second harvest depends on old growth wood, and that timber intensification lowers carbon stocks.
Trade-offs between ecosystem services and alternative pathways toward sustainability in a tropical dry forest region			The design of strategies aimed at sustainable resource management requires an understanding of the trade-offs between the ecosystem services at stake, to determine appropriate ways in which to navigate them. We assess trade-offs between forage production for cattle ranching and the maintenance of carbon stocks or tree diversity in a Mexican tropical dry forest. Trade-offs between pairs of services were assessed by identifying their efficiency frontiers at both site and landscape scales. We also estimated service outcomes under current and hypothetical land-management conditions. We found stark trade-offs between fodder and carbon stocks and between fodder and tree species richness at the site scale. At the landscape scale, the efficiency frontier was concave, with a much less pronounced trade-off in the fodder-species richness case. Our estimates of current service supply levels showed a reduction of 18-21% for C stock and 41-43% for fodder biomass, relative to the maximum feasible values along the efficiency frontier. Choice of the optimum management strategy to reduce such inefficiency depended on deforestation level: secondary forest regeneration was most suitable when deforestation is low, whereas increased fodder productivity in the pastures is best when deforestation is high. Pasture enrichment with forage trees and secondary forest growth are potential management alternatives for achieving sustainability given the range of enabling ecological factors and to balance ecological and social sustainability given the requirements and preferences of local stakeholders. Given that analogous trade-offs are found across the tropics, this work contributes to reconciling tropical forest maintenance and its use for sustainable rural livelihoods.
Trade-offs between tree cover, carbon storage and floristic biodiversity in reforesting landscapes			This study explores the relationships between an increase in tree cover area (i.e., natural and planted-tree land covers) and changes in forest carbon storage and the potential of a landscape to provide habitat for native floristic biodiversity. Four areas experiencing an increase in tree cover were analyzed. We developed a metric estimating the potential to support native biodiversity based on tree cover type (plantation or natural forests) and the landscape pattern of natural and anthropogenic land covers. We used published estimates for forest and plantation carbon stocks for each region. Focus regions in northwestern Costa Rica, northern Vietnam, southern Chile and highland Ecuador all showed an increase in tree cover area of 390 %, 260 %, 123 % and 418 %, respectively. Landscapes experiencing increases in natural secondary forest also experienced an increase in carbon stored above and below ground, and in the potential to support native floristic biodiversity. Study landscapes in Chile and Ecuador experiencing an expansion of exotic plantations saw their carbon stock decrease along with their potential to support native floristic biodiversity. This study shows that an increase in forest area does not necessarily imply an increased provision of ecosystem services when landscapes are reforesting with monoculture plantations of exotic tree species. Changes in the support of native biodiversity and the carbon stored in pulp rotation plantations, along with other ecosystem services, should be fully considered before implementing reforestation projects.
Trade-offs in linking adaptation and mitigation in the forests of the Congo Basin			Recent discussions on forests and climate change have highlighted the potential for conservation of tropical forests to contribute synergistically to both mitigation (reducing emissions of greenhouse gases) and adaptation ( increasing capacity to cope with changing climate conditions). Key mechanisms through which adaptive advantages might be gained include the potential for forest resources to support livelihoods in the context of climatic strains on agriculture and the protection that intact forest ecosystems might provide against landslides, flash floods and other hazards related to extreme weather. This paper presents findings from field research with forest communities in three areas of the Congo Basin in Central Africa, in which the adaptive role and potential of forests in these respects is critically analysed. The investigation was carried out through a combination of structured and semi-structured qualitative techniques within six villages in Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea and Rwanda. The findings of the research highlight the need to understand both the limits of synergy, and the constraints and trade-offs for rural livelihoods that may be associated with a forest conservation agenda driven by the additional impetus of carbon sequestration. The search for synergy may be conceptually laudable, but if forest management actions do not take account of on-the-ground contexts of constraints and social trade-offs then the result of those actions risks undermining wider livelihood resilience.
Traditional home garden agro-biodiversity dynamics, agro-ecosystem services, and management practices in smallholder farmers setting, South-Central Ethiopia			Traditional home gardens are rich in agro-biodiversity and are crucial for improving and diversifying the livelihood of smallholder farmers. Though many researches are carried out on home gardens in tropical regions, there are only few studies on the dynamics of traditional home gardens, agro-ecosystem services, indigenous management practices, and roles in mitigating climate shocks, which is the objective of the present study. For the same purpose, three sites were purposively selected out of which 308 sample smallholder households were chosen using a simple random sampling technique for a household survey. Key informant interviews, focus group discussions, and field observations were also used to collect data for cross-checking the data collected through the house hold survey. Results demonstrate that there was a wide-ranging diversity of crops in traditional home garden landscape. Both annual and perennial crops were incorporated into the home gardens to enhance their multiple agro- ecosystem services, including enhancing resilience to climate shocks. They ranged from herbaceous to large trees and food to cash crops. The primary agro-ecosystem services that the home garden agro-biodiversity delivered were diversifying the sources of food, income, and medicine, as well as improving food security. Home gardens were largely managed by indigenous knowledge, including hand weeding, manure and compost application, nursery preparation, fencing, and flood run-off control. The agro-biodiversity in traditional home gardens is more diverse, dynamic, and resilient to climate shocks. Nonetheless, they are neglected hotspots of agro-biodiversity and sociocultural diversity. In conclusion, the agro-biodiversity in traditional home gardens promotes food availability, accessibility, and utilization virtually all year round as well as contributes to the preservation of agricultural genetic and cultural diversity.
Trait-dependent responses of birds and bats to season and dry forest distance in tropical agroforestry			Agricultural expansion and intensification increasingly threaten birds and bats, especially insectivorous species from the tropics. Cacao agroforests in tropical rainforest areas have been shown to support higher bird and bat biodiversity than other land-use systems, but their suitability for tropical dry forest biodiversity remains unclear. We present the first assessment of bird and bat diversity patterns in cacao agroforests inside tropical dry forest landscapes. We investigated the response of bird and bat species richness and abundance to forest distance and season across 12 smallholder, organic cacao agroforests and adjacent tropical dry forests in the Peruvian lowlands of Piura. We found that insectivorous bird abundance and species richness increased with forest distance in the dry but not in the rainy season, indicating the value of cacao agroforests for these birds when resources are scarce in forests. In the case of bats, we observed more species in agroforests with increasing forest distance independent of season, and the abundance of insectivorous species increased along the gradient. Other dietary groups and forest specialists of both taxa did not vary notably across the forest distance gradient. Our findings point to the relevance of cacao agroforests as alternative habitats for insectivorous birds and bats in tropical dry forest landscapes, especially during the dry season. We suggest that the maintenance of wildlife friendly cacao agroforests, parallel to dry forest conservation and restoration, creates win-win situations for both the conservation of tropical dry forest fauna and the maintenance of related ecosystem services from which cacao smallholders may benefit.
Transformation scenarios towards multifunctional landscapes: A multi-criteria land-use allocation model applied to Jambi Province, Indonesia			In tropical regions, shifting from forests and traditional agroforestry to intensive plantations generates conflicts between human welfare (farmers’ demands and societal needs) and environmental protection. Achieving sustainability in this transformation will inevitably involve trade-offs between multiple ecological and socioeconomic functions. To address these trade-offs, our study used a new methodological approach allowing the identification of transformation scenarios, including theoretical landscape compositions that satisfy multiple ecological functions (i.e., structural complexity, microclimatic conditions, organic carbon in plant biomass, soil organic carbon and nutrient leaching losses), and farmers needs (i.e., labor and input requirements, total income to land, and return to land and labor) while accounting for the uncertain provision of these functions and having an actual potential for adoption by farmers. We combined a robust, multi-objective optimization approach with an iterative search algorithm allowing the identification of ecological and socioeconomic functions that best explain current land-use decisions. The model then optimized the theoretical land-use composition that satisfied multiple ecological and socioeconomic functions. Between these ends, we simulated transformation scenarios reflecting the transition from current land-use composition towards a normative multifunctional optimum. These transformation scenarios involve increasing the number of optimized socioeconomic or ecological functions, leading to higher functional richness (i.e., number of functions). We applied this method to smallholder farms in the Jambi Province, Indonesia, where traditional rubber agroforestry, rubber plantations, and oil palm plantations are the main land-use systems. Given the currently practiced land-use systems, our study revealed short-term returns to land as the principal factor in explaining current land-use decisions. Fostering an alternative composition that satisfies additional socioeconomic functions would require minor changes (“low-hanging fruits”). However, satisfying even a single ecological indicator (e.g., reduction of nutrient leaching losses) would demand substantial changes in the current land-use composition (“moonshot”). This would inevitably lead to a profit decline, underscoring the need for incentives if the societal goal is to establish multifunctional agricultural landscapes. With many oil palm plantations nearing the end of their production cycles in the Jambi province, there is a unique window of opportunity to transform agricultural landscapes. © 2024 The Author(s)
Transforming Tropical Agroforestry towards High Socio-Ecological Standards			Growing demand for tropical commodities that are socially and environmentally more sustainable is changing the global market for agroforestry products such as coffee and cocoa. Transforming mass production of cash crops towards higher socio-ecological standards includes challenges, but also novel opportunities to protect ecosystem services and human health and well-being alike. © 2020 Elsevier Ltd
Transitioning from extensive pastures to silvopastoral systems improves multiple soil ecosystem services in Colombian Amazon.			Silvopastoral systems are gaining attention as a sustainable approach to address the environmental challenges caused by traditional livestock farming in the Amazon. This study examines the effects of transitioning from extensive pastures to silvopastoral systems on soil ecosystem services (SES) in the Colombian Amazon. We identified sensitive soil indicators to monitor SES changes in response to livestock management, and synergies and tradeoffs between them. Soil samples were collected from three locations to a depth of 30cm across three land uses: traditional pastures, 15-years-old silvopastoral systems implemented on former pastures, and secondary vegetation. We assessed five critical soil-related ecosystem services: support for plant growth, carbon storage, nutrient cycling, erosion control, and water regulation and aeration. Our findings reveal significant enhancements in multiple soil ecosystem services in silvopastoral systems, with increases of 32% in plant growth support, 34% in nutrient cycling, and 16% in erosion control compared to traditional pastures. Although soil carbon (C) storage showed no significant differences between pastures and silvopastoral systems, both systems exhibited values 16% higher than secondary vegetation. A positive interconnection among carbon storage, nutrient cycling, and erosion control services was revealed, highlighting them as major drivers of synergies. Seven soil properties were identified as sensitive indicators of changes in land management, which may serve as key proxy for monitoring soil ecosystem services: i) soil organic carbon, ii) pH, iii) soil base saturation, iv) copper, v) magnesium, vi) zinc, and vii) aluminum. These results highlight the potential of silvopastoral systems to improve soil health and resilience, offering a sustainable alternative to traditional livestock management. This study underscores the importance of integrating trees into pastures to restore degraded lands and promote sustainable agricultural practices in tropical regions, contributing to global environmental conservation efforts.
Transplanting naturally regenerated tree seedlings for tropical forest restoration: a case study of Calophyllum brasiliense and Vochysia guatemalensis in Mexico			Plant species produce far more seedlings than those surviving to adulthood. It would seem reasonable to take advantage of that excess production, by relocating seedlings to desired restoration sites. There is, however, little information available on this issue. In the present study, we collected naturally regenerated seedlings of two native species, Calophyllum brasiliense ("bari") and Vochysia guatemalensis ("corpo"), in old-growth forest patches, and transplanted them for the enrichment of a secondary tropical forest in Veracruz, Mexico. For transplanted C. brasiliense seedlings, overall survival was 32% after 20 months, and for V. guatemalensis seedlings it was 66% after 26 months. The mean height (+/- standard error) of all C. brasiliense and V. guatemalensis seedlings that survived until the end of the study, was 33 +/- 2 cm (from initially 12.9 +/- 0.2 cm) and 52 +/- 5 cm (from 4.6 +/- 0.1 cm), respectively. We applied a cost-benefit model to assess the trade-off between initial-investment costs and the resulting survival of transplanting naturally regenerated seedlings in the current study, in comparison with direct seeding (with and without the protection of seeds and emerged seedlings) reported in a previous study for the same area and species. For C. brasiliense, the success of transplanting naturally regenerated seedlings was always inferior to direct seeding without protection, whereas for V. guatemalensis it was always superior. Comparing the transplantation of naturally regenerated seedlings with direct seeding with protection, the best propagation strategy depended on the (monetary) value that a treelet is expected to be worth after 2 years.
Tree biomass, carbon stock characteristics and ground beetles (Coleoptera: Carabidae) diversity in the Uzungwa Scarp Forest Nature Reserve, Tanzania			Reducing carbon emission from Deforestation and forest Degradation (REDD+) has drawn attention and remain one of the main options for climate change mitigation. However, the extent to which conservation for carbon may enhance biodiversity conservation in both disturbed and relatively undisturbed (control) environment remain unclear in most forest types. The extent to which anthropogenic disturbances affect carbon stock and ground beetle diversity is also far from clear. This paper addressed these knowledge gaps using data based on ground beetles, carbon stock in live trees and tree species sampled in Uzungwa Scarp Nature Forest Reserve (USNFR). All trees with a diameter at breast height (DBH) ≥ 5 cm were measured for height and DBH in twelve clusters of 1 ha in size. In the same clusters, ground beetles were sampled using pitfall traps, active night search and active day search. The species diversity of ground beetles differed significantly between control sites and disturbed sites (p < 0.05). The mean total biomass and carbon stock in live trees were high in disturbed sites (323.72 t/ha) when compared to control sites (289.72 t/ha) but the difference was not statistically significant (U = 14, p > 0.05). Carbon in live trees and ground beetle diversity showed a weak positive correlation, while richness and abundance showed weak negative in control sites. Results show that REDD+ related activities in a tropical forest may enhance ground beetle diversity and carbon stock if ground beetles conservation is explicitly taken into account. Thus forest conservation planning that pursues both carbon storage and ground-dwelling invertebrate diversity is recommended. © 2022, The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.
Tree cover increase mitigation strategy: implications of the "replacement approach" in carbon storage of a subtropical ecosystem			Worldwide tree cover increase (TCI) is one the most important climate change mitigation strategies, given the role of the ecosystems as carbon (C) reservoirs. Reforestation could be key to achieving TCI. However, there is still a knowledge gap about its real mitigation effects when it is applied through its replacement approach (REP-app). We evaluate the REP-app effects (replace native forest cover-NFC-by forestry plantation cover-FPC) on magnitude and direction of ecosystem C stock changes. By means of a field study, we quantified the C stock through a space-for-time substitution method, using eight paired sites (NFC/FPC) in a northern Argentinian subtropical forest (SAY). We studied C in saplings, lianas, above and belowground biomass, dead organic biomass, and soil. Through a metaanalysis, we evaluated the reliableness within the response of C sequestration (gain or loss) in international study cases and, therefore, the robustness of outcomes analyzing some main moderator variables that may influence the result. A significant effect of C loss was revealed by both, the field study (- 50%) and the metaanalysis (- 20.4%), and this response was consistent through stands of ages and species different. SAY sequestered 285 MgC ha(-1). Only 35-year-old Eucalyptus stand reached similar values, but they are reservoirs of doubtful permanence with functional attributes that could affect long-term ecosystem functioning. Given that the TCI strategy seek to achieve interconnected efforts in relation to climate, biodiversity, and sustainable development, the REP-app must not be considered a mitigation strategy in subtropical ecosystems. Global programs promoting TCI must be redirected urgently.
Tree diversity and carbon important species vary with traditional agroforestry managers in the Indian Eastern Himalayan region			Traditional agroforestry systems, one of the time tested and dominant land use from tropical to sub-tropical regions, were recognized for their contributions to food production, biodiversity conservation, and atmospheric carbon sequestration. Their management often varies from region to region. However, these systems frequently mimic economically managed land uses due to increased pressure on the monetary requirement of their managers. The present study aims to evaluate (i) tree density, (ii) tree diversity indices, and (iii) identify the biomass carbon important tree species managed by different communities of the Indian Eastern Himalayan region. We found that the Mizo community harbored the highest number of tree species (35) in the traditional agroforestry system with the highest tree diversity index (3.47). Total biomass carbon of tropical agroforestry systems managed by different communities ranged between 4.72 Mg ha(-1) (Meitei) and 29.26 Mg ha(-1) (Bengali). Similarly, in the sub-tropical traditional agroforestry system, the highest and the lowest biomass carbon was observed in Mizo- (10.93 Mg ha(-1)) and Angami- (6.05 Mg ha(-1)) managed systems. Of the 31 biomass carbon, important species found across the traditional agroforestry systems, Artocarpus heterophyllus, had the highest occurrence (50%), followed by Parkia timoriana (37.5) and Amoora rohituka, Delonix regia, Mangifera indica, and Toona ciliata (25% for each species). Farmers' preference to cash return of a species, trees density, and basal area were the determinant factors in the carbon stock potential of these systems. The present study suggests that the farmers' preferred and dominant species in their agroecosystems have a limited scope of enhanced biomass carbon storage. Therefore, improvement of traditional agroforestry systems through selective incorporation of biomass carbon important tree species is recommended to enhance the carbon sink capacity of these systems.
Tree diversity, use and carbon stocks in productive restoration areas in Calakmul, Campeche			Tropical forests of the Calakmul Biosphere Reserve (REBICA) are home to high biodiversity and provide diverse ecosystem services threatened by the advance of the agricultural frontier. Productive restoration (RP), as a strategy that articulates the needs of producers and the conservation of natural resources, was implemented in modules in the ejidos Benito Juarez II (BJ), Eugenio Echeverria Castellot I (EEC) and Los Angeles (LA), adjacent to the REBICA. The aim was to evaluate a baseline for long-term monitoring of the impact of restoration actions on tree diversity, its use and stored carbon. The ejidos EEC and LA were associated with agroforestry systems, while in BJ a silvopastoral system was implemented, estimating densities of 1 713 ind ha(-1), 3 144 ind ha(-1) and 1 717 ind ha(-1) respectively. True diversity (1D) ranged from 24.63 in LA to 15.13 in EEC and 13.47 in BJ. Sixteen potential uses were recognized for the identified species of which 47 were protected under CITES, IUCN and NOM-059 lists. The carbon values corresponded to 6.96 Mg C ha(-1) in BJ, 10.32 Mg C ha(-1) in EEC and 34.40 Mg C ha(-1) in LA. The variations in composition, structure, biomass and carbon estimated indicate that the estimation of this baseline will facilitate the generation of a monitoring program that will allow evaluating the impact of the restoration actions implemented and, where appropriate, modifying them to accelerate the recovery of the analysed attributes.
Tree ecosystem: Microbial dynamics and functionality			Trees constitute a dominant component of the agroforestry ecosystem. The forests are dynamic ecological reservoirs. Microbial dynamics in a forest are usually governed by the fires, insect outbreaks, climatic or seasonal variations, and anthropogenic activities occurring across tens to thousands of years. Microbial ecological studies revealed that microbe species are important drivers of various processes taking place in forests as well as respond to these changes. Microbial dynamic studies have been undertaken in temperate and boreal forests, whereas tropical forests are yet to be explored and characterized. Still there is a lack of information and knowledge in this area. The description of the microbial communities is incomplete or biased. Also, scanty information is available on ectomycorrhiza (ECM) and saprophytic wood-decomposing fungi. The microbial taxa actively participating in forest ecosystem services have not yet identified. This chapter describes intensive studies that have been carried out on microbial activity; their interactions with trees and other forest biota are required. © Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2019.
Tree legume enhances livestock performance in a silvopasture system			Silvopastoral systems (SPSs) can increase overall productivity and long-term income due to the simultaneous production of trees, forage, and livestock. This 2-yr study evaluated animal performance and herbage responses in C-4-grass monoculture or in SPS in the subhumid tropical region of Brazil. The experimental design was a randomized complete block with three replications. Treatments were: Urochloa decumbens (Stapf.) R. Webster (Signalgrass) + Mimosa caesalpiniifolia Benth (SPS-mimosa), Signalgrass + Gliricidia sepium (Jacq.) Kunth ex Walp (SPS-gliricidia), and signalgrass monoculture (SM). Response variables included herbage and livestock responses. Cattle were managed under continuous stocking with variable stocking rate. There was a treatment x month interaction for herbage mass. Green herbage accumulation rate ranged from 20 to 80 kg dry matter ha(-1) d(-1) across months, with SPS-mimosa presenting lower rates. Average daily gain was greater in SPS-gliricidia, followed by SM and SPS-mimosa (0.77, 0.56, and 0.23 kg d(-1), respectively), varying across months. Stocking rate ranged from 0.86 to 1.6 AU ha(-1). Total gain per area during the experimental period was greater for SPS-gliricidia (423 kg body weight [BW] ha(-1)), followed by signalgrass in monoculture (347 kg BW ha(-1)) and SPS-mimosa (50 kg BW ha(-1)). Silvopasture systems using signalgrass and gliricidia enhanced livestock gains compared with signalgrass in monoculture, and mimosa trees outcompeted signalgrass, reducing livestock gains. Silvopasture systems with tree legumes have the potential to provide numerous ecosystem services and to reduce the C footprint of livestock systems in the tropics; however, the choice of tree species is key and is determined by which ecosystem service is prioritized.
Tree plantations on farms: Evaluating growth and potential for success			Interest in native species is growing across the tropics as reforestation of degraded lands becomes more widespread. In this study four tree species native to Panama - Cedrela odorata, Pachira quinata, Samanea saman, and Tabebuia rosea - were grown on rural farms at two dry tropical sites in Panama for up to five years. Survivorship and growth data at these "on-farm" trials are compared to data recorded from nearby experimental or "species selection" trial sites and evaluated in terms of soil fertility and management. Participant farmers were also asked about their interest in planting trees in general as well as their interest in 61 species grown in the species selection trial.Although, on-farm survivorship was variable and generally lower than that found on the species selection trial, one species (S. saman) experienced high and consistent survivorship. High survivorship combined with growth data from farms at both sites for this species suggests it would be a good candidate for extension projects working with rural farmers. Survivorship of other species appears more sensitive to farmer management and/or local site conditions. Generally lower growth on the Los Santos farms as compared to the species-selection trial is attributed to the lower soil fertility (plant available P) at the on-farm sites compared to the species selection trial. In contrast, only one species - P. quinata - had a growth variable found to be significantly lower between the on-farm and species selection trial sites in Rio Hato. C. odorata, P. quinata T. rosea can all be used in on-farm conditions with consideration to specific site and management conditions.By 2009, approximately 80% of the farmers planting trees still wished to participate in tree planting activities. All of the farmers no longer wishing to continue with the project expressed slow growth rates of trees as a principal reason. All but one of these farmers had growth rates for his/her trees markedly below those of the species selection trial nearby. Some farmers wishing to continue had very high mortality rates (>70% for all species), suggesting non-tangible benefits for participating in project activities. Other species that were not tested on-farm but grew well in the species-selection trials and were of interest to local farmers are discussed.As long as specific site and management conditions are carefully considered, data from species selection trials can be useful in informing tree planting projects with rural farmers; however, care should be taken to manage expectations. (C) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Tree regeneration in active and passive cloud forest restoration: Functional groups and timber species			Tree regeneration of late-successional, animal-dispersed and/or timber species in restored forests is key to the recovery of ecological functions and interactions, as well as ecosystem services. We assessed whether active restoration is more effective than passive restoration at increasing the recovery of these groups in the tree seedling community. We analysed tree seedlings (>0.3 m to 1.5 m in height) over four years under three conditions in a tropical montane cloud forest landscape in Mexico: mature cloud forest (MF) as the reference system, active restoration (AR; mixed plantation with native species) and passive restoration (PR; natural succession). The AR and PR were 24 years old and were originally established in abandoned grazing land located at similar distances to the MF (709 +/- 67 m and 906 +/- 66 m, respectively). We recorded similar to 488 seedlings/year belonging to 51 tree species. Seedling density was higher in AR than in PR, but no differences were found in recruitment or survival rates between these restoration conditions. The density of late-successional, barochorous-synzoochorous and timber species was much higher in MF than in the restoration conditions. Seedling density of timber species was similar in AR and PR. Our results support higher recovery of the richness and density of late-successional and barochorous-synzoochorous functional groups in the tree seedling community in AR than in that of PR. However, the overall low seedling density and recruitment found in both restoration conditions highlight the need for additional intervention, even after 24 years, in order to overcome barriers to tree regeneration. Direct seeding and enrichment plantings of late-successional, barochorous-synzoochorous and high-value timber species could contribute towards more ecologically and economically valuable forests.
Tree species composition and selection effects drive overstory and understory productivity in reforested oil sands mining sites			Reforestation is a feasible option for the eventual restoration of biodiversity and ecosystem services on deforested oil-sands mining sites. The associations between plant diversity and productivity spanning the different strata of restoration forests, in conjunction with specific factors that may impact these relationships, remain uncertain. We sampled 94 sites that encompassed conifer, mixed-wood, and broadleaved overstory types as three exemplar substrates following the reforestation of oil-sands mining sites in Alberta, Canada. We employed structural equation modeling to investigate the correlations between species diversity and aboveground biomass production spanning forest vegetation strata, while concurrently accounting for the effects of overstory composition, functional diversity/identity, soil fertility, and restoration age. We found that the relationships between species diversity and biomass were negative, or inconsequential across restoration forest strata. Overstory biomass was linked to the coniferous tree proportion and community-weighted mean of leaf nitrogen, rather than the species and functional diversity of overstory trees. Further, overstory composition, diversity, and biomass were the key features involved in the diversity and biomass of understory strata. Our results demonstrated the importance of overstory tree species composition and selection effects toward driving overstory and understory productivity in restoration forests at post-oil sands mining sites. Coniferous trees were observed to have lower leaf nutrient levels and negative impacts on the productivity and diversity of overstory and shrub layers. Therefore, it was recommended that a greater proportion of broadleaved trees should be incorporated to promote productivity and species diversity in restoration forests through the enhancement and utilization of available resources.
Tree species controls over nitrogen and phosphorus cycling in a wet tropical forest			Wet tropical forests play an important role in the global carbon (C) cycle, but given current rates of land-use change, nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) limitation could reduce productivity in regenerating forests in this biome. Whereas the strong controls of climate and parent material over forest recovery are well known, the influence of vegetation can be difficult to determine. We addressed species-specific differences in plant traits and their relationships to ecosystem properties and processes, relevant to N and P supply to regenerating vegetation in experimental plantations in a single site in lowland wet forest in Costa Rica. Single tree species were planted in a randomized block design, such that climate, soil (Oxisol), and land-use history were similar for all species. In Years 15-25 of the experiment, we measured traits regarding N and P acquisition and use in four native, broad-leaved, evergreen tree species, including differential effects on soil pH, in conjunction with biomass and soil stocks and fluxes of N and P. Carbon biomass stocks increased significantly with increasing soil pH (P = 0.0184, previously reported) as did biomass P stocks (P = 0.0011). Despite large soil N pools, biomass P stocks were weakly dependent on traits associated with N acquisition and use (N2 fixation and leaf C:N, P < 0.09). Mass-balance budgets indicated that soil organic matter (SOM) could supply the N and P accumulated in biomass via the process of SOM mineralization. Secondary soil P pools were weakly correlated with biomass C and P stocks (r = 0.47, P = 0.08), and were large enough to have supplied sufficient P in these rapidly growing plantations, suggesting that alteration of soil pH provided a mechanism for liberation of soil P occluded in organo-mineral soil complexes, and thus supply P for plant uptake. These results highlight the importance of considering species effect on soil pH for restoration projects in highly weathered soils. This study demonstrates mechanisms by which individual species can alter P availability, and thus productivity and C cycling in regenerating humid tropical forests, and the importance of including traits into global models of element cycling. How was the data set collected? We addressed the relationships between tree species and accrual of C, N, and P, using a long-term, replicated field experiment containing four native tree species grown in plantations under similar climate, parent material and land-use history in a tropical wet forest in Costa Rica. Our approach was to identify mechanisms that had two main criteria: (1) the potential to influence availability of N and P for plants, and thus productivity (as indicated by their biomass accumulation) and (2) a direct connection to traits that could differ among species in their attributes, and thus drive species-specific differences in ecosystem properties. We used various approaches to evaluate several mechanisms in relation to specific traits, while also considering that plant species differ in a plethora of traits that could interact to result in a non-significant correlation between a particular mechanism and trait. Field measurements The field experiment was established on a 12-ha site that had been mature wet tropical forest until deforestation in 1955, planted to pasture, and grazed until abandonment in 1987. In 1988, a stratified randomized complete block experiment was established with individual species planted within each plot. The design contained twelve 0.25-ha (50 m * 50 m) plots in each of four blocks. Each plot was divided into four quadrants to facilitate random sampling within plots. Eleven of the 12 plots within a block were planted with a single tree species, with a tree spacing of 3 * 3 m. The 12th plot was left unplanted as a Control, with those plots receiving the same management, except that no trees were planted. We established a fifth block (150 x 200 m in size) in Mature Forest, <150 m from the experimental site, such that soils, climate, and historical vegetation were similar to the adjacent experiment. By the time of this study, only four of the 11 tree species planted had survived with complete canopy coverage across at least 3 of the 4 blocks (four-letter codes in parentheses): Hieronyma alchorneoides Allemao (Hial); Pentaclethra macroloba (Willd.) Ktze, (Pema); Virola koschnyi Warb., (Viko); and Vochysia guatemalensis Donn. Sm. (Vogu). To evaluate differences among species related to N and P acquisition, use, and storage, we measured C, N, and P concentrations and stocks of these compartments: plant biomass (above- and belowground), surface litter, and mineral soil (five depth intervals, 0-100 cm). Components of the planted (overstory) biomass included: canopy (leaves, flowers and fruits); twigs (diameters <1 cm); branches (diameters 1-10 cm); large branches and boles (diameters > 10 cm); stumps; stump-roots; woody roots (>2 mm diameter); and fine roots (≤ 2 mm diameter). Components for the regenerating (unplanted, understory) vegetation included the same components. See Metadata sheet for full details. We measured above- and belowground fluxes of organic matter, C, N, and P of the planted species and the vegetation regenerating on its own, referred to as the overstory and understory respectively. Components measured included: fine litterfall; branchfall; aboveground biomass increments (Delta biomass) of the overstory and understory, coarse-root and stump root biomass increments and fine-root growth (overstory + understory). We assayed asymbiotic N2 fixation in surface soil (0-5 cm) and surface litter. Turnover time was calculated as the quotient of biomass and NPP within each component, expressed in years. Soil respiration was measured in-situ approximately monthly for two years (Nov 2011-Oct 2013) in 3-4 quadrats per plot. Sampling Laboratory methods Organic C and total N for both plants and soil were analyzed by dry combustion (DC) using a Thermo-Finnigan EA Flash (Series 1112, EA Elantech, Lakewood, NJ). Duplicates were run on all samples. Plant tissue P was measured by microwave-assisted acid digestion and analyzed using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (Kingston and Haswell 1997). In total, 2704 plant samples wereanalyzed for C, N, and P.  We used the acetylene reduction assay to estimate nitrogenase activity and thus evaluate asymbiotic N2 fixation. Gas analysis was conducted on a Tracor 540 gas chromatograph (GC) fitted with a carbosphere column (Alltech, 5' * 1/8" SS COL P/W ALUMINA F-1 60/80 1 EA, 5664PC). The oven and FID temperatures were 100 °C and 175 °C respectively. Regarding the incubation period, analysis of ethylene results gave no evidence of substrate depletion within 24 h, nor inhibition of activity over 7 d. Nitrogenase activity was low enough that a 7-d period was needed to detect activity; thus, data presented are for the 7-d incubation period. The C2H2 reduced by the sample over the incubation period was calculated as: DeltaC2H4 (mumol C2H4 L-1 g-1 hr-1) * headspace (ml/1000) / incubation period (hrs) / sample mass (g dry wt). Potential N2 fixation was calculated using a molar ratio of 3:1 ethylene produced per N fixed. For soil, total P was extracted in HCl:HNO3 (4:1 by volume) (Crosland et al. 1995) and P in the digests was measured using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES). For measurement of total organic P, we used the ignition method (Kuo 1996), in which organic P in the soil was converted to inorganic P by oxidation at 550° C. Phosphorus in ignited and unignited subsamples was then extracted with 0.5N H2SO4 for 16 h. ICP-AES was used to measure P in the extracts. Organic P in the soil was calculated by subtracting P concentration in the unignited sample from P concentration in the ignited sample. Modified Olsen-extractable P was determined by extraction with NaHCO3 and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (Kuo, 1996). Sequential P extractions were conducted to target secondary minerals following Chadwick et al. (1994) to quantify the P associated with these phases, and to determine whether they were altered by the experimental tree species. Following an initial extraction of labile nutrients with unbuffered 1 M ammonium acetate, we extracted soils with acid ammonium oxalate, which dissolves SRO Fe and Al phases, and then with citrate-dithionite, which dissolves most crystalline Fe oxyhydroxides (as well as substituted or co-precipitated Al). These extractions have long been used for assessing secondary mineralogy of highly weathered soils (Chadwick et al. 1994, Torn et al. 1997). The sum of Poxalate and Pdithionite quantified in this procedure is hereafter referred to as secondary soil P. It is important to note that the organic and secondary pools partially overlap because a portion of the organic P that is liberated by combustion will also likely be solubilized by the oxalate or dithionite extraction; that is, secondary mineral-bound P includes organic P that is bound with these  How has the dataset been processed? Field and laboratory data were either immediately entered into Excel spreadsheets from hand-written field data sheets, or from data-capturing apparati (e.g., LICOR 8100). Datasets were then formatted for analyses in SAS and R. All data sets were regularly backed up on storage devices. To confirm species variation in traits and better understand the relationships among traits, we summarized and visualized these multivariate traits with PCA. We used 40 traits for which we had data for every plot in the experiment. Data were centered and scaled data prior to principle components analysis. We also ran permanova as a mixed model with species, block, and their interaction using Type III sums of squares with residual randomization permutation procedures. For factorial analyses, the experimental unit was the plot. For variables with multiple measurements per plot, the mean was used in the analysis. The treatment consisted of the vegetation type; for most variables, this consisted of the four planted tree species, but for some it included the Mature Forest and/or the Control. For variables in which measurements included only the four planted species, the design was a randomized complete block (n = 15, with 4 species * 4 blocks, minus oneVochysia plot). For analyses including the Mature Forest, the design was an incomplete block design (n = 23 if it also included the Control). Blocks were considered a random effect. We tested for homogeneity of variances and normality of distributions. ANOVA was used to evaluate differences among vegetation types in element (C, N, and P) concentrations, stoichiometries, and stocks in vegetation (by component), surface litter (by component), soil (5 depth intervals, including a vegetation type * depth interaction term), N2 fixation (by substrate, including a vegetation * substrate interaction. We first conducted a MANOVA to determine whether all elements could be evaluated in one test for a given response variable. In tests for all variables, the interactions among elements were significant, thus individual ANOVAs were done for each element. To assess redistribution of N and P within the soil profile, we compared changes in N and P stocks within the rooting zone (0-30 cm) and below (30-100 cm) over the 8-y period of the project. Procedures were conducted in SAS (Littell et al. 1996). Multiple regression models were used to evaluate the relative effects of explanatory variables, i.e., species traits that could influence N and P acquisition and use, on the response variables of stocks of biomass C, N, and P. # Tree species controls over nitrogen and phosphorus cycling in a wet tropical forest Give a brief summary of dataset contents, contextualized in experimental procedures and results. ## Description of the data and file structure This data set is organized as follows. The first sheet in this Excel file is labeled Metadata and this sheet contains information about the data. The Metadata sheet is organized by these columns: Study name; General information; Components; Abbreviations; Description; Frequency/Dates of measurements; Sheet name within this file; and Notes. Each remaining sheet in this Excel file is labeled as per the Metadata column Sheet name within this file. The sheets include: * Biomass C,N,P conc * Biomass CN, CP, NP * C Budget * N Budget * P Budget * Fine-root biomass * Surface litter mass * Soil bulk density * Soil C * Soil N * Soil P * Litterfall OM * Litterfall C * Litterfall N * Litterfall P * Branchfall * Fine-root growth * Soil respiration * N fixation * Trait Ordination Data * Change in soil CNP The C budget, N budget and P budget sheets incorporate many of the other data sheets. Abbreviations are defined in the Metadata sheet, but generally repeated within the other sheets. Across all sheets, missing data are denoted by a period (.). ## Sharing/Access information Data on soil pH from this study are available from the Dryad Digital Repository: The rDNA sequence file is available from the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (accession number SRX766152). ## Code/Software Data were centered and scaled data prior to principle components analysis (vegan::rda; v.2.6-4, Oksanen et al. 2022) in R (v.4.2.2; R Core Team 2022). SAS Programs used included: the MANOVA, MIXED, and REG procedures. For comparisons including the Mature Forest, we used the Satterthwaite adjustment for degrees of freedom. Pairwise comparisons for significant overall F-tests were conducted using *P*-values adjusted by Tukeys Honestly Significant Difference method. Copyright: CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication
Tree species diversity and community composition in a human-dominated tropical forest of Western Ghats biodiversity hotspot, India			The structure, function, and ecosystem services of tropical forest depend on its species richness, diversity, dominance, and the patterns of changes in the assemblages of tree populations over time. Long-term data from permanent vegetation plots have yielded a wealth of data on the species diversity and dynamics of tree populations, but such studies have only rarely been undertaken in tropical forest landscapes that support large human populations. Thus, anthropogenic drivers and their impacts on species diversity and community structure of tropical forests are not well understood. Here we present data on species diversity, community composition, and regeneration status of tropical forests in a human-dominated landscape in the Western Ghats of southern India. Enumeration of 40 plots (50 m x 20 m) results a total of 106 species of trees, 76 species of saplings and 79 species of seedlings. Detrended Correspondence Analysis ordination of the tree populations yielded five dominant groups, along disturbance and altitudinal gradients on the first and second axes respectively. Abundant species of the area such as Albizia amara, Nothopegia racemosa and Pleiospermum alatum had relatively few individuals in recruiting size classes. Our data indicate probable replacement of rare, localized, and old-growth 'specialists' by disturbance-adapted generalists, if the degradation is continuing at the present scale. (C) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Tree species diversity and its relationship with carbon stock in the parkland agroforestry of Northern Ethiopia			Parkland agroforestry can store carbon and conserves biodiversity. Studying the relationship between carbon stock and biodiversity is crucial in understanding the tradeoff between major benefits of the parkland agroforestry system, and way to achieve the optimum balance between them. Therefore, this study aims to estimate the biomass and SOC in community type, and explore the relationship between carbon stocks and diversity. Tree with DBH (Diameter at breast height) > 2 cm was measured and species were identified in 75 (50x100m) randomly located plots. Species richness (S), Species evenness (J), Shannon-weiner diversity index (H') and Simpson diversity index (D) of the study area were 3.02, 0.81, 0.82 and 0.46 respectively. Similarly, the mean aboveground (AGC), belowground (BGC) and soil organic (SOC) carbon were 7.9, 3.03 and 20.07 Mg C ha-1 respectively. There was a liner and weakly significant correlation between AGC and tree J in plant community 2 (r = -0.558, P < 0.05) and 3 (r = -0.451, P < 0.05), and there was a negative correlation between J (r = -0.552, P < 0.05), D (r = -0.646, P < 0.05) and H' (r = -0.643, P < 0.05) with TC (Total carbon) in plant community 2. However, there was no significant relationship between J, D and H' with TC in plant communities 1 and 3. In these parkland agroforestry systems, the relationship tree species diversity with AGC and TC appeared to be highly variable; it indicates that parkland agroforestry systems have significantly improved the vegetation and SOC. However, forest carbon enhancement cannot assure the biodiversity conservation and promotion in a parkland agroforestry system.
Tree species richness increases ecosystem carbon storage in subtropical forests			Forest ecosystems are an integral component of the global carbon cycle as they take up and release large amounts of C over short time periods (C flux) or accumulate it over longer time periods (C stock). However, there remains uncertainty about whether and in which direction C fluxes and in particular C stocks may differ between forests of high versus low species richness. Based on a comprehensive dataset derived from field-based measurements, we tested the effect of species richness (3-20 tree species) and stand age (22-116 years) on six compartments of above-and below-ground C stocks and four components of C fluxes in subtropical forests in southeast China. Across forest stands, total C stock was 149 +/- 12 Mg ha(-1) with richness explaining 28.5% and age explaining 29.4% of variation in this measure. Species-rich stands had higher C stocks and fluxes than stands with low richness; and, in addition, old stands had higher C stocks than young ones. Overall, for each additional tree species, the total C stock increased by 6.4%. Our results provide comprehensive evidence for diversity-mediated above-and below-ground C sequestration in species-rich subtropical forests in southeast China. Therefore, afforestation policies in this region and elsewhere should consider a change from the current focus on monocultures to multi-species plantations to increase C fixation and thus slow increasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations and global warming.
Trees outside forest (TOFs) aids in mitigating global climatic change through carbon sequestration: Example from academic institutional landscapes			TOF including urban and other plantations like road side, homestead gardens, residential areas or in various institutional or academic landscapes make positive contribution to living conditions of different towns and cities. The present work reports the amount of biomass and its contribution to carbon stock of different woody perrennials in the campus of Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya, West Bengal, India. The study was carried out by enumerating the entire study area for volume estimation and further calculation was done through validated methodologies. A total of 1816 numbers of individuals with dbh >= 10 cm of 95 woody perennials species belonging to 79 genera and 38 families were enlisted. Out of 95 species, the contribution was dominated by 52 forestry tree species followed by road side plantation (21) and fruit crops (14). A total of 812.211 Mg ha- 1 of biomass was recorded from the woody tree species with 79.40% contribution from above ground biomass (AGB) and 20.60% (BGB) below ground biomass. In the AGB forestry tree species showed dominance in terms of contribution (322.95 Mg ha -1) followed by plantation crops (169.695 Mg ha -1), road side plantation (107.069 Mg ha -1) and least by fruit crops (45.190 Mg ha-1). The overall carbon stock found was 403.176 Mg Cha- 1 with highest contribution from forestry tree species (200.53 Mg Cha- 1) followed by plantation crops (106.720 Mg C ha -1) and least by fruit crops (28.470 Mg Cha- 1). The study recommends plantaion of more and more woody species across the academic landscapes especially with threatened category flora for conservation and carbon sequestration for mitigating global climate change. TOFs will have to play an important role for sustaining future generations due to shrinking of other forest landuse systems.
Trees outside forests as climate change mitigation champions: evaluating their carbon sequestration potential and monetary value in Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak (Haryana), India			The annual average increase in carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration is touching new heights every year. Global climate change and warming are twin outcomes of record-breaking CO2 levels. The trees outside forests (TOF) are the most promising and suitable components in the ecosystem for combating global warming via carbon (C) sequestration. Urban university campuses are the hotspot regions of TOF. We have attempted to quantify the C stock, C sequestration potential, and C credit value of dominant tree species at Maharshi Dayanand University (MDU), Rohtak. Different volumetric and biomass equations were used for biomass computation. We assessed a total of 29,442 trees (top 10) for measuring phytosociological parameters like total tree count, age, height (H), and diameter at breast height (DBH) to quantify the amount of C stored. The total C stock, C sequestration rate, and monetary value were 78.67 (Mg C ha(-1)), 19.05 (Mg CO2 ha(-1) year(-1)), and 23,101.59 $ year(-1), respectively. Eucalyptus globulus is the most dominant tree species on the campus and topped almost all the quantitative characteristics like total tree count (similar to 40 %), age (25 years), density (D) (55.35 trees ha(-1)), and total C stock (16.06 & PLUSMN; 9.90 Mg C ha(-1)). Tree basal area (BA), D, diversity, and H positively affected the total C stocks. When the C market becomes operational, these C credits can be traded while generating additional income for the university. The results from this study can also help calculate the total C footprint of the campus.
Tropical and Boreal Forest Atmosphere Interactions: A Review			This review presents how the boreal and the tropical forests affect the atmosphere, its chemical composition, its function, and further how that affects the climate and, in return, the ecosystems through feedback processes. Observations from key tower sites standing out due to their long-term comprehensive observations: The Amazon Tall Tower Observatory in Central Amazonia, the Zotino Tall Tower Observatory in Siberia, and the Station to Measure Ecosystem-Atmosphere Relations at Hyytiala in Finland. The review is complemented by short-term observations from networks and large experiments.The review discusses atmospheric chemistry observations, aerosol formation and processing, physiochemical aerosol, and cloud condensation nuclei properties and finds surprising similarities and important differences in the two ecosystems. The aerosol concentrations and chemistry are similar, particularly concerning the main chemical components, both dominated by an organic fraction, while the boreal ecosystem has generally higher concentrations of inorganics, due to higher influence of long-range transported air pollution. The emissions of biogenic volatile organic compounds are dominated by isoprene and monoterpene in the tropical and boreal regions, respectively, being the main precursors of the organic aerosol fraction.Observations and modeling studies show that climate change and deforestation affect the ecosystems such that the carbon and hydrological cycles in Amazonia are changing to carbon neutrality and affect precipitation downwind. In Africa, the tropical forests are so far maintaining their carbon sink.It is urgent to better understand the interaction between these major ecosystems, the atmosphere, and climate, which calls for more observation sites, providing long-term data on water, carbon, and other biogeochemical cycles. This is essential in finding a sustainable balance between forest preservation and reforestation versus a potential increase in food production and biofuels, which are critical in maintaining ecosystem services and global climate stability. Reducing global warming and deforestation is vital for tropical forests.
Tropical and Highland Temperate Forest Plantations in Mexico: Pathways for Climate Change Mitigation and Ecosystem Services Delivery			Forest plantations are a possible way of increasing forest productivity in temperate and tropical forests, and therefore also increasing above- and belowground carbon pools. In the context of climate change, monospecific plantations might become an alternative to mitigate global warming; however, their contribution to the structural complexity, complementarity, and biodiversity of forests has not been addressed. Mixed forest plantations can ensure that objectives of climate change mitigation are met through carbon sequestration, while also delivering anticipated ecosystem services (e.g., nutrient cycling, erosion control, and wildlife habitat). However, mixed forest plantations pose considerable operational challenges and research opportunities. For example, it is essential to know how many species or functional traits are necessary to deliver a set of benefits, or what mixture of species and densities are key to maintaining productive plantations and delivering multiple ecosystem services. At the same time, the establishment of forest plantations in Mexico should not be motivated solely by timber production. Forest plantations should also increase carbon sequestration, maintain biodiversity, and provide other ecosystem services. This article analyzes some matters that affect the development of planted forests in the Mexican national context, and presents alternatives for forest resources management through the recommendation of mixed forest plantations as a means of contributing to climate change mitigation and the delivery of ecosystem services.
Tropical and subtropical Asia's valued tree species under threat			Tree diversity in Asia's tropical and subtropical forests is central to nature-based solutions. Species vulnerability to multiple threats, which affect provision of ecosystem services, is poorly understood. We conducted a region-wide, spatially explicit assessment of the vulnerability of 63 socioeconomically important tree species to overexploitation, fire, overgrazing, habitat conversion, and climate change. Trees were selected for assessment from national priority lists, and selections were validated by an expert network representing 20 countries. We used Maxent suitability modeling to predict species distribution ranges, freely accessible spatial data sets to map threat exposures, and functional traits to estimate threat sensitivities. Species-specific vulnerability maps were created as the product of exposure maps and sensitivity estimates. Based on vulnerability to current threats and climate change, we identified priority areas for conservation and restoration. Overall, 74% of the most important areas for conservation of these trees fell outside protected areas, and all species were severely threatened across an average of 47% of their native ranges. The most imminent threats were overexploitation and habitat conversion; populations were severely threatened by these factors in an average of 24% and 16% of their ranges, respectively. Our model predicted limited overall climate change impacts, although some study species were likely to lose over 15% of their habitat by 2050 due to climate change. We pinpointed specific natural areas in Borneo rain forests as hotspots for in situ conservation of forest genetic resources, more than 82% of which fell outside designated protected areas. We also identified degraded areas in Western Ghats, Indochina dry forests, and Sumatran rain forests as hotspots for restoration, where planting or assisted natural regeneration will help conserve these species, and croplands in southern India and Thailand as potentially important agroforestry options. Our results highlight the need for regionally coordinated action for effective conservation and restoration. © 2021 The Authors. Conservation Biology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Society for Conservation Biology.
Tropical carbon sink accelerated by symbiotic dinitrogen fixation			A major uncertainty in the land carbon cycle is whether symbiotic nitrogen fixation acts to enhance the tropical forest carbon sink. Nitrogen-fixing trees can supply vital quantities of the growth-limiting nutrient nitrogen, but the extent to which the resulting carbon-nitrogen feedback safeguards ecosystem carbon sequestration remains unclear. We combine (i) field observations from 112 plots spanning 300 years of succession in Panamanian tropical forests, and (ii) a new model that resolves nitrogen and light competition at the scale of individual trees. Fixation doubled carbon accumulation in early succession and enhanced total carbon in mature forests by similar to 10% (similar to 12MgC ha(-1)) through two mechanisms: (i) a direct fixation effect on tree growth, and (ii) an indirect effect on the successional sequence of non-fixing trees. We estimate that including nitrogen-fixing trees in Neotropical reforestation projects could safeguard the sequestration of 6.7 Gt CO2 over the next 20 years. Our results highlight the connection between functional diversity of plant communities and the critical ecosystem service of carbon sequestration for mitigating climate change.
Tropical deforestation and greenhouse gas emissions			0
Tropical Dry Forest Recovery : Processes and Causes of Change			0
Tropical Dry Forests			Globally, tropical dry forests (i.e., forests that occur in tropical regions with several months of severe drought) include a variety of vegetation types that differ in canopy cover, level of deciduousness and the role of grasses and fire as the primary driver of vegetation dynamics. Despite the lack of a unified concept, dry forests play a key role in local/global sustainability due to their immense biodiversity plus livelihood support via ecosystem services. Unfortunately, these unique biotas persist as the most threatened terrestrial ecosystem. Thereby, we shall combine biodiversity-related concerns with those addressing the collapse/ruin of entire vulnerable societies as indicated by the combination of forest degradation into a backdrop of climate change. © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Tropical forest above-ground productivity is maintained by nutrients cycled in litter			Tropical forest productivity represents an important global carbon sink, but many tropical forests grow on infertile soils. Efficient nutrient cycling by litterfall has long been assumed to maintain tropical tree growth, but there is no direct evidence that the nutrients cycled in litterfall are essential for tropical forest productivity.To test whether nutrient cycling by litterfall maintains tropical forest above-ground productivity, we established large-scale long-term litter removal (L-) and litter addition (L+) treatments in a mature lowland tropical forest. We hypothesised that the removal of nutrients in litter would reduce tree growth, survival and litter production in L- plots. By contrast, the addition of nutrients in litter would enhance tree growth, survival and litter production in L+ plots. To test our hypotheses, we recorded tree growth and survival every 2 years, and measured litterfall monthly during 17 years of treatments.Tree growth and litterfall declined over time in L- plots, with consistently lower growth rates compared to controls after 8 years, and lower litter production after 4 years of treatments. By contrast, although litterfall was higher in the L+ plots relative to the controls, there was only a minor transient increase in tree growth immediately after the start of treatments. Tree survival declined over time in all treatments but was not affected by litter manipulation.The long-term decline in tree growth and litterfall in the L- plots provides the first empirical evidence that nutrient cycling by litterfall plays a key role in maintaining above-ground productivity in this tropical forest. By contrast, the transient increase in growth in the L+ plots can be attributed to the large inputs of nutrients with the addition of the entire litter standing crop at the start of treatments. The addition of nutrients in litter over the long term was nonetheless sufficient to enhance litter production, possibly by accelerating leaf turnover.Synthesis: Efficient nutrient cycling by litterfall makes an important contribution to the annual nutrient requirements of mature tropical forest trees, compensating for infertile soils. Disturbances that disrupt this finely balanced cycle could therefore reduce biomass carbon sequestration in tropical forests.La productividad primaria de los bosques tropicales representa un importante sumidero global de carbono, a pesar de que muchos de estos bosques crecen sobre suelos infertiles. Por mucho tiempo se ha asumido que el crecimiento de los arboles en estos bosques esta sostenido por un eficiente reciclaje de nutrientes proveniente de la hojarasca, pero no hay evidencia directa de que los nutrientes reciclados en la hojarasca sean esenciales para la productividad de los bosques tropicales.Para probar si el reciclaje de nutrientes de la hojarasca sostiene la productividad epigea de los bosques tropicales, establecimos tratamientos a largo plazo de remocion (L-) y adicion (L+) de hojarasca en un bosque maduro tropical de bajura. Hipotetizamos que la remocion de los nutrientes contenidos en la hojarasca reduciria el crecimiento, la supervivencia, y la produccion de hojarasca de los arboles en parcelas de L-. Al contrario, hipotetizamos que la adicion de nutrientes en hojarasca aumentaria el crecimiento, la supervivencia, y la produccion de hojarasca de los arboles en parcelas de L+. Para probar nuestra hipotesis, registramos el crecimiento y la supervivencia de los arboles cada dos anos, y medimos hojarasca mensualmente durante 17 anos de tratamientos.El crecimiento de los arboles y la produccion de hojarasca disminuyo con el tiempo en parcelas de L-, con tasas de crecimiento consistentemente menores que en los controles despues de ocho anos, y una menor produccion de hojarasca despues de cuatro anos de tratamientos. En contraste, aunque la produccion de hojarasca fue mayor en parcelas de L+ comparada con los controles, solo hubo un aumento transitorio en el crecimiento de los arboles inmediatamente despues del inicio de los tratamientos. La supervivencia de los arboles disminuyo con el tiempo en todos los tratamientos, pero no fue afectada por la manipulacion de hojarasca.El declive a largo plazo observado en el crecimiento de los arboles y la produccion de hojarasca en las parcelas de L- brinda una primera evidencia empirica de que el reciclaje de nutrientes en la hojarasca juega un papel clave para sostener la productividad epigea de este bosque tropical. En contraste, el aumento transitorio en el crecimiento de los arboles en las parcelas de L+ se puede atribuir a la gran entrada de nutrientes que representa la adicion del mantillo entero al inicio de los tratamientos. La adicion de nutrientes en la hojarasca a largo plazo fue sin embargo suficiente para aumentar la produccion de hojarasca, posiblemente a traves de un aumento en la tasa de recambio de las hojas.Sintesis: El reciclaje eficiente de nutrientes a traves de la hojarasca contribuye significativamente a los requerimientos anuales de nutrientes de los arboles en bosque maduro tropical, compensando la infertilidad del suelo. Por lo tanto, perturbaciones a este delicado ciclo podrian reducir el secuestro de carbono en la biomasa de los bosques tropicales.The maintenance of highly productive lowland tropical forests on infertile soils is often attributed to nutrient cycling via litterfall. Almost 40 years after this theory was first proposed, our large-scale field experiment demonstrates that tree growth and litter production decline in response to long-term litter removal, providing the first empirical evidence that nutrient cycling by litterfall plays a key role in maintaining above-ground productivity in this tropical forest.image
Tropical Forest and Wetland Losses and the Role of Protected Areas in Northwestern Belize, Revealed from Landsat and Machine Learning			Changes in land-use and land-cover, including both agricultural expansion and the establishment of protected areas, have altered the landscape pattern and extent of forest and wetland cover in the tropics. In Central America, land-use and land-cover change is also threatening the cultural resources of the region's ancient Maya heritage since many ancient sites have been degraded by burning, deforestation, and plowing. In this study of Orange Walk District of northern Belize, from the 1980s to the present, we used multitemporal Landsat data with a random forest classifier to reveal trends in land-use and land-cover change and the increasing loss of forest and wetlands. We develop a random forest classifier that is time-generalized to map land-use and land-cover across the entire Landsat record, including Landsat 4, 5, 7, and 8, with a single algorithm. Including multiyear and seasonal composites was important for obtaining cloud-free coverage and distinguishing between different land-use and land-cover types. Early deforestation (1984-1987) was in small patches scattered across the landscape and likely driven by small scale agriculture such as milpa and smaller area tractor and horse-drawn plowing. The establishment of protected areas in the late 1980s and early 1990s allowed for forest regrowth in these areas, while wetland losses were high at 15%. The transition to industrial agriculture in the 2000s, however, drove a 43.6% expansion of agriculture and a 7.5% loss of forest and a 28.2% loss of wetlands during the similar to 15 years. Protected areas initiated in the 1980s led to a nearly 100 km(2) decrease in agriculture from 1984-1987 to 1999-2001, and they became essential refugia for habitat and maintaining ecosystem services.
Tropical forest birds after 20 years of the establishment of a reservoir: Extinction, colonization, and recolonization events			Reservoirs are fundamental for human well-being but can cause landscape changes (e.g., habitat fragmentation and loss), altering biodiversity and ecosystem services. However, we know little about reservoir long-term effects on bird communities of tropical rainforests at different temporal scales. We assessed species richness and composition changes in four consecutive periods in a reservoir area in the Colombian Tropical Andes. After 20 years of monitoring avifauna within the reservoir, we recorded 360 bird species along with 47 local extinction and 184 colonization events. We found that species richness increased by 42% during the first 11 years after reservoir establishment. After that, changes in species bird composition were largely explained by species turnover. Eighty-two percent of the expected species in the region were recorded within the reservoir area. Also, forests surrounding the reservoir are a habitat for several threatened bird species. Bird community changes observed can be explained by secondary succession, changes in vegetation cover (i.e., increase in forest area), the transformation of aquatic ecosystems, forest protection, and restoration programs focused on biodiversity conservation. Long-term systematic bird sampling in tropical forests is key to understanding biodiversity dynamics and the effectiveness of conservation actions.
Tropical forest carbon balance in a warmer world: a critical review spanning microbial- to ecosystem-scale processes			Tropical forests play a major role in regulating global carbon (C) fluxes and stocks, and even small changes to C cycling in this productive biome could dramatically affect atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations. Temperature is expected to increase over all land surfaces in the future, yet we have a surprisingly poor understanding of how tropical forests will respond to this significant climatic change. Here we present a contemporary synthesis of the existing data and what they suggest about how tropical forests will respond to increasing temperatures. Our goals were to: (i) determine whether there is enough evidence to support the conclusion that increased temperature will affect tropical forest C balance; (ii) if there is sufficient evidence, determine what direction this effect will take; and, (iii) establish what steps should to be taken to resolve the uncertainties surrounding tropical forest responses to increasing temperatures. We approach these questions from a mass-balance perspective and therefore focus primarily on the effects of temperature on inputs and outputs of C, spanning microbial- to ecosystem-scale responses. We found that, while there is the strong potential for temperature to affect processes related to C cycling and storage in tropical forests, a notable lack of data combined with the physical, biological and chemical diversity of the forests themselves make it difficult to resolve this issue with certainty. We suggest a variety of experimental approaches that could help elucidate how tropical forests will respond to warming, including large-scale in situ manipulation experiments, longer term field experiments, the incorporation of a range of scales in the investigation of warming effects (both spatial and temporal), as well as the inclusion of a diversity of tropical forest sites. Finally, we highlight areas of tropical forest research where notably few data are available, including temperature effects on: nutrient cycling, heterotrophic versus autotrophic respiration, thermal acclimation versus substrate limitation of plant and microbial communities, below-ground C allocation, species composition (plant and microbial), and the hydraulic architecture of roots. Whether or not tropical forests will become a source or a sink of C in a warmer world remains highly uncertain. Given the importance of these ecosystems to the global C budget, resolving this uncertainty is a primary research priority.
Tropical Forest Conservation and Industry Partnership: An Experience from the Congo Basin			Historically, the conservation of forests and wildlife has focused on the creation of national parks and reserves. However, only 9% of protected areas are larger than 14,000 hectares, likely making them too small to conserve ecosystem services and prevent loss of wide-ranging keystone species such as elephant and leopard. New approaches are needed that extend conservation beyond protected area boundaries into areas where economic considerations prevail. The book describes one such emerging model of conservation: the integration of the private sector into partnerships to protect biodiversity and improve forest management. While such partnerships are being created in nearly every sector of resource extraction, detailed analyses of how such partnerships work and whether they benefit biodiversity conservation are rare. Using a case study from the Congo Basin, the book examines principles of conservation and partnership, and provides technical and methodological details to replicate an innovative conservation model. It presents concrete solutions for expanding conservation across multi-use landscapes, a necessary action as industry expands to all the corners of the globe. © 2012 Wildlife Conservation Society.
Tropical forest conservation versus conversion trade-offs: Insights from analysis of ecosystem services provided by Kakamega rainforest in Kenya			Ecosystem services provided by tropical forests are becoming scarcer due to continued deforestation as demand for forest benefits increases with the growing population. There is need for comprehensive valuation of key ecosystem services in order to inform policy and implement better management systems to enhance the supply of ecosystem services. This study estimates local economic value of key ecosystem services provided by Kakamega rainforest and examines how the information can support sustainable forest management in Kenya. This is the only rainforest in Kenya and it has exceptional biocliversity value including several unique species not found anywhere else in the country. Kakamega rainforest also provides a classic case of conflict between conservation and exploitation goals given the dense population around it We carried out elaborate household and visitors surveys to collect data used to estimate the economic value of three main ecosystem services. We estimated the total economic value of key ecosystem services (excluding biodiversity value) at about US$ 74 million per year or US$ 415 ha(-1) yr(-1). The local economic benefits are considerably less than forgone returns from agricultural activities if the forest were to be converted to the best agricultural uses. Arguably, continued protection of this forest is justified on the basis of the unknown value of its rich biodiversity and capacity to sequester CO2. Empirical findings show that the existing forest management system was less effective due to resource constraints and institutional weaknesses. Our study provides insights for the need to manage this forest for multiple uses. We recommend an integrated management strategy that balances local resource needs with biodiversity conservation. We suggest that improved stakeholder collaboration can facilitate sustainable management of this forest resource. Besides, carefully crafted payment for ecosystem services mechanisms and broad environmental education programs can support sustainable forest conservation for this arid other similar forest ecosystems in Africa. (C) 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Tropical forest conservation: Attitudes and preferences			This paper applies contingent valuation to assess public awareness of tropical deforestation, to investigate the willingness to pay (WTP) to conserve tropical forests, and to determine the impact of the payment vehicle on the stated WTP of a sample of about 500 individuals in Geneva, Switzerland. About 3/4 of respondents state that they have already heard about tropical deforestation and biodiversity. People rank carbon storage as the most important contribution of tropical forests, followed by biodiversity and support to local communities. The mean stated WTP is about CHF 110.- per year. All other things being equal, the stated WTP is about 24% higher for a tax payment vehicle compared to a voluntary payment. Education and income have a positive impact on WTP. WTP is also higher when the respondents judge that the main contribution of tropical forests is towards biodiversity. (C) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Tropical forest dynamics in unstable terrain: A case study from New Guinea			Long-term forest dynamics plots in the tropics tend to be situated on stable terrain. This study investigated forest dynamics on the north coast of New Guinea where active subduction zones are uplifting lowland basins and exposing relatively young sediments to rapid weathering. We examined forest dynamics in relation to disturbance history, topography and soil nutrients based on partial re-census of the 50-ha Wanang Forest Dynamics Plot in Papua New Guinea. The plot is relatively high in cations and phosphorus but low in nitrogen. Soil nutrients and topography accounted for 29% of variation in species composition but only 4% of variation in basal area. There were few areas of high biomass and most of the forest was comprised of small-diameter stems. Approximately 18% of the forest was less than 30 y old and the annual tree mortality rate of nearly 4% was higher than in other tropical forests in South-East Asia and the neotropics. These results support the reputation of New Guinea's forests as highly dynamic, with frequent natural disturbance. Empirical documentation of this hypothesis expands our understanding of tropical forest dynamics and suggests that geomorphology might be incorporated in models of global carbon storage especially in regions of unstable terrain. © Copyright Cambridge University Press 2018.
Tropical Forest Ecosystem Services in Improving Livelihoods For Local Communities			This edited book covers major importance of tropical forest diversity and its values to vegetation, wildlife, and the local community. It addresses the current issues and opportunities in the Southeast Asia’s tropical forests. This book lays the groundwork for a better understanding of tropical forest ecosystem services. Ecosystem services has four concepts: provisioning, regulating, cultural and supporting services. In an era of rapid population growth and increasing pressure on tropical natural resources, ecosystem services have become central to the discussion of climate change mitigation. The values of tropical forest ecosystem services deserve to be the highlighted when it comes to shaping responsible behaviors towards sustainable development goals (SDGs). This book is of interest and useful to researchers and academics teaching in the field of tropical forest conservation, tropical ecosystems, tropical products technology, ecotourism, forest plantation management, bio industrial economy, agroforestry business and marketing. Professionals, foresters, industrial entrepreneurs, ecologists, and a valuable source of reference to the relevant researchers and students in the region. © The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023.
Tropical Forest Landscape Restoration in Indonesia: A Review			Indonesia has the second-largest biodiversity of any country in the world. Deforestation and forest degradation have caused a range of environmental issues, including habitat degradation and loss of biodiversity, deterioration of water quality and quantity, air pollution, and increased greenhouse gas emissions that contribute to climate change. Forest restoration at the landscape level has been conducted to balance ecological integrity and human well-being. Forest restoration efforts are also aimed at reducing CO2 emissions and are closely related to Indonesia's Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) from the forestry sector. The purpose of this paper is to examine the regulatory, institutional, and policy aspects of forest restoration in Indonesia, as well as the implementation of forest restoration activities in the country. The article was written using a synoptic review approach to Forest Landscape Restoration (FLR)-related articles and national experiences. Failures, success stories, and criteria and indicators for forest restoration success are all discussed. We also discuss the latest silvicultural techniques for the success of the forest restoration program. Restoration governance in Indonesia has focused on the wetland ecosystem such as peatlands and mangroves, but due to the severely degraded condition of many forests, the government has by necessity opted for active restoration involving the planting and establishment of livelihood options. The government has adapted its restoration approach from the early focus on ecological restoration to more forest landscape restoration, which recognizes that involving the local community in restoration activities is critical for the success of forest restoration.
Tropical Forest Regeneration			Following large-scale human or natural disturbances, the regeneration of tropical forests follows a progression of stages through which forest assemblages gradually become enriched with species and increase in structural and functional complexity. Successional pathways and rates of change vary widely according to the nature of prior land use, the proximity of old-growth forest, and the availability of seed-dispersing fauna. Regenerating forests rapidly accumulate nutrients and carbon in vegetation, litter, and soil, but the recovery of species composition may take centuries. Regeneration of tropical forests provides essential resources and ecosystem services that support millions of forest-dependent people. © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Tropical forest restoration under future climate change			Tropical forest restoration has the potential to remove large amounts of CO2 from the atmosphere, but the climate mitigation potential could be threatened by climate change impacts. This study shows that carbon sequestered in restored forests is predominantly safe under a range of future scenarios.One of the most promising ways to rapidly remove CO2 from the atmosphere is through the restoration of tropical forests. Ongoing and future climate change may, however, threaten the permanence of carbon stored through restoration. Excessive heat, drought or increased disturbances such as wildfire could all negatively impact the integrity of restored carbon. To investigate these risks to tropical forest restoration, we performed 221 simulations with a dynamic global vegetation model (LPJ-LMfire) driven by a range of future climate scenarios and ecophysiological responses to CO2 concentrations. We show that carbon in restored tropical forests is largely preserved under the entire range of potential future climates, regardless of assumptions we make about the potential for CO2 fertilization of photosynthesis. Restoring even half of the potential area can account for 56-69% of the carbon storage, depending on whether areas are selected for low cost or high carbon gain.
Tropical forest restoration: Fast resilience of plant biomass contrasts with slow recovery of stable soil C stocks			Due to intensifying human disturbance, over half of the world's tropical forests are reforested or afforested secondary forests or plantations. Understanding the resilience of carbon (C) stocks in these forests, and estimating the extent to which they can provide equivalent carbon (C) sequestration and stabilization to the old growth forest they replace, is critical for the global C balance. In this study, we combined estimates of biomass C stocks with a detailed assessment of soil C pools in bare land, Eucalyptus plantation, secondary forest and natural old-growth forest after over 50years of forest restoration in a degraded tropical region of South China. We used isotope studies, density fractionation and physical fractionation to determine the age and stability of soil C pools at different soil depths. After 52years, the secondary forests had equivalent biomass C stocks to natural forest, whereas soil C stocks were still much higher in natural forest (97.42t/ha) than in secondary forest (58.75 t/ha) or Eucalyptus plantation (38.99t/ha) and lowest in bare land (19.9t/ha). Analysis of C-13 values revealed that most of the C in the soil surface horizons in the secondary forest was new C, with a limited increase of more recalcitrant old C, and limited accumulation of C in deeper soil horizons. However, occlusion of C in microaggregates in the surface soil layer was similar across forested sites, which suggests that there is great potential for additional soil C sequestration and stabilization in the secondary forest and Eucalyptus plantation. Collectively, our results demonstrate that reforestation on degraded tropical land can restore biomass C and surface soil C stocks within a few decades, but much longer recovery times are needed to restore recalcitrant C pools and C stocks at depth. Repeated harvesting and disturbance in rotation plantations had a substantial negative impact on the recovery of soil C stocks. We suggest that current calculations of soil C in secondary tropical forests (e.g. IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories) could overestimate soil C sequestration and stabilization levels in secondary forests and plantations.A is available for this article.
Tropical forest subjected to intensive post-logging silviculture maintains functionally diverse dung beetle communities			Commercially logged tropical forests hold high conservation value but are rapidly being converted to lucrative low-diversity plantations. Post-logging interventions that accelerate forest timber and carbon recovery—such as enrichment planting and cutting of woody vines—may reduce both the spatial extent of logging and economic pressures to convert forests, delivering considerable conservation benefits. However, they could also seriously undermine logged forest biodiversity, simplifying forest structure and removing important wildlife microhabitats. To date, no study has investigated the impact of post-logging interventions on invertebrates. Focusing on dung beetles, we explore the effects of intensive vine-cutting and enrichment planting within a largescale post-logging silvicultural project in northern Borneo. We find that for four measures of functional diversity (the facet of diversity that accounts for species traits and functions) and for species richness, treated forest communities are similar to those in unlogged and naturally regenerating forest. Moreover, although community composition in treated forest remains distinct from old-growth forest, it is no different than that in naturally regenerating forest and in fact more closely resembles old-growth than naturally regenerating forest in terms of effective diversity. Our results indicate that logged forests continue to host diverse and functioning dung beetle communities even after silvicultural intensification. Post-logging interventions could therefore play an important role in forest and biodiversity conservation via their incorporation into emerging agendas including REDD+ and the Bonn Challenge. © 2019 Elsevier B.V.
Tropical forest, geospatial data and REDD+			With an increasing role of tropical forests supporting a range of ecosystem services, biodiversity conservation, water regulation, soil conservation, timber, non-timber forest products, carbon sequestration, and climate change mitigation, the importance of forest resources management has become very crucial. The tropical forests of Indochina countries are rich in biodiversity and carbon density, and thus are significant from social, ecological, political and economic aspects. These forests provide essential livelihoods to the local and indigenous people. Rapid economic growth, agriculture expansion, illegal logging, population growth, and urbanization have been reported as major contributors to almost all cases of deforestation. Due to rapid development, forest resources are at a great risk. The FRA 2010 report shows that deforestation caused a loss of about 13 million hectares of tropical forests per year from the year 2000 to 2010. Therefore, there is an urgent need for better management of these resources. This book partially contributes towards climate change mitigation by implementing the Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation (REDD+) mechanism. To mitigate climate change, most present studies are now concentrated on afforestation, reforestation and reducing deforestation and degradation. This book is focused on the application of multi-sensor remote sensing techniques to manage Cambodian forests for the effective implementation of the REDD+ mechanism. In this context, it is important to obtain reliable and consistent information of (a) forest cover, (b) deforestation, and (c) forest biomass to estimate CO2 emissions for the improvement of national carbon accounting. Additionally, this information will also be used for the development of the measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) system and for the management of forest resources to support sustainable forest management. Current knowledge is very limited with regard to the MRV system for REDD+ mechanism implementation. This book demonstrates the use of multi-sensor remote sensing techniques to manage the forest resources more sustainably. Further, it includes a concept on how precisely we can measure various forest parameters to minimize the uncertainty and to validate the results based on field data. The study is very much interdisciplinary in nature. It integrates core remote sensing techniques with the socio-economic angle of the REDD+ mechanism. It emphasizes on remote sensing as a technique for ensuring the MRV of REDD+ initiatives, taking into consideration its cost effectiveness in implementation. © 2017 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. All rights reserved.
Tropical forestry practices for carbon sequestration: A review and case study from southeast Asia			In order to fulfill their commitments to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, the industrialized countries started searching for cost-effective alternatives for reducing their greenhouse gas emissions. This has led to a rising interest in forestry-based carbon (C) offsets. Tree planting or silvicultural treatments can be used to actively remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Alternatively, conservation practices or improved forest management can be used to prevent or reduce current trends of carbon release from existing forests. In this paper, we describe a series of carbon offset projects that have been initiated using these approaches. A project involving planting of degraded forests in Sabah, Malaysia, is described in more detail. It is estimated that this project will offset 183 Mg C ha(-1) after a 60-yr rotation, or an average of 100 Mg C ha(-1) yr(-1) during the same rotation period.
Tropical forests and cocoa production: synergies and threats in the chocolate market			Cocoa is an important agricultural product that plays a crucial role in local communities in South America. In Brazil, it is traditionally grown in agroforestry systems, which are more sustainable and contribute to biodiversity conservation. However, the recent expansion of intensive monocultures in tropical forests poses significant threats to this activity. Using historical data on land use and cocoa productivity at the municipality level from Brazil's primary cocoa-producing states, we show that maintaining and restoring forest cover are positively correlated with cocoa productivity, particularly in areas with less anthropogenic disturbance. This highlights the dependence of cocoa production on ecosystem services. Recent data reveal that in municipalities where local agriculture is less reliant on cocoa, only larger farms have benefitted from increased forest cover, probably due to their greater dependence on fragments of natural habitat for ecosystem services. In municipalities that are more reliant on cocoa, the effects of forest cover were not detected, while strong negative effects of forest fragmentation were observed in both small- and large-scale farms. We emphasize the importance of preserving natural forests near cocoa plantations to optimize productivity in Amazon and Atlantic Forest agroforestry, especially in deforested areas.
Tropical forests as drivers of lake carbon burial			A significant proportion of carbon (C) captured by terrestrial primary production is buried in lacustrine ecosystems, which have been substantially affected by anthropogenic activities globally. However, there is a scarcity of sedimentary organic carbon (OC) accumulation information for lakes surrounded by highly productive rainforests at warm tropical latitudes, or in response to land cover and climate change. Here, we combine new data from intensive campaigns spanning 13 lakes across remote Amazonian regions with a broad literature compilation, to produce the first spatially-weighted global analysis of recent OC burial in lakes (over similar to 50-100-years) that integrates both biome type and forest cover. We find that humid tropical forest lake sediments are a disproportionately important global OC sink of similar to 80 Tg C yr(-1) with implications for climate change. Further, we demonstrate that temperature and forest conservation are key factors in maintaining massive organic carbon pools in tropical lacustrine sediments.
Tropical forests in a Co2-rich world			Tropical forests resemble, besides their enormous genetic diversity, the single largest biomass carbon pool in the world. Only a 'small' annual increase of this pool could trap the current surplus of atmospheric CO2. The fact that this is not happening already today (after the world has seen a 27% increase in atmospheric CO2 in only 150 years) sets the boundaries of the likely trends to be expected in the future. In contrast to the possibly small overall responses of the tropical forest carbon pool, individual plant responses to CO2 enrichment will be significant. Since species and their genotypes will not respond in identical ways, selective processes will be induced which will lead to new community structures and alterations of numerous plant-plant, plant-animal and plant-microbe interactions. Examples are provided for such subtile CO2 effects, measured both in the greenhouse and in the field. From what is known currently it is concluded that in closed humid tropical forests leaf area index is unlikely to increase, mineral nutrient and water demand may (at least temporarily) become reduced, and leaf tissue quality plus associated consumer behavior will be altered. The big unknown is the behavior of tropical soils and their microflora and fauna. There is a realistic possibility that carbon turnover will be increased in tropical forests in a CO2-enriched world, which would have substantial implications for nutrient cycling.
Tropical Forests: The Challenges of Maintaining Ecosystem Services while Managing the Landscape			This 140-page book titled "Tropical Forests - The Challenges Of Maintaining Ecosystem Services While Managing The Landscape" is written in English. This book contains six individually authored chapters and each chapter is extensively referenced. The topics covered include land use change ecosystem services, fauna diversity in tropical rainforest, detection of Amazon forest degradation, climate chage mitigation, remote sensing data, and nutrient cycling.
Tropical forest-transition landscapes: a portfolio for studying people, tree crops and agro-ecological change in context			Nudging the development trajectory of tropical landscapes towards sustainability requires a global commitment and policies that take diverse contexts and forest transitions into account. Out-scaling and upscaling landscape-level actions to achieve sustainable development goals globally need to be based on understanding of extrapolation domains and interconnectivity of products and services. We evaluated three portfolios of tropical landscape observatories and quantified extrapolation domains across ecological zones, stages of forest transition, human development index (HDI), population density and potential prominence of four dominant tropical tree crops (arabica coffee, cacao, rubber and oil palm). The ASB Partnership for Tropical Forest Margins portfolio was focussed on active humid forest margins and the Poverty and Environment Network on early stages of forest transition. The portfolio of sentinel landscapes of the Forests, Trees and Agroforestry (FTA) research programme provides a 5% sample of pantropical area, 8% of people, 9% of tree cover and 10-12% of potential tree crop presence, with quantified biases across zones, transition stages and HDI. In the 'water tower' configuration, relatively high population density coincides with biodiversity, coffee expansion and contested ecosystem services. The extrapolation domain of the FTA portfolio includes trade-off (tree loss) and synergy (restoration) phases of tropical forest transition.
Tropical mixed-species plantations can outperform monocultures in terms of carbon sequestration and economic return			Tropical reforestation is an important strategy to mitigate the global climate crisis through the sequestration of CO2. Together with increasing CO2 prices, carbon storage becomes increasingly relevant for commercial re-forestations. Due to higher productivity, mixed-species reforestations have been suggested for carbon plantings. Yet, current studies comparing mixtures and monocultures lack an in-depth comparison of economic and carbon sequestration potentials. Moreover, their economic valuations do not consider carbon payments and differences in forest management. Using a simulation-optimization approach, we compared the economic and carbon sequestration performance of commercial mixed-species stands and monocultures in Costa Rica. Mixed-species stands outperformed their monoculture peers by net present value (NPV) up to 3135 USD/ha if only timber sales were considered, or 3500-16,800 USD/ha if carbon payments were also considered (at a discount rate of 8%). When managed solely for carbon sequestration, the best-performing mixture achieved a mean stand carbon 7% above the best-performing monoculture. The results were sensitive to the comparison baseline applied. The results of this study suggest that tropical mixed-species plantations can be a competitive alternative to mono-cultures. Forest investors could benefit from establishing mixed-species plantations when reforesting plantation sites where species-specific site suitability is uncertain, or when working with lesser-studied tree species.
Tropical montane cloud forest, twenty years of ecological research. What have we done and where are we going?			Tropical montane cloud forest (TMCF) is a current issue. It would appear that TMCF had an extended tradition in ecological research, but it is only during the last 20 years that it has been intensively studied. The last 10 years have seen an impressive development in ecological knowledge and the emergence of several research lines. The objective of this paper is to present a review of the TMCF ecological research published in 1995-2014 to have a retrospective, a current view and a glimpse of future studies in Mexico and, particularly, in the state of Veracruz. Biodiversity and disturbance have been the most addressed issues in TMCF. In the last decade, following disturbance and habitat loss of the TMCF, more applied topics such as ecological restoration and ecosystem services have been consolidated. Forthcoming topics will be relating forest resilience with forest processes, components and climate change effects.
Tropical peatland carbon storage linked to global latitudinal trends in peat recalcitrance			Peatlands represent large terrestrial carbon banks. Given that most peat accumulates in boreal regions, where low temperatures and water saturation preserve organic matter, the existence of peat in (sub)tropical regions remains enigmatic. Here we examined peat and plant chemistry across a latitudinal transect from the Arctic to the tropics. Near-surface low-latitude peat has lower carbohydrate and greater aromatic content than near-surface high-latitude peat, creating a reduced oxidation state and resulting recalcitrance. This recalcitrance allows peat to persist in the (sub)tropics despite warm temperatures. Because we observed similar declines in carbohydrate content with depth in high-latitude peat, our data explain recent field-scale deep peat warming experiments in which catotelm (deeper) peat remained stable despite temperature increases up to 9 °C. We suggest that high-latitude deep peat reservoirs may be stabilized in the face of climate change by their ultimately lower carbohydrate and higher aromatic composition, similar to tropical peats. © 2018, The Author(s).
Tropical peatlands under siege: the need for evidence-based policies and strategies			It is widely known that tropical peatlands, including peat swamp forests (PSFs), provide numerous ecosystem services in both spatial and temporal dimensions. These include their role as large stores for organic carbon, which when not managed well could be released as carbon dioxide and methane, accelerating climate warming. Massive destruction and conversion of peatlands occur at an alarming rate in some regions. We hope that the lessons learned from those regions currently under siege from conversion can inform other regions that are at the precipice of mass conversion to agriculture. Much has been learned about high latitude, northern hemisphere peatlands but less is known about tropical peatlands. We collate, analyze, and synthesize the evidence revealed from the set of articles in this special issue. This special issue is a step forward, presenting new information generated from a considerable amount of field data collected from peatlands across the tropics in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. The hard data collected using comparable scientific methodologies are analyzed and compared with existing published data to form a larger dataset as scientific evidence. The synthesis is then interpreted to generate new knowledge to inform the policy community on how to strategize the sustainable management of tropical peatlands. Carbon (C) stocks in tropical peatland ecosystems can be as large as 3000 Mg C ha                             −1                             , but the rate of loss is also phenomenal, causing substantial emissions of greenhouse gases of more than 20 Mg C ha                             −1                              year                             −1                             . These losses have mainly taken place in Southeast Asia, particularly Indonesia, where peatland development for oil palm and pulpwood has accelerated over the past few decades. Although peatlands in the Amazon and Congo Basin are less developed, it is possible that the same unsustainable pathway would be followed in these regions, if lessons from the dire situation in Southeast Asia are not learned. Strong policies to halt further loss of tropical peatlands may be drawn up and combined with incentives that promote a global agenda under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 21st Conference of the Parties, Paris, France, Agreement. However, we also propose a framework to address national and local agendas that can be implemented under the nationally determined contributions (NDCs) by balancing conversion/development and conservation/restoration objectives.                          © 2019, The Author(s).
Tropical rainforest biodiversity and aboveground carbon changes and uncertainties in the Selva Central, Peru			Tropical deforestation has reduced the extent of natural forests, which conserve biodiversity, provide essential resources to people, and reduce climate change by storing carbon. Forest conservation projects need tree species data to effectively manage biodiversity while greenhouse gas reduction programs require robust methods to estimate forest carbon. Here, we use field measurements, remote sensing, and Monte Carlo analyses to quantify tree biodiversity and aboveground carbon changes and uncertainties in 5200km2 of Amazonian and Yungas rainforest and other land around the Parque Nacional Yanachaga-Chemillén and two other protected areas in the Selva Central, Peru. Field inventories of 17ha found 438 tree species in 156 families. Field measurements of 10,838 trees and Monte Carlo analyses of uncertainties in measurements, allometric equations, wood density, and the carbon fraction of biomass showed that aboveground live carbon densities were 93±39Mgha-1 (mean ±95% confidence interval [CI]) in old-growth forest and 40±10Mgha-1 in secondary forest. Carbon density was significantly correlated to tree species richness (P<0.0001). Supervised classification of Landsat images showed a 1989-2005 net deforestation rate of 0.3%y-1, reduction of forest cover from three-quarters of the area to two-thirds, and net degradation of additional forest equivalent to half the deforested area. A Monte Carlo analysis that combined carbon density and remote sensing uncertainties showed that forest changes caused statistically significant net emissions of 1.6±0.4millionMg carbon. Allometric equations and remote sensing accounted for most of the uncertainty. Multivariate statistical analyses showed that, of six factors examined, distance to roads most explained historical deforestation patterns. The protected areas experienced no net deforestation, very low degradation, and very low change close to roads. Projection of potential forest cover to 2021 indicates that a Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+) project could avoid gross emissions of 2.8±0.8millionMg carbon. One-eighth of the area would be eligible for afforestation or reforestation under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), with credit for carbon storage occurring above a projected baseline gross reforestation rate of 1.8%y-1. These activities could conserve tropical forest carbon and biodiversity. © 2013 Elsevier B.V.
Tropical Rainforest Successional Processes can Facilitate Successfully Recovery of Extremely Degraded Tropical Forest Ecosystems Following Intensive Mining Operations			Reforestation is an effective way to alleviate deforestation and its negative impacts on ecosystem services. In tropical rainforest ecosystem, however, frequent typhoons and heavy rainfall can result in landslides and uprooting of many seedlings, making reforestation efforts very difficult, especially within extremely degraded sites where soil conditions cannot support any plant life. Here, we described a reforestation protocol which is based on tropical rainforest successional processes to not only prevent landslides and tree uprooting due to frequent typhoon and heavy rain, but also accelerate tropical forest succession. This protocol first used the slope and soil layer of the undisturbed old-growth tropical rainforest as a reference to reconstruct slope and soil layers. Then multiple tropical tree species with high growth and survival rate were separately monocultured in the reconstructed soil layers. In the year of 2015 and 2016, we tested the effectiveness of this protocol to recover a 0.2 km(2) extremely degraded tropical rainforest which consists of bare rock and thus does not support any plant life, in Sanya city, China. Our results showed that, both typhoons and heavy rains did not result in landslide or any tree damages in the area this reforestation protocol was used. Moreover, our separately monocultured eight fast-growing tree species have much higher fast-growing related functional traits than those for tree species in the adjacent undisturbed tropical seasonal forest, which in turn resulted in large soil water and nutrient loss within 3 years. This seemed to simulate a quick transition from primary succession (consist of bare rock and cannot support any plant life) to mid-stage of secondary tropical rainforest succession (many fast-growing pioneer tree species induced high soil water and nutrient loss). Thus, mixing the late-successional tropical tree species with each of the separately monocultured eight fast-growing tree species can accelerate recovery to the undisturbed tropical rainforest as soon as possible. Overall, based on tropical rainforest successional processes, our research provides an effective protocol for quickly and effectively restoring an extremely degraded tropical rainforest ecosystem. We expect that this work will be important for the future recovery of other extremely degraded tropical rainforest ecosystems.
Tropical rainforests and agroforests under global change: Ecological and socio-economic valuations — an introduction			Tropical rainforests are disappearing, causing irreversible species losses, especially of rare and specialised species (e.g. Owens and Bennett 2000, Acebey et al. 2003, Kessler et al. 2009, Maas et al. 2009). Despite an increasing recognition of the value of biodiversity and associated ecosystem services at national and international levels, rainforests continue to be seriously threatened by human-induced global change such as agricultural intensification and climate change. © 2010, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Tropical reforestation and climate change: Beyond carbon			Tropical reforestation (TR) has been highlighted as an important intervention for climate change mitigation because of its carbon storage potential. TR can also play other frequently overlooked, but significant, roles in helping society and ecosystems adapt to climate variability and change. For example, reforestation can ameliorate climate-associated impacts of altered hydrological cycles in watersheds, protect coastal areas from increased storms, and provide habitat to reduce the probability of species' extinctions under a changing climate. Consequently, reforestation should be managed with both adaptation and mitigation objectives in mind, so as to maximize synergies among these diverse roles, and to avoid trade-offs in which the achievement of one goal is detrimental to another. Management of increased forest cover must also incorporate measures for reducing the direct and indirect impacts of changing climate on reforestation itself. Here we advocate a focus on "climate-smart reforestation," defined as reforesting for climate change mitigation and adaptation, while ensuring that the direct and indirect impacts of climate change on reforestation are anticipated and minimized. © 2015 The Authors. Restoration Ecology published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of Society for Ecological Restoration.
Tropical reforestation and deforestation and the Kyoto Protocol			0
Tropical secondary forest regeneration conserves high levels of avian phylogenetic diversity			Secondary forests are promoted as having pivotal roles in reversing the tropical extinction crisis. While secondary forests recover carbon and species over time, a key question is whether phylogenetic diversity the total evolutionary history across all species within a community also recovers. Conserving phylogenetic diversity protects unique phenotypic and ecological traits, and benefits ecosystem functioning and stability. We examined the extent to which avian phylogenetic diversity recovers in secondary forests in the Colombian Choco-Andes. sesPD, a measure of phylogenetic richness corrected for species richness, recovered to old-growth forest levels after similar to 30 years, while sesMPD, a measure of the phylogenetic distance between individuals in a community, recovered to old-growth levels even within young secondary forest. Mean evolutionary distinctiveness also recovered rapidly in secondary forest communities. Our results suggest that secondary forests can play a vital role in conserving distinct evolutionary lineages and high levels of evolutionary history. Focusing conservation and carbon-based payments for ecosystem services on secondary forest recovery and their subsequent protection thus represent a good use of scarce conservation resources. (C) 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Tropical wetlands and land use changes: The case of oil palm in neotropical riverine floodplains			Oil palm plantations are expanding in Latin America due to the global demand for food and biofuels, and much of this expansion has occurred at expense of important tropical ecosystems. Nevertheless, there is limited knowledge about effects on aquatic ecosystems near to oil palm-dominated landscapes. In this study, we used Landsat 7 ETM+, Landsat 8 OLI imagery and high-resolution images in Google Earth to map the current extent of oil palm plantations and determined prior land use land cover (LULC) in the Usumacinta River Basin as a case-study site. In addition, we assess the proximity of the crop with aquatic ecosystems distributed in the Usumacinta floodplains and their potential effects. Based on our findings, the most significant change was characterized by the expansion of oil palm crop areas mainly at expenses of regional rainforest and previously intervened lands (e.g. secondary vegetation and agriculture). Although aquatic ecosystem class (e.g. rivers, lagoons and channels) decreased in surface around 3% during the study period (2001-2017), the change was not due to the expansion of oil palm lands. However, we find that more than 50% of oil palm cultivations are near (between 500 and 3000 m) to aquatic ecosystems and this could have significant environmental impacts on sediment and water quality. Oil palm crops tend to spatially concentrate in the Upper Usumacinta ecoregion (Guatemala), which is recognized as an area of important fish endemism. We argue that the basic information generated in this study is essential to have better land use decision-making in a region that is relative newcomer to oil palm boom.
Turnover rates of regenerated forests challenge restoration efforts in the Brazilian Atlantic forest			Natural forest regeneration is a key component of global ecosystem restoration scenarios. Regenerated forests, however, may not persist and a better understanding of the drivers of forest persistence is critical to ensure the success of restoration efforts. We used 35 years of detailed land cover maps to quantify forest regeneration and study the drivers of regenerated forest persistence and longevity in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest, a restoration hotspot. We mapped over 4.47 Mha of native forest regenerated in the region between 1985 and 2019, of which, two thirds persisted until 2019 (3.1 Mha). However, mean age of ephemeral (i.e. cleared before 2019) forest regeneration was only 7.9 years, suggesting a rapid turnover of regrowing forests under certain conditions. Regenerated forests had greater longevity and probability of persistence in steeper slopes, close to rivers and existing forests, near permanent agriculture, and in areas with higher Gross Development Product and agricultural yield, but were less likely to persist in areas with higher rural-urban population ratios. Regeneration occurred predominantly in pasturelands and areas of shifting agriculture, but it was also less likely to persist within these dynamic landscapes. Specific public policies should stimulate forest regeneration in areas of consolidated agriculture, where forest permanence tends to be higher. The ephemerality of forest regeneration in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest highlights the importance of favorable conditions and policies that promote second-growth forest persistence in tropical regions. Conservation of regenerating forests is critical for meeting national and global restoration and climate mitigation goals.
Two decades of accelerated deforestation in Peruvian forests: a national and regional analysis (2000-2020)			The global tree cover has kept reducing in the last two decades, mainly in tropical forests, despite the global efforts to conserve biodiversity and the ecosystem services that provides. Considering South America is the region that had the highest rate of net forest loss (2000-2020), it is crucial to understand the deforestation dynamics of each country and their regions for the evaluation of effective national conservation actions. Here, we carried out a spatiotemporal analysis of the deforestation rates from 2000 to 2020 on a national and regional scale, including the forest loss inside protected areas, in Peru. It was found that Peru lost 3.4 million ha of forest between 2000 and 2020, mainly in the Not Flooded Rainforest region. National deforestation rates accelerated, while within protected areas rates showed a very small increase. Regional deforestation rates followed the national pattern with one exception-the Coast region. Our results evidence the success of the national conservation strategy based on protected areas to avoid deforestation in all regions, except in the Andean. Moreover, the increment in deforestation rates is aligned with the growth in road infrastructure; increments in anthropic activities; and the more frequent and intense natural extreme events that vary according to the region. Therefore, it is urgent to differentiate the drivers of deforestation that operate at the national versus the regional scale, consider the inclusion of all forest types in the monitoring system, and the strengthening of policies related to land use change at all scales.
Uncertain Emission Reductions from Forest Conservation: REDD in the Bale Mountains, Ethiopia			The environmental integrity of a mechanism rewarding Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD) depends on appropriate accounting for emission reductions. Largely stemming from a lack of forest data in developing countries, emission reductions accounting contains substantial uncertainty as a result of forest carbon stock estimates, where the application of biome-averaged data over large forest areas is commonplace. Using a case study in the Bale Mountains in Ethiopia, we exemplify the implications of primary and secondary forest carbon stock estimates on predicted REDD project emission reductions and revenues. Primary data estimate area-weighted mean forest carbon stock of 195 tC/ha +/- 81, and biome-averaged data reported by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change underestimate forest carbon stock in the Bale Mountains by as much as 63% in moist forest and 58% in dry forest. Combining forest carbon stock estimates and uncertainty in voluntary carbon market prices demonstrates the financial impact of uncertainty: potential revenues over the 20-year project ranged between US$9 million and US$185 million. Estimated revenues will influence decisions to implement a project or not and may have profound implications for the level of benefit sharing that can be supported. Strong financial incentives exist to improve forest carbon stock estimates in tropical forests, as well as the environmental integrity of REDD projects.
Uncertainty in land-use change and forestry sector mitigation options for global warming: Plantation silviculture versus avoided deforestation			How land-use change and forestry sector options can be used to mitigate global warming will depend on a variety of pending decisions regarding interpretation of the Kyoto Protocol, including treatment of uncertainty. In tropical forest countries, the allocation of effort between plantation silviculture and reduction of deforestation would be influenced by the stringency of requirements regarding certainly. Slowing deforestation offers much greater potential benefits, but the certainty associated with these is much lower than in the case of plantations. In the Brazilian case, deforestation avoidance could produce carbon benefits worth 6-45 times as much as the destructive ranching and logging uses to which the forest is now being converted. Capturing the potential value of carbon benefits from avoided deforestation will depend on increasing our understanding of the deforestation process and consequent ability to reduce the uncertainty associated with the effects of deforestation-avoidance measures. It will also depend on whether carbon credits are defined in terms of a. maximum level of uncertainty. (C) 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
Uncovering data gaps in biodiversity research within Brazilian Atlantic Forest restoration			Bringing together and synthesizing data from several primary studies and scales represents a powerful method for identifying patterns and gaps within forest restoration science. In this study, we employ a pioneer quantitative database-driven review combined with spatial analysis to delineate research trends across biodiversity studies within the Brazilian Atlantic Forest (BAF). We gathered a total of 90 primary studies that met our inclusion criteria, collectively providing 822 observations (comparisons between restoration sites and reference forests) spanning restoration areas with ages ranging from 1 to 90 years old. Vascular plants and invertebrates dominated in terms of data availability, whereas soil microorganisms were the subject of limited inquiry. There is an evident disparity in the number of evidences for different forest types across regions, with mixed forest being underrepresented in relation to seasonal forest and dense forest (rainforest). On the contrary, we observed an even distribution of biodiversity outcomes across the age categories we defined for reference forests (i.e. secondary forest, secondary advanced, and old-growth forest). Geospatial analysis revealed a concentration of research efforts within the southeastern region of the BAF. However, a significant research deficit remains for the northeast and south regions, crucial for comprehending biodiversity responses to restoration in environmental extremes. By integrating both qualitative and quantitative approaches, this framework review provides a roadmap for deepening our understanding of biodiversity responses to restoration in the BAF. Ultimately, it serves as a bridge between quantitative findings and nuanced contextual insights, guiding future research and similar studies across diverse ecosystems worldwide.
Uncovering the Hidden Carbon Treasures of the Philippines’ Towering Mountains: A Synergistic Exploration Using Satellite Imagery and Machine Learning			Tropical montane forests (TMFs) are highly valuable for their above-ground biomass (AGB) and their potential to sequester carbon, but they remain understudied. Sentinel-1, -2, biophysical data and Machine Learning were used to estimate and map the AGB and above-ground carbon (AGC) stocks in Benguet, Philippines. Non-destructive field AGB measurements were collected from 184 plots, revealing that pine forests had 33.57% less AGB than mossy forests (380.33 Mgha−1), whilst the grassland summit had 39.93 Mgha−1. In contrast to the majority of literature, AGB did not decrease linearly with elevation. NDVI, LAI, fAPAR, fCover and elevation were the most effective predictors of field-derived AGB as determined by Random Forest (RF) feature selection in R. WEKA was used to evaluate and validate 26 Machine Learning algorithms. The results show that the Machine Learning K star (K*) (r = 0.213–0.832; RMSE = 106.682 Mgha−1–224.713 Mgha−1) and RF (r = 0.391–0.822; RMSE = 108.226 Mgha−1–175.642 Mgha−1) exhibited high modelling capabilities to estimate AGB across all predictor categories. Consequently, spatially explicit models were carried out in Whitebox Runner software to map the study site’s AGB, demonstrating RF with the highest predictive performance (r = 0.982; RMSE = 53.980 Mgha−1). The study area’s carbon stock map ranged from 0 to 434.94 Mgha−1, highlighting the significance of forests at higher elevations for forest conservation and carbon sequestration. Carbon-rich mountainous regions of the county can be encouraged for carbon sequestration through REDD + interventions. Longer wavelength radar imagery, species-specific allometric equations and soil fertility should be tested in future carbon studies. The produced carbon maps can help policy makers in decision-planning, and thus contribute to conserve the natural resources of the Benguet Mountains. © Deutsche Gesellschaft für Photogrammetrie, Fernerkundung und Geoinformation (DGPF) e.V. 2023.
Under what conditions do payments for environmental services enable forest conservation in the Amazon? A realist synthesis			Payments for environmental services (PES) have been widely studied as one possible way to counter deforestation and support livelihoods. Given the high rates of deforestation in the Amazon region, it is important to study under which conditions PES have positive environmental and social outcomes. We contribute to this debate through a systematic review based on the Realist Evaluation framework. First, we review case studies to identify configurations of social-ecological factors (context), PES design and implementation (resource mechanisms), people's responses (reasoning mechanisms), and the results in terms of forest conservation and people's livelihoods (outcomes). Second, we develop a middle-range theory of how, for whom, and under what conditions PES in the Amazon achieve these results. After screening 972 articles in the SCOPUS, Scielo, and WorldCat databases, we reviewed 13 articles in-depth that contained all the elements (context-mechanism-outcomes) needed to identify these configurations. Our results show that PES in the Amazon generate positive environmental and social outcomes when they: (a) combine cash and in-kind incentives, (b) raise environmental awareness through capacity building, (c) engage socially and ethnically diverse stakeholders through equitable and inclusive approaches, (d) apply transparent spatial targeting, (e) guarantee strong conditionality through robust monitoring of compliance, and (f) guarantee stable delivery of payments.
Understanding and Integrating Local Perceptions of Trees and Forests into Incentives for Sustainable Landscape Management			We examine five forested landscapes in Africa (Cameroon, Madagascar, and Tanzania) and Asia (Indonesia and Laos) at different stages of landscape change. In all five areas, forest cover (outside of protected areas) continues to decrease despite local people's recognition of the importance of forest products and services. After forest conversion, agroforestry systems and fallows provide multiple functions and valued products, and retain significant biodiversity. But there are indications that such land use is transitory, with gradual simplification and loss of complex agroforests and fallows as land use becomes increasingly individualistic and profit driven. In Indonesia and Tanzania, farmers favor monocultures (rubber and oil palm, and sugarcane, respectively) for their high financial returns, with these systems replacing existing complex agroforests. In the study sites in Madagascar and Laos, investments in agroforests and new crops remain rare, despite government attempts to eradicate swidden systems and their multifunctional fallows. We discuss approaches to assessing local values related to landscape cover and associated goods and services. We highlight discrepancies between individual and collective responses in characterizing land use tendencies, and discuss the effects of accessibility on land management. We conclude that a combination of social, economic, and spatially explicit assessment methods is necessary to inform land use planning. Furthermore, any efforts to modify current trends will require clear incentives, such as through carbon finance. We speculate on the nature of such incentive schemes and the possibility of rewarding the provision of ecosystem services at a landscape scale and in a socially equitable manner.
UNDERSTANDING AND SCALING VULNERABILITY OF NEOTROPICAL AMAZON AND TRANSITIONAL FORESTS TO ALTERED FIRE REGIMES			SUMMARY The Amazon is the most important biome of South America, harbouring extraordinarily high levels of biodiversity and providing important ecosystems services. This biome is particularly notable for evolving independently from fire and in a moist, warm climate. In recent decades, altered fire regimes and an increasingly hotter and drier climate has pushed this key biome towards ecological thresholds that will likely lead to major losses in biodiversity and ecosystem services. Similarly, the ecotonal forests at the Amazon-Cerrado transition are unique ecosystems in terms of form and function, but they may be the first to suffer large-scale tree mortality and species loss due to the combined effects of increased anthropogenic disturbance, altered fire regimes and a drier climate.  Vulnerability of fire and droughts are closely intertwined in Amazonian and transitional forests because fires in this region only occur when there is water stress and a human ignition source. Thus, drought increases vulnerability to fire, but we do not yet understand the magnitude and spatial variation of these vulnerabilities. Once a forest burns there is immediate tree mortality, but recent evidence also shows a significant time-lagged mortality that can last for decades, becoming an important carbon source. However, the mechanistic processes that lead to time-lagged tree mortality in this myriad of forest ecosystems encompassing the Amazon biome and the Amazon-Cerrado transition are still poorly understood. We also lack knowledge on how these processes might vary spatially across the biome and its transition. A better understanding of the mechanisms that lead to tree mortality after fires and droughts is needed to design future policies that emphasise nature-based solutions including restoration and natural regeneration.  This proposal presents a multi-level approach that aims at deciphering the mechanisms that underly vulnerability to fire and time-lagged post-fire mortality across the tropical forests in Amazon and Amazon-Cerrado transition. To achieve this aim, we will quantify fire vulnerability at three different scales and link them through an upscaling approach. First, we will identify the ecological mechanisms, reflected through functional traits, that explain why individuals and species die after fires occur. For this, we will focus on poorly understood traits that can be related to fire and/or hydraulic functioning. Second, at the community scale, we will examine how vegetation structure, community traits and microclimate affect the probability to burn, through an intensive characterisation of different vegetation types with multispectral and light detection and ranging (LIDAR) imagery. Third, we will use our our unique ground-dataset on functional traits, vegetation structure and moisture dynamics, and the latest state-of-art remotely sensed information on structure and water stress to predict the vulnerability of the Amazon forests and Amazon-Cerrado transitional forests. This information will be directly applicable for the detection of sensitive hotspots (areas particularly vulnerable to fire) through satellite products. We will deliver quantifiable early-warning metrics of ecosystem vulnerability to fire that can be mapped and incorporated into fire management policies.  This is a revised version of a NERC proposal that was rejected with a score of 7 by the NERC Panel in July 2020, and we have carefully addressed the Panel's comments. Specifically, we have clarified the methodology and we have reformulated the hypotheses, so they address vulnerability to fire and not drought fire-interactions.
Understanding and utilising plant-animal interactions to facilitate forest regeneration in degraded landscapes			Using a quasi-experimental approach and spatial modelling, this project will test the influence of natural and anthropogenic factors on the success of natural forest restoration in an expansive landscape dominated by oil palm production (Northern Borneo). Southeast Asia has experienced some of the highest rates of land-use and land cover change globally, with 65% of the terrestrial land surface now covered by human-modified tropical forests .Unlike monoculture timber or oil palm plantations, logged forests often retain a large proportion of their endemic biodiversity and ecosystem functions. If managed appropriately, they hold tremendous potential for biodiversity conservation and carbon sequestration. This PhD project will resolve key uncertainties surrounding this appropriate management by identifying the biological, environmental and anthropogenic constraints on tree re-establishment in logged forest ecosystems. Using a combination of field-, desk-and greenhouse-based techniques, the PhD student will examine the role of human management (such as reduced impact logging, liana removal), biotic processes (dispersal, competition, herbivory, mycorrhizas) and abiotic factors(topography, microclimate, soil properties, landscape connectivity) in regulating tree establishment and growth in the Murum region in Sarawak, Malaysian Borneo. We expect the PhD student to use a blend of greenhouse studies, manipulative field experiments, remote sensing and advanced, 'big data' spatial modelling. Full training will be provided from world experts in these fields. Working with our CASE Partner, the PhD will be able to feed those findings into management plans detailing actions that pave the way for successful forest restoration activities in the future.
Understanding ecological, legal and social aspects of the forest-water relation with importance for ecosystem services			Sustaining ecosystem services important to humans while providing a dependable water supply for agriculture and urban needs is a major challenge faced by managers of human-dominated watersheds. Forests are considered to provide a wide variety of goods and ecosystem services (ES) to humanity, including production of timber and non-timber forest products, cultural and spiritual values to local and indigenous people, and they are also considered the best source of potable water for human use. This works intends to improve our understanding on ecological aspects that drive the forest-water relation and, their tradeoffs with social perceptions and legal frameworks that base forest conservation and restoration strategies in tropical countries, to improve decision making about water-ES supply. We will carry out: (1) a global meta-analysis to assessing effects of natural and restored forests on evapotranspiration, runoff and infiltration processes in tropical regions, (2) a global assessment of social and legal perceptions and regulations about these effects in tropical forest regions, (3) analysis of tradeoffs among ecological, socio-economic and legal aspects of the forest-water relation in two study cases. Considering the increasing pressure on water resources and hydrologic regulation that humans are placing on lands and the environment, results from this work will be very useful to build better predictive frameworks for understanding the consequences of vegetation change and also to guide future forest conservation and restoration projects, as well as payments for ecosystem services schemes.
Understanding future Amazon forest dynamics and microclimate buffering through a Free Air CO2 Experiment			Forest ecosystems play a crucial role in the global carbon cycle and the global climate. Through photosynthesis and growth, forests across the globe are absorbing 30% of anthropogenic annual CO2 emissions, thus directly contributing to the mitigation of climate change. Besides their climate-regulating function, forests also provide a variety of additional ecosystem services. Tropical forests store the majority of global live biomass in forests and are considered as a biodiversity hotspot. Despite this important role tropical forests play in our climate system and society, there is increasing evidence that forests globally are under increasing pressure from climate change. How climate change impacts forests and their subsequent functions is, however, not fully understood, especially considering larger spatial and longer temporal scales.Deforestation and forest degradation account for about 12% of global anthropogenic carbon emissions, which is second only to fossil fuel combustion. This estimate is highly uncertain due to inadequate estimates of forest carbon stocks and is expected to range from 6 to 17%. Carbon emissions are partly compensated for by carbon uptake from the regrowth of secondary forests and the rebuilding of soil carbon pools following afforestation. However, the global distribution of terrestrial carbon sinks and sources remains highly uncertain. Constraining the inaccuracy of these carbon estimates is essential to support effective forest management and future climate mitigation actions. The debate concerning a possible Amazon forest die-back, i.e catastrophic losses of forest cover and biomass, illustrates the growing concern that terrestrial ecosystems (and tropical forests in particular) might not be able to maintain uptake of anthropogenic emissions at the current rate. A better understanding of forest growth dynamics will improve our understanding of the carbon cycle and mechanisms responsible for terrestrial sources and sinks of carbon, reducing their uncertainties of magnitude and distribution.The responses of forests to elevated CO2, e[CO2], have not been tested in the Amazon or anywhere else in the tropics, and there is a compelling need to reduce this uncertainty. A Free Air CO2 Enrichment (FACE) experiment is the most direct and robust scientific approach for accomplishing this. The AmazonFACE experiment will provide primary scientific information that advances our knowledge and understanding of the physiological and ecological effects of e[CO2] in tropical forests. It will provide data needed for parameterizing and improving predictive models of the long-term effects of elevated CO2 on carbon cycle and climate feedbacks. AmazonFACE is directed towards resolving a key source of uncertainty about the future of the Amazon forest: the potential for rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations to buffer tropical forests against the deleterious effects of climate change by stimulating forest growth and resilience to drought. The central pivot of AmazonFACE is a CO2 enrichment experiment of unprecedented scope and importance in a primary, old-growth forest in central Amazon, near Manaus, Brazil. The experiment will simulate the atmospheric CO2 composition of the near future (50 year) to help answer the question: "How will rising atmospheric CO2 affect the resilience of the Amazon forest, the biodiversity it harbours, and the ecosystem services it provides?". Within this project we will work at AmazonFACE to study the forest dynamics and microclimate buffering capacity using novel sensor technologies and plant functional traits. (AU)
Understanding landowners' intention to restore native areas: The role of ecosystem services			Understanding landowners' intention to voluntarily engage in conservation initiatives is essential to designing more realistic projects and interventions. In this study, we used the Theory of Planned Behavior to identify the psychological constructs underlying landowners' intention to restore areas with native vegetation on their properties over the next three years. We extended the model, investigating whether the perception of ecosystem services, age, number of springs, and size of property affect the intention studied. We interviewed 75 landowners whose properties are in the surroundings of a public protected area in Brazil and applied structural equation modeling to analyze the acquired data. The results agree with the predicted relationship between attitudes and intention. Furthermore, perception of the ecosystem services and the number of springs on a given property are two factors which directly affect attitude and indirectly affect the intention to restore. Younger landowners are more willing to restore. These results suggest that understanding the benefits of conserving biodiversity on farmland affects management practices. Investing in educational initiatives to promote more knowledge about ecosystem services will increase the involvement of more landowners in future conservation programs.
Understanding the biodiversity consequences of habitat change:: the value of secondary and plantation forests for neotropical dung beetles			1. Secondary and plantation forests are becoming increasingly widespread in the tropics. A recent meta-analysis on the impacts of land-use change on tropical forest dung beetles concluded that regenerating forests can be effective in helping to offset species loss following deforestation. However, our understanding of the extent to which these results can be generalized to new locations remains very poor.2. We attempted to overcome many of the design limitations that characterize previous studies by collecting spatially independent dung beetle samples from primary, secondary and Eucalyptus plantation forests in north-east Brazilian Amazonia across a large quasi-experimental landscape that minimized confounding edge and fragmentation effects.3. We recorded 9203 dung beetles, comprising 85 species. Species richness was significantly higher in primary forest and the majority of species were more abundant there than elsewhere, whereas secondary and plantation sites harboured an impoverished subset of primary forest species.4. Our data illustrate the low value of tropical secondary and plantation forests for dung beetles in our study area, and our conclusions are more pessimistic than those of earlier studies.5. Because of differences in the order of species rank-abundance and rank-biomass patterns, re-coding community data from abundance to biomass significantly altered the analytical weight of individual species in determining community patterns. Larger bodied beetles were more prone to local extinctions and abundance declines and this effect was consistent both within and between genera.6. Synthesis and applications. Our study demonstrates that secondary and plantation forests in a large neotropical landscape host exceptionally impoverished dung beetle communities. Furthermore, the depletion of beetle abundance combined with a reduction in average body mass in converted forests is likely to have detrimental consequences for the maintenance of dung beetle-mediated ecosystem services in these habitats. Differences in biogeographical and landscape context, and the influence of common limitations in sampling design, may explain why many other studies have painted a more optimistic picture of the conservation value of anthropogenic habitats. In the absence of further evidence we caution strongly against the claim that forest regeneration schemes on degraded land can effectively offset the loss of species following deforestation, and urge that conservation strategies prioritize the protection of remaining areas of primary forest.
Understanding the ecology of tree-seedling growth in dry tropical environment: a management perspective			The dry tropical forests are among the most vulnerable ecosystems of the world and, however, are relatively understudied. These forests provide various ecosystem services, and are progressively being converted into patches of dry scrubs, savanna and marginal cropland systems, due to various anthropogenic perturbations. Soils of these regions are relatively nutrient poor with a patchy nutrient and water distribution pattern. Therefore, the variability in these natural resources imposed by the present climate change scenario may affect the forest plant community of dry tropics via its impact on seedling growth and recruitment. Seedlings are considered as the most sensitive stage of plant lifecycle, and therefore, understanding of seedling regeneration may help in restoration of forest ecosystems. Seedling growth is majorly regulated by various naturally occurring resources (such as light, water, nutrient, etc.) and disturbances (such as defoliation, grass competition, fire, etc.). Therefore, efforts on the regeneration of these forest systems are highly necessitated. In the present study, we critically reviewed the studies on seedling survival and growth under different resource and disturbance regimes with a special focus to dry tropical environment. We found that water, light, nutrients, herbivory, and grass competition majorly regulates recruitments, growth, and establishment of the tree seedling in dry tropical environment. Most of the studies are limited to observe the effect of one or two factors over the seedling survival and growth. However, the resources and disturbances may have an interactive effect over seedling growth. Therefore, studies encompassing the interactions of various growth factors (resources and disturbances) under different climatic conditions are urgently needed for the successful regeneration of tree seedlings and for the restoration of plant community. Moreover, it will improve our ability to manage the tropical vegetation under changing climatic scenario.
Understanding the importance of primary tropical forest protection as a mitigation strategy			Given the short time-frame to limit global warming, and the current emissions gap, it is critical to prioritise mitigation actions. To date, scant attention has been paid to the mitigation benefits of primary forest protection. We estimated tropical forest ecosystem carbon stocks and flows. The ecosystem carbon stock of primary tropical forests is estimated at 141-159 Pg C (billion tonnes of carbon) which is some 49-53% of all tropical forest carbon, the living biomass component of which alone is 91-103% of the remaining carbon budget to limit global warming to below 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial levels. Furthermore, tropical forests have ongoing sequestration rates 0.47-1.3 Pg C yr(-1), equivalent to 8-13% of annual global anthropogenic CO2 (carbon dioxide) emissions. We examined three main forest-based strategies used in the land sector-halting deforestation, increasing forest restoration and improving the sustainable management of production forests. The mitigation benefits of primary forest protection are contingent upon how degradation is defined and accounted for, while those from restoration also depend on how restoration is understood and applied. Through proforestation, reduced carbon stocks in secondary forests can regrow to their natural carbon carrying capacity or primary forest state. We evaluated published data from studies comparing logged and unlogged forests. On average, primary forests store around 35% more carbon. While comparisons are confounded by a range of factors, reported biomass carbon recovery rates were from 40 to 100+ years. There is a substantive portfolio of forest-based mitigation actions and interventions available to policy and decision-makers, depending on national circumstances, in addition to SFM and plantation focused approaches, that can be grouped into four main strategies: protection; proforestation, reforestation and restoration; reform of guidelines, accounting rules and default values; landscape conservation planning. Given the emissions gap, mitigation strategies that merely reduce the rate of emissions against historic or projected reference levels are insufficient. Mitigation strategies are needed that explicitly avoid emissions where possible as well as enabling ongoing sequestration.
Understory management and fertilization affected soil greenhouse gas emissions and labile organic carbon pools in a Chinese chestnut plantation			Management practices markedly impact carbon (C) cycling in forest plantations. However, the interactive effects of understory management and fertilization on soil greenhouse gas (GHG) fluxes and labile organic C pools remain unclear in forest plantations. To investigate the effects of understory replacement, fertilization, and their interaction on soil GHG fluxes and labile organic C pools in a Chinese chestnut plantation, we conducted a 2 x 2 factorial experiment over a 12-month field study with four treatments; Control (understory removed without understory replacement or fertilization), understory replacement (understory removed and seeded with Medicago sativa L, MS), fertilization (F), and MS + F. The GHG fluxes were determined using a static chamber/GC technique. The seasonal pattern of GHG fluxes did not change in any of the treatments in this one-year study; however, soil GHG fluxes, total global warming potential (GWP) of GHG fluxes, and soil organic C (SOC), water soluble organic C (WSOC), microbial biomass C (MBC), and NO3--N concentrations were significantly affected by MS. F, and their interaction. In addition, GHG fluxes, GWP, and SOC, WSOC, MBC and NO3--N concentrations were markedly increased by fertilization, regardless of the understory replacement treatment (P < 0.05), but they were increased by understory replacement only in the fertilized plots. The GHG fluxes were correlated with soil temperature and WSOC in all plots (P < 0.05), but not with soil moisture and MBC. These findings suggest that understory replacement likely is the optimum management technique for reducing/minimizing GHG fluxes, while F can enhance the effects of MS on increasing soil organic C and nutrient availability. We conclude that a combination of a moderate rate of fertilization and understory replacement with legume species should be adopted to increase soil C sequestration, maintain soil fertility and sustainably develop chestnut plantations. (C) 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Undertaking large-scale forest restoration to generate ecosystem services			The global community is seeking to substantially restore the world's forest cover to improve the supply of ecosystem services. However, it is not clear what type of reforestation must be used and there is a risk that the techniques used in industrial timber plantations will become the default methodology. This is unlikely to be sufficient because of the well-known relationship between biodiversity and ecological functioning. Restoration may be achieved through natural regeneration but this may not always occur at critical locations. Ecological restoration involving species-rich plantings might also be used but can be difficult to implement at landscape scales. I review here the consequence of planting more limited numbers of species and the effects of this on the delivery of ecosystem services. Evidence suggests many commonly sought ecosystem servicesthough not allmay be generated by the modest levels of species richness provided these species have appropriate traits. The literature also shows that the alpha diversity of restored forests is not the only driver of functionality and that the location and extent of any reforestation are significant as well; beta and gamma diversity may also affect functionality but these relationships remain unclear. Encouraging the adoption of even moderately diverse plantings at landscape scales and at key locations will require policies and institutions to balance the type, location, and scale of restoration and make the necessary trade-offs between national and local aspirations. New approaches and metrics will have to be developed to monitor and assess restoration success at these larger scales.
Undervaluing and Overexploiting the Brazilian Cerrado AT OUR PERIL			0
Unexploited potentials of trees outside forests: catchment landscape restoration through homegardens in Upper Mahaweli Catchment in Sri Lanka			It is vital to explore the potential of homegardens as (HGs) one of the major Trees Outside Forest sources in the Upper Mahaweli Catchment (UMC) in Sri Lanka, to restore ecosystem services lost due to large-scale deforestation. Woody tree diversity of HGs was assessed using diversity indices in selected agro-ecological regions of UMC. Then biophysical, socio-economic and institutional factors affecting the tree diversity of HGs were assessed. Data was collected from woody tree species from a 500 random sample of HGs located in two major districts in UMC using a resource assessment survey coupled with a household survey. A multiple linear regression analysis was implemented with primary and secondary data, using the STATA software. A total of 64,163 trees were enumerated and 110 woody tree species from 38 families were recorded. Shannon index, Simpson index Margalef and Evenness index ranged from 1.51-3.21, 0.32-0.91, 2.06-8.76 to 0.34-0.71 respectively. The majority of Agro-ecological regions such as Upcountry Intermediate Zone-IU2, Mid country Intermediate Zone-IM3a, Upcountry Wet Zone-WU2b, Mid country Wet Zone-WM2a, WM2b and IM3c recorded high tree diversity. Comparatively high evenness recorded in agro-ecological regions of Upcountry Intermediate Zone-IU2, Mid-country Wet Zone-WM2a and Upcountry Intermediate Zone-IU3d., is due to the rapid spreading of exotic species. According to the regression model (R-2-50%, p < 0.01), several factors affected positively and negatively on tree diversity. Tree diversity in the majority of HGs located in UMC was similar to some South-Asian tropical forests, indicating the high potential of HGs in the ecological restoration of degraded UMC landscapes. Therefore, incentive-based policy instruments should be introduced to enhance the tree diversity of HGs to restore ecosystem services and the ecological sustainability of the UMC.
Uniting niche differentiation and dispersal limitation predicts tropical forest succession			Tropical secondary forests are increasingly important for carbon sequestration and biodiversity conservation worldwide; yet, we still cannot accurately predict community turnover during secondary succession. We propose that integrating niche differentiation and dispersal limitation will generate an improved theoretical explanation of tropical forest succession. The interaction between seed sources and dispersers regulates seed movement throughout succession, and recent technological advances in animal tracking and molecular analyses enable us to accurately monitor seed movement as never before. We propose a framework to bridge the gap between niche differentiation and dispersal limitation. The Source-Disperser Limitation Framework (SDLF) provides a way to better predict secondary tropical forest succession across gradients of landscape disturbance by integrating seed sources and frugivore behavior.
Urban tree carbon density and CO2 equivalent of National Zoological Park, Delhi			In a highly urbanized city like Delhi, the urban forest plays a vital role in climate change mitigation by capturing and storing carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere. Urban vegetation helps in increasing carbon sink and CO2 equivalent (CO(2)eq) and also provides other aesthetic and psychological environmental benefits. To understand how urban trees are vital for carbon sink, the present study aimed to quantify the carbon density and CO(2)eq in trees at National Zoological Park (NZP), New Delhi, a tropical semi-arid region of India. For this, we estimated tree biomass or dry matter content of 25 species with the help of allometric equations which are available in published literature and applicable for the tropical region. It was observed that the highest diameter at breast height (DBH) was contributed by Ficus sp. while the maximum density among adult tree species found in Albizia procera. The total mean dry matter content, C density, and CO(2)eq of NZP were 92.10 Mg ha(-1), 43.61 Mg-C ha(-1), and 168.83 Mg ha(-1), respectively. The highest biomass, C density, and CO(2)eq obtained in the species of Ficus benghalensis followed by Ficus racemosa and Azadirachta indica. The data indicates that the trees having the capacity to store carbon are essential for the maintenance of a sustainable environment. Thus, the study suggests that there is a substantial scope to increase the carbon density and CO2eq in urban city through adopting various management strategies viz. afforestation and reforestation program on degraded and abandoned land to maintain a clean and sustainable environment.
Use of 3-PG and 3-PGS to simulate forest growth dynamics of Australian tropical rainforests - II. An integrated system for modelling forest growth and scenario assessment within the wet tropics bioregion			Regional model analyses of forest growth are critical for capturing global aspects of tropical rainforest carbon exchange. This research presents the development of a multi-model approach for assessing forest growth and biomass accumulation within the wet tropics bioregion (WTB) based on 10 years of available data and existing model parameter sets. The Tropical Rainforest Growth (TRG) model system employs the 3-PG and 3-PGS models to account for both old-growth rainforest and forest regeneration from seedlings in response to human-induced and natural disturbances. Above-ground biomass (AGB) stocks of the mature forest throughout the WTB for 2000 were estimated to be similar to 202 t C/ha. Replacement of areas of old-growth with commercial timber plantations decreased overall AGB stocks to approximately 146 t C/ha. However, plantation carbon accumulation rates were higher than the mature rainforest, representing their potential to accumulate more biomass over a longer analysis time period. As tropical cyclones may significantly alter the carbon stocks of old-growth rainforests, the effect of tropical cyclone Rona on the WTB was assessed. The cyclone had a minimal impact on total AGB stocks within the region, yet these systems are an important factor to be considered in carbon and forest regeneration modelling activities in the tropics. The TRG system is an advanced modelling tool providing a rapid process-based assessment of biomass stocks and accumulation dynamics within Australia's tropical rainforest bioregion and has the potential for application in tropical forest ecosystems at both national and international levels. (c) 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Use of artificial perches by birds in ecological restoration areas of the Cerrado and Atlantic Forest biomes in Brazil			Artificial perches are widely used in ecological restoration projects: however, the results of these works are yet to be summarized in a review. The goal of the present study was to describe the taxonomic structure of birds that utilized artificial perches, as well as determine the species of birds that most frequently utilized the perches in restoration areas of the Cerrado and Atlantic Forest biomes. We used secondary data obtained from a systematic review of literature available on digital sources. A total of 17 studies were obtained for the two biomes, 15 of which were analyzed. From these studies, 126 bird species were recorded, averaging 19.26 +/- 8.30 SD species per study. Five species were categorized as frequent users of artificial perches (Pitangus sulphuratus, Tyrannus melancholicus, Mimus satuminus, Columbine talpacoti, and Tyrannus savana). These birds are predominantly generalist species, which disperse seed under the perches and this feeding habit of this group has implications for the restoration process. The large number of species that utilize artificial perches highlights the importance of these structures in supporting bird diversity, in addition to the promotion of bird ecosystem services.
Use of the framework species method to restore carbon flow via litterfall and decomposition in an evergreen tropical forest ecosystem, Northern Thailand			If forest restoration is to play a significant role in mitigating climate change, greater knowledge is needed of how quickly the process can restore carbon flows to levels typical of natural forest. Litterfall and its decomposition are two important components of the carbon cycle of tropical forest ecosystems. This paper quantified the balance between these two processes in experimental plots undergoing restoration of upland evergreen forest by the framework species method in the upper watershed of the Mae Sa Valley, Chiang Mai province, northern Thailand. Restoration plots had been planted with 20–30 indigenous forest tree species at an average initial density of 3,100 trees.ha-1 in 1998, 2002 and 2007 (at 11, 7 and 2 yr, respectively, before the study commenced). Carbon flow measurements in these plots were compared with identical measurements in relatively intact mature forest and nonplanted control sites. Measurements were litterfall dry mass (from litterfall traps emptied monthly), percentage carbon content (using the Walkley-Black method) and decomposition rates (using litterbags). Net inputs of carbon into the soil pool via litterfall declined below control levels for at least 7 yr after tree planting (probably due to fire and weeding), but increased rapidly thereafter, reaching 61% of natural forest levels by 11 yr and are projected to reach natural forest levels (1.33 t.ha-1.yr-1 carbon) in 14–16 yr after tree planting. Therefore, the framework species method appears to be an efficient mechanism for restoring carbon flow through forest ecosystems and should be considered for forest restoration projects where carbon sequestration is included among the objectives. © 2015, Kasetsart University. All right reserved.
Use of trees in Jamapa, traditions in a deforested area			Trees have played an important role in the development of civilizations, both for provisioning of resources and for other environmental services. However, there is a strong decrease in the quantity and diversity of tropical forests trees due to land use changes. One of the main causes of this situation is the livestock activity, which in the state of Veracruz, Mexico, occupies a surface of about 3.7 million hectares (representing 50.6% of its territory). The objective of this study was to research into cattle ranchers' knowledge of arboreal species, their uses, their cultural importance and the changes that have taken place over time. Sixty eight species of trees were mentioned and their uses were classified in 22 types of uses. The cultural importance index was calculated for each species and the most important changes in the communities' lifestyle were described. The results showed that ranchers have a wide knowledge about trees but it is rapidly disappearing. Trees are used not only to get benefits for the livestock activity but also to satisfy other needs of daily life. The quantity and diversity of arboreal species reflect the lifestyle, influences and changes over time within the communities. The decisions of ranchers configure the landscape, and therefore the recommendation is to increase the amount of trees, their conservation and uses to maintain the environmental services they provide.
Using landscape connectivity tools to identify conservation priorities in forested areas and potential restoration priorities in rubber plantation in Xishuangbanna, Southwest China			Context Maintaining connectivity is critical for fragmented habitat networks to retain native species. The tropical forest in Xishuangbanna, Southwest China, is a biodiversity hotspot for China, but is also vulnerable to deforestation due to rapid expansion of rubber plantations, thus better understanding of connectivity may be crucial to species persistence. Objectives To quantify the functional connectivity changes in the forest in Xishuangbanna from 1976 to 2014, and identify the conservation and restoration priorities for effective forest conservation and management. Methods Using the graph theory (in Conefor sensinode 2.6), forest connectivity from 1976 to 2014 was quantified using probability of connectivity and number of components indexes. The importance of each forest patch during each period and the potential contribution of low-profit rubber plantation patches in 2014 was quantified and ranked by delta values for PC (dPC) index. Results Connectivity of forest in Xishuangbanna has progressively decreased over the last 40 years. The ten forest patches which had the highest dPC value remained almost the same for all five periods between 1976 and 2014, though relative importance varied. The 50 most potentially important low-profit rubber plantation patches were identified and mapped, and provide a target for effective restoration efforts to facilitate efficient use of funding to best improve conservation outcomes. Conclusions Targeted and effective interventions for landscape scale conservation and management can be made based on graph theory and connectivity analysis. Restoring low-profit rubber provides a mechanism for reconnecting the forest as an effective conservation tool. Here we show the application of this approach to restore forest and most effectively increase connectivity at minimum economic cost.
Using markets to leverage investment in forest and landscape restoration in the tropics			Governments and international organizations are promoting or drafting programs to undertake Forest and Landscape Restoration (FLR) of hundreds of millions of hectares of degraded tropical landscapes to support the provision of ecosystem goods and services. But the challenge to recover economic and ecological functionality could be far beyond their financial capacity. Here, we explore the potential of markets and their interaction with policies to leverage investment for FLR in the tropics. We first review the challenges and opportunities of exploiting market forces for FLR, which can be essential for kick-starting the implementation of programs globally. We identify four key opportunities for regulating markets to promote FLR: economic mechanisms; technological, educational or infrastructural investment; legal and enforcement mechanisms; and market-led standards and certification schemes. Finally, we present five pitfalls that may arise when relying on markets to promote FLR. Governments will need to play a critical role in establishing appropriate policy frameworks and institutional arrangements to leverage investments when market signals are not strong enough to initiate changes in traditional land use or farming practices, or to regulate reforestation activities when market signals become so strong that they overwhelm all other land-use activities, leading to a transformed and homogenized landscape.
Using plant-pollinator interactions to identify key species for planning tropical forest restoration			There is still a lack of practical guidelines for understanding species roles and planning restoration strategies to enhance plant-pollinator interactions and support ecosystem functioning. We applied a network approach to understand the evolution of plant-pollinator restoration patterns and identify priority species, thus advancing restoration planning. Specifically, we compared species composition and network metrics along a gradient of time postdisturbance, from the initial stage of restoration to pristine forest in the Eastern Amazon. We found that mining type is a predictor of species composition. We observed the recovery of interaction diversity and pollinator specialization in the early stages of restoration. Mining type affected connectance, interactions, and species richness, and the restoration stage affected the number of links. From the interactions, we built a trait-based framework to select manageable native species for initial restoration. The species selection framework proposed here is useful not only for forest restoration but also for the restoration of other areas and case studies (e.g. agroecosystems, conservation units, and ecological corridors) and can be adapted depending on the goals of each project. Here, we provide practical information for the management of mined land restoration in the Eastern Amazon and for restoration planning across broader scales.
Using Species Distribution Modeling to Delineate Richness Patterns of Chiropterophilic Plants and Allocate Conservation Efforts in Mexico and the Southwestern United States			Migratory nectarivorous bats provide important ecological services throughout their ranges, particularly for their food plants. These services include pollinating food plants, dispersing seeds, and reducing genetic isolation in plant populations. However, many important food plants occur in imperiled ecosystems, particularly in tropical dry forests. We assessed the conservation status of lands containing high richness of food plants for three migratory nectarivores-the Mexican long-tongued bat (Choeronycteris mexicana), the Mexican long-nosed bat (Leptonycteris nivalis), and the lesser long-nosed bat (Leptonycteris yerbabuenae)-throughout their ranges including migratory, transition, and resident habitat zones. We found low to moderate levels of land protection in regions with high chiropterophilic plant diversity, but this may be offset by sustainable agroforestry, cultivation, and in-situ management. The models we used are available as an ArcGIS map package to help allocate conservation and restoration efforts on the ground. Our results support the need for greater land protection throughout the Sierra Madre Occidental and Sierra Madre Oriental to increase contiguity of protected lands and potential stopover habitat for migratory nectarivorous bats. Additionally, our data show the need for greater land protection in southern resident zones to enhance year-round habitat for nectarivorous bats in the face of rapid deforestation.
Using the CENTURY model to assess the impact of land reclamation and management practices in oasis agriculture on the dynamics of soil organic carbon in the arid region of North-western China			Large-scale reclamation of arid land in North-western China over the past 50 years has converted the natural desert landscape into anthropogenic oasis, particularly in the lower part of watersheds. Drastic human activities may have caused the change of soil organic carbon (SOC) in anthropogenic oasis. This study employs the CENTURY model (Version 4.0) to investigate the effects of land reclamation and management practices in oasis agriculture on the dynamic of SOC at the lower part of Sangong river watershed, a typical anthropogenic oasis reclaimed at 50 years ago. Based on field investigation, history of crop rotations, and past farm practices in study area, land management practices were divided into five categories, corresponding five periods, 0-1958, 1959-1984, 1985-1992, 1993-1998 and 1999-2008. The model successfully simulated the SOC dynamics of the top layer soil (0-20 cm) in the different periods. The state of equilibrium of total SOC and the active, slow, and passive carbon pools were built by CENTURY model in 0-1959. Over the 50 years' cultivation (1959-2008), the mean change in total SOC exhibited complex ways. SOC increased rapidly in the first 2 years (1959-1960) after shrubland reclamation, and declined slowly during the period 1961-1984 and then decreased rapidly from 1985 to 1992. Between 1993 and 1998, it remained relatively stable, and climbed rapidly again during 1999-2008. The trend in total SOC showed "N" shape, i.e., increase, decrease, then increase. Finally, total SOC is greater (8.2%) in 2008 than the original level of SOC under the natural desert shrub. The improvements of land management practices such as ploughing being replaced with no tillage, straw being crushed before returning it to soil, and reasonable application of fertilizers, played a key role in the change in total SOC. Especially, soil carbon sequestration was obviously increased since protective management practices were implemented in 1993, such as no tillage, straw returning to soil, and the balanced fertilization technique. The results were different from the conclusions that loss of soil organic carbon would happen due to reclamation and continuous farming in tropical forests, semiarid grasslands of northern China and Nigerian semiarid Savannah. (C) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Valuation of Potential and Realized Ecosystem Services Based on Land Use Data in Northern Thailand			Evaluating potential (PES) and realized (RES) ecosystem services can significantly improve the clarity and understanding of sustainable natural resource management practices. This study determined spatial distribution indices and assessed the economic value of both PES and RES in Northern Thailand. The geographic distribution and intensity of 17 ecological services of six land use categories (i.e., forests, agriculture, shrubland, urban land, water bodies, and barren land) were estimated for the distribution and unit values of PES and RES, by using the Co$ting Nature Model. Our results suggested that the PES and RES values were spatially consistent. The map showing the distribution of PES and RES values revealed high values in the cities of Chiang Mai, Chiang Rai, Lamphun, Lampang, Phitsanulok, and Nakhon Sawan. Nutrient cycling, soil formation, and water supply were identified as the top potential ecological services, while nutrient cycling, water supply, and soil formation were the most realized. The ecosystem service packages in Northern Thailand had a potential annual value of 36.31 billion USD per year. However, after adjusting for relative indices, the realized ecosystem services were valued at 13.44 billion USD per year, representing only one-third of the potential value. To manage resources effectively and make informed decisions, it is essential to comprehend the gap between possible and actual ecosystem services. This research underscores the financial worth of ecosystem services and emphasizes the significance of using them sustainably to enhance human well-being and conserve the environment in Northern Thailand.
Valuation of rural ecology: preference analysis and benefit transfer			Benefit evaluation furnishes a valuable reference for the formulation and execution of rural ecological restoration policies. This paper employs choice experiment and multinomial logit model to dissect rural residents' ecological restoration preference. The paper gauges the benefit associated with rural ecological restoration within the "Study Site" and crafts a benefit transfer model to prognosticate the benefit within the "Policy Site." The results show that rural residents exhibit a preference for ecological restoration, albeit with variations in preference across distinct regions. Specifically, based on the results within the "Study Site," the upsurge in benefit stemming from ecological restoration in Haikou, Dongfang, Lingshui, and Qiongzhong amounts to 414.541 CNY, 467.625 CNY, 619.374 CNY, and 491.463 CNY per household, respectively. Utilizing the benefit transfer model to prognosticate the benefit variations within the "Policy Site," the ultimate evaluation indicates that ecological restoration in Hainan can confer a cumulative benefit of 719.7 million CNY upon the residents. These findings serve as a pivotal point of reference for the advancement of rural ecological restoration within tropical regions.
Valuation of tropical forest services and mechanisms to finance their conservation and sustainable use: A case study of Tapantí National Park, Costa Rica			The Tapanti National Park in Costa Rica comprises a precious but vulnerable tropical rain forest area. The monetary values of ecosystem services that are provided by this park are estimated in order to assess the mechanisms to finance the park's conservation and sustainable use. The main ecosystem services provided by the park are water supply (for drinking and electricity generation), maintenance of biodiversity and opportunities for recreation and tourism. Based on interviews with over 300 stakeholders, the study identified the main beneficiaries of these ecosystem services. The monetary benefits of the three services combined were estimated at approx. US$2.5 million/year, equivalent to an average of US$43/year for the total park area (58.323 ha). Compared to other, similar areas, the recreation values are relatively low (approx. 0.6 million US$/year) while the water-supply service is very high: approx. 1.7 million US$/year for hydro-electricity and approx. 0.2 million US$/year for drinking water. Both the low recreation and high water supply values can be correlated with the high rainfall of over 6500 mm/year. To develop payment-mechanisms for the conservation and sustainable use of Tapantí National Park, the main stakeholders were asked about their willingness to pay for the maintenance of the services they benefited from. Different financing mechanisms have been explored, such as taxes, user fees, individual and corporate donations, friends' schemes, and voluntary contractual arrangements. In general, most of the stakeholders were willing to pay for the ecosystem services they received. These potential payments amounted to at least 400,000 US$/year, which excludes the hydro-electricity beneficiary. Even without payments from the hydro-electricity company, this amount suffices to cover the current (245,000 US$) and urgently needed additional budget (100,000 US$) for the National Park management. © 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Values of weedy regrowth for rainforest restoration			Can weedy regrowth be sometimes useful in restoration? Former pastures, created historically by deforestation and other interventions but then retired from agricultural use, now provide a major opportunity for forest restoration. Globally, forest has begun to regenerate spontaneously at large scales on many such retired pasture lands. Additionally, non-native species are increasingly often the first trees and shrubs to establish in this situation. Here, I consider the ecological processes that enable some of these species to be useful in restoring diverse rainforest communities of flora and fauna to disused pasture and other agricultural lands; in terms of both the generalised ecological mechanisms involved and specific cases in rainforest landscapes of eastern Australia. Ecological research has shown that regrowth trajectories which begin with dominance by non-native trees and shrubs may of themselves sometimes transition over several decades towards dominance by native rainforest species, and that these novel ecosystems provide significant habitat for native fauna, as well as a range of ecosystem services. Their destruction in the name of weed control is likely to have an immediate adverse ecological impact. Alternatively, they could be managed and harnessed as a useful part of the practitioners' toolkit for rainforest restoration.
Valuing nature: the case of tropical forests and Costa Rica			The paper focuses on the failure to account for the value of standing tropical forests, and of ecosystem services in general, in economic decision-making. This blindness to the values of nature has led to overexploitation, degradation and destruction of tropical forests, which, in turn, has also significantly contributed to greenhouse gas emissions. Forest conservation and restoration has a critical role to play in the fight against climate change and brings a vast array of additional benefits, from security in water, energy, food, health and livelihoods to maintaining biodiversity itself as a core component of our living planet. As first Minister of Environment and Energy under President Oscar Arias (1986-1990), I brought these views into societal decision-making in Costa Rica and here I briefly describe how.This article is part of the theme issue 'Bringing nature into decision-making'.
Valuing the economic impacts of seed dispersal loss on voluntary carbon markets			Seed dispersal is an ecosystem service strongly affected by the loss of mutualist dispersers, with economic consequences in terms of carbon sequestration and climate change mitigation policies. Especially, large frugivores are important contributors to carbon sequestration because they are the main disperser of large-seeded trees, which store a high amount of carbon. The effect of seed dispersers defaunation on carbon sequestration is particularly significant in tropical forests, where frugivores disperse 70-94% of the woody plant species and where similar to 59% of the world's forest carbon above ground is stored. However, the economic impacts of the defaunation of large frugivores on ecosystem services, such as seed dispersal and carbon sequestration, are poorly valued. Here, we simulate the effects of the loss of three large frugivores (Brachyteles arachnoides, Alouatta guariba, and Pipile jacutinga) on the recruitment of hardwood tree species and its economic impact on carbon markets. We found that the combined loss of the large frugivores would reduce the standing carbon sequestration by 2.5%. However, defaunation also affects seed predator communities, which influences the contribution of the frugivores. By adding the loss of large seed predators, the reduction in carbon sequestration would rise to 3.5%. In summary, the potential economic contribution of the seed dispersal services provided by our target dispersers ranges from US$3.94 ha(-1) year(-1) to US$15.42 ha(-1) year(-1). We highlight the importance of conserving seed disperser and predator communities to guarantee the long-term viability of forest carbon sequestration. We argue that knowledge of the economic consequences of defaunation should be included in carbon mitigation policies and encourage animal conservation and forest restoration.
Valuing the functionality of tropical ecosystems beyond carbon			Land-based carbon sequestration projects, such as tree planting, are a prominent strategy to offset carbon emissions. However, we risk reducing natural ecosystems to one metric - carbon. Emphasis on restoring ecosystems to balance ecosystem services, biodiversity conservation, and carbon sequestration is a more appropriate strategy to protect their functioning.
Variability of soil surface characteristics in a mountainous watershed in Valle del Cauca, Colombia: Implications for runoff, erosion, and conservation			Understanding catchment sediment or solute transport frequently relies on understanding of soil nutrient conditions and physical properties. This study investigates hydropedological patterns in a tropical catchment by understanding soil nutrient and soil surface changes. Soil nutrient concentrations and hydraulic properties were measured from the La Vega micro watershed in the southwestern Colombian Andes at 16 distributed locations in four elevation ranges (between 1450 and 1700 m a.s.l.). The site is a part of a conservation partnerships which implements programs and monitor impacts. Soil samples were analyzed for total nitrogen (TN), Bray II-available phosphorus, exchangeable cations, pH, organic matter, and texture. Soil hydraulic conductivities at two depths (0-5 cm and 5-10 cm) were determined in conservation implementation areas (enclosures and natural regrowth). In the upper elevation range, regrowth of natural vegetation was found on deep soils (similar to 3 m) with moderate infiltration (26 cm hr(-1)), the lowest bulk density (0.92 g cm(-3)), and the highest TN (0.4%). The lowest elevation (mixed land use of grazing and riparian forests with deep profiles) had the lowest infiltration (4 cm hr(-1)), highest bulk density (1.02 g cm(-3)), and the lowest TN (0.26%). In the middle elevation ranges, conserved tropical forest vegetation were located on shallow soil depths with high organic matter (similar to 6%) and high infiltration (86 cm hr(-1)). The lowest infiltration rate average (2.3 cm hr(-1)) exceeded the estimated erosive regional precipitation intensity (similar to 2.5 cm hr(-1)) about 60% of the time, while the median infiltration rate (10 cm hr(-1)) exceeded rainfall intensities 94% of the time, indicating that infiltration excess and saturation excess runoff mechanisms are both present. Coupling data with sediment concentration and solute concentration patterns can help discern correlations between scales and will help to monitor effectiveness of conservation programs aimed at sustaining ecosystem services.
Variable Responses of Lowland Tropical Forest Nutrient Status to Fertilization and Litter Manipulation			Predicting future impacts of anthropogenic change on tropical forests requires a clear understanding of nutrient constraints on productivity. We compared experimental fertilization and litter manipulation treatments in an old-growth lowland tropical forest to distinguish between the effects of inorganic nutrient amendments and changes in nutrient cycling via litterfall. We measured the changes in soil and litter nutrient pools, litterfall, and fine root biomass in plots fertilized with nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), or potassium (K), and in litter addition and litter removal treatments during 7 years. Soil inorganic N and litter N increased in double-litter plots but not in N-fertilized plots. Conversely, litter P and soil pools of P and K increased in fertilized plots but not in the double-litter plots. Soil and litter pools of N and K decreased in the no-litter plots. Changes in litterfall with added nutrients or litter were only marginally significant, but fine root biomass decreased with both the litter and the K addition. Differences between the two experiments are mostly attributable to the coupled cycling of carbon and nutrients in litter. Increased nutrient inputs in litter may improve plant uptake of some nutrients compared to fertilization with similar amounts. The litter layer also appears to play a key role in nutrient retention. We discuss our findings in the context of possible impacts of anthropogenic change on tropical forests.
Variation in carbon storage among tree species: Implications for the management of a small-scale carbon sink project			Despite growing evidence for an effect of species composition on carbon (C) storage and sequestration, few projects have examined the implications of such a relationship for forestry and agriculture-based climate change mitigation activities. We worked with a community in Eastern Panama to determine the average above- and below-ground C stocks of three land-use types in their territory: managed forest, agroforests and pasture. We examined evidence for a functional relationship between tree-species diversity and C storage in each land-use type, and also explored how the use of particular tree species by community members could affect C storage. We found that managed forests in this landscape stored an average of 335 Mg C ha(-1), traditional agroforests an average of 145 Mg C ha(-1), and pastures an average of 46 Mg C ha(-1) including all vegetation-based C stocks and soil C to 40 cm depth. We did not detect a relationship between diversity and C storage; however, the relative contributions of species to C storage per hectare in forests and agroforests were highly skewed and often were not proportional to species' relative abundances. We conclude that protecting forests from conversion to pasture would have the greatest positive impact on C stocks, even though the forests are managed by community members for timber and non-timber forest products. However, because several of the tree species that contribute the most to C storage in forests were identified by community members as preferred timber species, we suggest that species-level management will be important to avoiding C-impoverishment through selective logging in these forests. Our data also indicate that expanding agroforests into areas currently under pasture could sequester significant amounts of carbon while providing biodiversity and livelihood benefits that the most common reforestation systems in the region - monoculture teak plantations - do not provide. (c) 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Variation in Plant Water Use, Growth, and Water-use Efficiency of Planted Mixtures and Monocultures: Toward Proper Species Selection for Reforestation Efforts in the Seasonally Dry Tropics			0
Variation in soil organic carbon stock with forest type in tropical forests of Kanyakumari Wildlife Sanctuary, Western Ghats, India			Sequestration of atmospheric carbon-dioxide in biospheric carbon (C) pools is a key strategy towards climate change mitigation. Soil is a huge C reservoir and its storage potential varies greatly with forest types. Therefore, in the present study, the soil organic carbon (SOC) storage pattern was assessed from 70 plots laid at three selected forest types comprising seven study sites at Kanyakumari Wildlife Sanctuary, Western Ghats, India: tropical dry deciduous (TDD I and TDD II), tropical semi-evergreen (TSE I and TSE II) and tropical evergreen forest (TEF I, TEF II and TEF III) at three depths (0-10, 10.1-20 and 20.1-30 cm). Statistical analyses were performed to understand the relationships between SOC stocks with other predictor variables. The SOC stock varied markedly with forest type and site-wise. The SOC ranged from 58 (TEF III) to 123.6 (TDD I) Mg C/ha with a mean of 84.9 +/- 4.4 Mg C/ha at 0-30 cm depth. SOC stock decreased, while soil bulk density increased with increase in soil depth. The TDD forest type (115.6 Mg C/ha) stocked the highest SOC compared to TEF (75.1 Mg C/ha) and TSE (68.9 Mg C/ha) forest types. Of the total SOC stock (0-30 cm), 44.2, 32.0 and 23.8% were stored in 0-10, 10.1-20 and 20.1-30 cm respectively in all the forest types. In contrast, litter C stock were high in TEF and TSE forest types and low in TDD forest type. SOC showed significant (P < 0.01) negative relationships with bulk density, litter C, and vegetation attributes. The SOC stock stored in the study sites amount to 212.9 (TEF III) to 453.6 (TDD I) Mg of CO2 equivalents. The present study reveals that forest type and site characteristics have a profound impact on SOC stock, which would, in turn, exert a great bearing on the ecosystem C cycling. These results would also enhance our ability to evaluate the role of these forest types in soil C sequestration and for developing and validating SOC models for tropical forest ecosystems.
Variation of biomass and carbon pools with forest type in temperate forests of Kashmir Himalaya, India			An accurate characterization of tree, understory, deadwood, floor litter, and soil organic carbon (SOC) pools in temperate forest ecosystems is important to estimate their contribution to global carbon (C) stocks. However, this information on temperate forests of the Himalayas is lacking and fragmented. In this study, we measured C stocks of tree (aboveground and below-ground biomass), understory (shrubs and herbaceous), deadwood (standing and fallen trees and stumps), floor litter, and soil from 111 plots of 50 m x 50 m each, in seven forest types: Populus deltoides (PD), Juglans regia (JR), Cedrus deodara (CD), Pinus wallichiana (PW), mixed coniferous (MC), Abies pindrow (AP), and Betula utilis (BU) in temperate forests of Kashmir Himalaya, India. The main objective of the present study is to quantify the ecosystem C pool in these seven forest types. The results showed that the tree biomass ranged from 100.8 Mg ha(-1) in BU forest to 294.8 Mg ha(-1) for the AP forest. The understory biomass ranged from 0.16 Mg ha(-1) in PD forest to 2.36 Mg ha(-1) in PW forest. Deadwood biomass ranged from 1.5 Mg ha(-1) in PD forest to 14.9 Mg ha(-1) for the AP forest, whereas forest floor litter ranged from 2.5 Mg ha(-1) in BU and JR forests to 3.1Mg ha(-1) in MC forest. The total ecosystem carbon stocks varied from 112.5 to 205.7 Mg C ha(-1) across all the forest types. The C stocks of tree, understory, deadwood, litter, and soil ranged from 45.4 to 135.6, 0.08 to 1.18, 0.7 to 6.8, 1.1 to 1.4, and 39.1-91.4 Mg ha(-1), respectively, which accounted for 61.3, 0.2, 1.4, 0.8, and 36.3% of the total carbon stock. BU forest accounted 65 % from soil C and 35 % from biomass, whereas PD forest contributed only 26 % from soil C and 74 % from biomass. Of the total C stock in the 0-30-cm soil, about 55 % was stored in the upper 0-10 cm. Soil C stocks in BU forest were significantly higher than those in other forests. The variability of C pools of different ecosystem components is influenced by vegetation type, stand structure, management history, and altitude. Our results reveal that a higher percentage (63 %) of C is stored in biomass and less in soil in these temperate forests except at the higher elevation broad-leaved BU forest. Results from this study will enhance our ability to evaluate the role of these forests in regional and global C cycles and have great implications for planning strategies for conservation. The study provides important data for developing and validating C cycling models for temperate forests.
Variation of soil fertility and carbon sequestration by planting Hevea brasiliensis in Hainan Island, China			The development of rubber industry depends on the sustainable management of rubber plantation. To evaluate the environmental effects of planting Hevea brasiliensis on a subsystem of tropical forest ecosystem, the variation of soil. fertility and carbon sequestration under rubber plantation within 30-year life period were investigated in Hainan Island. Results showed that (1) with the increase of stand age of rubber plantation, soil fertility decreased all along. From 1954 to 1995, soil organic matter, total N, available K and available P decreased by 48.2%, 54.1%, 56.7% and 64.1%, respectively. (2) If the complete return of litters was considered without additional fertilizer application to the soil of the rubber plantations, the consumption periods for P, N, K, Mg were only 825 years, 329 years, 94 years and 65 years, respectively. To improve soil fertility is essential for rubber plantation development. (3) The C sequestration of rubber trees per hectare accounts for 272.08 t within 30-year life period and 57.91% of them was fixed in litters. In comparison with C sequestration by rain forest (234.305 t/hm(2)) and by secondary rain forest (150.203 t/hm(2)), rubber forest has more potentials for C fixation. On the base of above results, the following measures would benefit the maintenance of soil fertility and the development of rubber industry, including applying fertilizer to maintain the balance of soil nutrients, intercropping leguminous plant to improve soil fertility, reducing the collection of litters, optimizing soil properties to improve element P availability such as applying CaCO3. The information gathered from the study can be used as baseline data for the sustainable management of rubber plantation elsewhere.
Vegetation ecology and carbon sequestration potential of shrubs in tropics of Chhattisgarh, India			Tropical forests are well known to have great species diversity and contribute substantial share in terrestrial carbon (C) stocks worldwide. Shrubs are long-neglected life form in the forest ecosystem, playing many roles in the forest and human life. Shrub has great impact on vegetation attributes which in turn modify the C storage and capture. In the present investigation, an attempt has been made to explore the dynamics of shrub species in four fire regimes, viz. high, medium, low, and no fire zones of Bhoramdeo Wildlife Sanctuary of Kawardha forest division (Chhattisgarh), India. The variations in structure, diversity, biomass, productivity, and C sequestration potential in all the sites were quantified. The density and basal area of shrub varied from 1250 to 3750 individuals ha(-1) and 2.79 to 4.92 m(2) ha(-1), respectively. The diversity indices showed that the value of Shannon index was highest in medium fire zone (3.77) followed by high, low, and no fire zones as 3.25, 3.12, and 2.32, respectively. The value of Simpson's index or concentration of dominance (Cd) ranged from 0.08 to 0.20, species richness from 0.56 to 1.58, equitability from 1.41 to 1.44, and beta diversity from 1.50 to 4.20, respectively. The total biomass and C storage ranged from 6.82 to 15.71 and from 2.93 to 6.76 t ha(-1), respectively. The shrub density, importance value index (IVI), and abundance to frequency ratio (A/F) significantly correlated between high fire and medium fire zone. The basal area was found to be significantly positively correlated between high fire and medium fire, and low and no fire zones, respectively. Two-way cluster analysis reflected various patterns of clustering due to influence of the forest fire which showed that some species have distant clustering while some have smaller cluster. Principal component analysis (PCA) reflects variable scenario with respect to shrub layer. Ventilago calyculata and Zizyphus rotundifolia showed higher correlation between themselves in terms of basal area (BA). The total shrub production was 1.59-3.53 t ha(-1) year(-1) while the C sequestration potential of 0.71-1.57 t ha(-1) year(-1) under different fire regimes. Shrub community in the medium fire zone reflected higher productivity and higher C sequestration in comparison to other fire zone. Among the different plant parts, the biomass accumulation ratio was highest in the root of shrub community among various fire regimes. Screening of species for restoration and different land-use pattern on the basis of biomass accumulation and carbon sequestering potential would be an effective strategy for decision-making in sustainable forest management.
Vegetation structure and relative humidity drive the diurnal foraging activity of Malaysian giant ant workers in urban fragmented forests			The impacts of urban forest fragmentation on tropical ant foraging activity are poorly understood. The Malaysian giant ant (Dinomyrmex gigas) is among the largest ant species worldwide. Colonies of this species contribute to important ecosystem processes such as predation and nutrient cycling in the tropical forests of Southeast Asia. Here, we compared the diurnal foraging activity of D. gigas workers in urban-fragmented and contiguous forests, and investigated how this was shaped by key environmental factors such as vegetation structure and microclimate. Specifically, we sampled ground-foraging D. gigas workers in four urban/semi-urban forest patches and two contiguous forests in Peninsular Malaysia across the wet and dry seasons. Surprisingly, we found that some urban forest patches, irrespective of area, supported greater foraging activity of D. gigas workers than contiguous forests. These differences in foraging activity were explained by differences in multiple stand-level variables between urban forests patches and contiguous forests. Specifically, the abundance of foraging D. gigas workers increased with number of trees with Diamater at breast height (DBH) 5-30 cm, but it decreased with relative humidity, canopy cover, number of palms, number of shrubs and trees with DBH <5 cm. Our study highlights the importance of urban forest patches, microclimate and vegetation structure for driving the diurnal foraging activity of Malaysian giant ant. Small and relatively large forest patches were of comparable importance for the maintenance of biodiversity in urban landscapes. In the absence of landscape connectivity, reforestation is the most feasible option to restore the natural habitat of D. gigas in urban forest patches and mitigate microclimatic edge effects.
Vertical distribution of aboveground biomass in a seasonal deciduous forest			Knowledge of aboveground biomass stock in Seasonal Deciduous Forests is imperative for the implementation of mechanisms to reduce emissions from deforestation, forest degradation and land reclamation. The present study analyzed the vertical distribution of aboveground biomasses in a Seasonal Deciduous Forest in Rio Grande do Sul state, Brazil. Seven 12 x 12 m plots were established, and all trees inside the plots were weighed directly in the field. Subplots of 5 x 5 m and 1 x 1 m were marked within the main plots to quantify the remaining vegetation. Average dry aboveground biomass was 316.5 Mg ha-1, trees with diameter at breast height (DBH) greater than 10 cm accounting for over 89% of this biomass. Therefore, biomass determination of large trees deserves special attention, since they represent a large part of the biomass of this forest ecosystem. Biomass of plants taller than 1.3 m and with diameter at breast height < 5 cm was 6.9 Mg ha-1, and that of plants lower than 1.3 m was 1.5 Mg ha-1. Average litter mass was 15.6 Mg ha-1. Trees of large diameters must be analyzed very carefully for quantify the biomass and carbon in the forests, because few individuals might represent a large part of the biomass of a forest ecosystem.
Viability of a macauba palm-Brachiaria grass intercropping system as an alternative to agroforestry production			In intercropping systems, shading is one of the main limiting factors for the development of plants in the understory, especially C-4 plants. However, successful pasture production in silvopastoral systems can be achieved through proper spatial arrangement. This study provides fundamental information that validates the macauba-grass consortium. For 20 months, during two dry seasons and two rainy seasons, microclimatic and physical variables in an Acrocomia aculeata-Brachiaria decumbens intercropping system were monitored. The spacings of the trees were 5 m x 4 m, 6 m x 4 m, 7 m x 4 m, and 8 m x 4 m and were compared to a traditional pasture. The aboveground biomass in the intercropping system was estimated as well as its ability to assimilate atmospheric CO2 and store carbon. Macauba palm presence in the intercropping system had a regulatory effect on the microclimatic conditions of the understory, regardless of tree spacing and season. In spacing, wider, the intercropped forage biomass was satisfactory and similar to that in the monocrop pastures. The spacing 7 m x 4 m and 8 m x 4 m improved the understory microclimatic conditions, allowing efficient forage growth and thus offering livestock food and comfort. These values were equivalent to those of traditional silvopastoral systems that use woody plant species. The estimates of aboveground biomass, carbon stock, and CO2 assimilation in the intercropping system with a spacing of 8 m x 4 m were 1.6 times greater than those of traditional pastures. Therefore, here, we show for the first time that A. aculeata-B. decumbens grass intercropping system is a viable alternative agroforestry practice for tropical regions, since sufficient amounts of fodder are provided alongside beneficial environmental services, such as the efficient sequestration and storage of atmospheric carbon.
Visual soil assessment as an early indicator of soil quality in the caatinga dry tropical forest under varying degrees of disturbance in the Brazilian semiarid region			Species diversity in the Caatinga Dry Forest is increasingly threatened by anthropogenic disturbances that degrade soil quality, triggering cascading effects on essential ecosystem services. Visual Soil Assessment (VSA) offers a cost-effective and rapid diagnostic tool to assess soil quality under different disturbance levels. This study analyzed VSA as an early indicator of soil quality in the Caatinga Dry Tropical Forest and evaluated its ability to distinguish forest conditions compared to laboratory analyses (physical, chemical, and organic attributes). The research was conducted in Apodi, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil, across four forest areas (NF1, NF2, NF3, and NF4) with varying preservation levels but similar limestone parent material. Morphological, visual, and laboratory soil analyses were performed. VSA proved to be practical and sensitive in detecting changes in native forest Cambisols under semiarid conditions. Key VSA indicators included earthworm count, absence of erosion, structure, porosity, compacted layer, and vegetation cover, effectively differentiating forest disturbance levels. The preservation classification ranked NF1 (lowest preservation) as moderate, NF2 (intermediate preservation) as good, and NF3 and NF4 (highest preservation) as very good. Multivariate analysis revealed that attributes related to total soil organic matter and its fractions in the surface layer (0–0.05 m) were the most sensitive to forest preservation levels. These attributes, along with nutrient availability (notably base cations) and soil pH influenced by limestone parent material, were higher in NF3 and NF4. Laboratory-based soil quality indices aligned with VSA results, confirming its reliability as an early diagnostic tool. VSA provides a valuable, cost-effective approach for monitoring and managing soil quality in the Caatinga Dry Forest, offering insights comparable to more resource-intensive laboratory analyses. © 2025 Elsevier B.V.
Warming Alters Plant Chemical and Nutrient Compositions by Affecting Metabolites in Cunninghamia lanceolata (Lamb.) Hook			Research Highlights: Warming alters the chemical composition of Cunninghamia lanceolata (Lamb.) Hook, resulting in increased production of macromolecular compounds that protect against heat stress. Background and Objectives: Low latitude forests are experiencing obvious climatic warming; however, the plant physiological responses to warming are not well understood. As warming induces moisture stress, we hypothesized that warming activates metabolites (i. e., lipids, phenolic compounds, amino acids) and causes damage to the leaves, exemplified by the increased concentrations of reactive oxygen species. Materials and Methods: We conducted a warming experiment in a C. lanceolata plantation. Plant physiological traits associated with nutrient status, reactive oxygen species, antioxidant enzymes species, and metabolites were measured. Results: Warming altered the chemical composition of C. lanceolata as it increased C: N ratios of leaves and roots. In particular, the concentrations of N and P in leaves and roots were significantly decreased under the warming condition, which might be related to the biomass production, namely, a dilution e ff ect. Under the warming condition, most of the phospholipid compounds and proteins significantly increased. Leaf C, carbohydrates, amino acids, organic acids, flavonoids, and phenolic compounds were identified to have significantly lower concentrations under the warming treatment than those under the control treatment. These results suggested that moisture stress under the warming treatment may drive C deficiency and metabolic restriction in plants. Conclusions: Under the warming condition, C. lanceolata changed its energy utilization strategy and invested more resources to produce macromolecular compounds for protecting against heat stress. Warming in sub-tropical forests alters plant chemical properties, and thus may have an important consequence for nutrient cycling and soil C sequestration.
Warming and microbial uptake influence the fate of added soil carbon across a Hawai'ian weathering gradient			Tropical forest soils contain some of the largest carbon (C) stocks on Earth, yet the effects of warming on the fate of fresh C entering tropical soils are still poorly understood. This research sought to understand how the fate of fresh C entering soils is influenced by warming, soil weathering status, and C chemistry. We hypothesized that compounds that are quickly incorporated into microbial biomass (i.e., greater C use efficiency [CUE]) subsequently have longer-term (255 days) retention in soil. We also hypothesized that relatively weathered soils with greater sorptive capacity also retain more fresh C in the short and longer-terms, and that C in these soils is more resistant to weathering loss compared with less weathered soils. We tested these hypotheses by adding two C-13 labeled compounds (glucose and glycine) to three tropical forest soils from a weathering gradient in Hawai'i, and then incubating soils at ambient (16 C), +5 degrees C, and +10 degrees C for 255 days. We found that 255-day C-13 retention in mineral soil across sites and temperatures was best predicted by two factors: initial retention of C-13 in mineral soil and initial microbial (CUE)-C-13 (Adjusted R-2 = 0.78). Carbon compound type influenced C-13 initial retention, with greater glucose-C-13 retention versus glycine-C-13 retention in mineral soils and microbial biomass, corresponding to greater glucose-C-13 retention in soil at 255 days. Warming had a negative longer-term effect on the retention of C-13 only in the least-weathered soil, supporting our hypothesis. These results show that initial retention of fresh C in soils via mineral sorption and microbial uptake is a strong predictor of longer-term retention, indicating that immediate C losses are a major hurdle for soil C storage. Also, retention of fresh C appears most sensitive to warming in less-weathered tropical soils, supporting the idea that mineral sorption may provide some protections against warming. Understanding the interaction between soil sorptive properties and warming for C cycling could improve predictions of forest-climate feedbacks for tropical regions.
Water availability drives aboveground biomass and bird richness in forest restoration plantings to achieve carbon and biodiversity cobenefits			To combat global warming and biodiversity loss, we require effective forest restoration that encourages recovery of species diversity and ecosystem function to deliver essential ecosystem services, such as biomass accumulation. Further, understanding how and where to undertake restoration to achieve carbon sequestration and biodiversity conservation would provide an opportunity to finance ecosystem restoration under carbon markets. We surveyed 30 native mixed-species plantings in subtropical forests and woodlands in Australia and used structural equation modeling to determine vegetation, soil, and climate variables most likely driving aboveground biomass accrual and bird richness and investigate the relationships between plant diversity, aboveground biomass accrual, and bird diversity. We focussed on woodland and forest-dependent birds, and functional groups at risk of decline (insectivorous, understorey-nesting, and small-bodied birds). We found that mean moisture availability strongly limits aboveground biomass accrual and bird richness in restoration plantings, indicating potential synergies in choosing sites for carbon and biodiversity purposes. Counter to theory, woody plant richness was a poor direct predictor of aboveground biomass accrual, but was indirectly related via significant, positive effects of stand density. We also found no direct relationship between aboveground biomass accrual and bird richness, likely because of the strong effects of moisture availability on both variables. Instead, moisture availability and patch size strongly and positively influenced the richness of woodland and forest-dependent birds. For understorey-nesting birds, however, shrub cover and patch size predicted richness. Stand age or area of native vegetation surrounding the patch did not influence bird richness. Our results suggest that in subtropical biomes, planting larger patches to higher densities, ideally using a diversity of trees and shrubs (characteristics of ecological plantings) in more mesic locations will enhance the provision of carbon and biodiversity cobenefits. Further, ecological plantings will aid the rapid recovery of woodland and forest bird richness, with comparable aboveground biomass accrual to less diverse forestry plantations.
Water inputs across a tropical montane landscape in Veracruz, Mexico: Synergistic effects of land cover, rain and fog seasonality, and interannual precipitation variability			Land-cover change can alter the spatiotemporal distribution of water inputs to mountain ecosystems, an important control on land-surface and land-atmosphere hydrologic fluxes. In eastern Mexico, we examined the influence of three widespread land-cover types, montane cloud forest, coffee agroforestry, and cleared areas, on total and net water inputs to soil. Stand structural characteristics, as well as rain, fog, stemflow, and throughfall (water that falls through the canopy) water fluxes were measured across 11 sites during wet and dry seasons from 2005 to 2008. Land-cover type had a significant effect on annual and seasonal net throughfall (NTF <0=canopy water retention plus canopy evaporation; NTF >0=fog water deposition). Forest canopies retained and/or lost to evaporation (i.e. NTF<0) five- to 11-fold more water than coffee agroforests. Moreover, stemflow was fourfold higher under coffee shade than forest trees. Precipitation seasonality and phenological patterns determined the magnitude of these land-cover differences, as well as their implications for the hydrologic cycle. Significant negative relationships were found between NTF and tree leaf area index (R2=0.38, P<0.002), NTF and stand basal area (R2=0.664, P<0.002), and stemflow and epiphyte loading (R2=0.414, P<0.001). These findings indicate that leaf and epiphyte surface area reductions associated with forest conversion decrease canopy water retention/evaporation, thereby increasing throughfall and stemflow inputs to soil. Interannual precipitation variability also altered patterns of water redistribution across this landscape. Storms and hurricanes resulted in little difference in forest-coffee wet season NTF, while El Niño Southern Oscillation was associated with a twofold increase in dry season rain and fog throughfall water deposition. In montane headwater regions, changes in water delivery to canopies and soils may affect infiltration, runoff, and evapotranspiration, with implications for provisioning (e.g. water supply) and regulating (e.g. flood mitigation) ecosystem services. © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Water-holding capacity (WHC), total carbon and nitrogen (TC and TN) contents, C:N ratio and pH of the selected biochar (B1: Coconut shell, B2: Rice husk) and compost (C1: Compost, VC1 and VC2: Vermicomposts) inputs.			Values are means (n = 3)  one standard deviation (in parentheses). n.d. = not detected. Copyright: CC BY 4.0
Wealth and the distribution of benefits from tropical forests: Implications for REDD			Interventions to strengthen forest conservation in tropical biomes face multiple challenges. Insecure land tenure and unequal benefit sharing within forest user groups are two of the most important. Using original household level survey data from 130 villages in six countries, we assess how current wealth inequality relates to tenure security and benefit flows from forest use. We find that villages with higher wealth inequality report lower tenure security and more unequal flows from forest income and externally sourced income. Furthermore, we find that wealthier individuals within villages capture a disproportionately larger share of the total amount of forest benefits available to each village, while external income often benefits poorer individuals more. These findings suggest that unless future forest conservation interventions actively work to mitigate inequalities linked to existing forest benefit flows, there is a risk that these interventions-including those associated with REDD + activities reproduce or even aggravate pre-existing socioeconomic inequalities within user groups, potentially undermining both their conservation and economic objectives.
Weight-of-evidence approach for assessing agroforestry contributions to restore key ecosystem services in tropical dry forests			Worldwide deforestation and degradation are limiting the capacity of tropical dry forests (TDFs) to provide environmental services. Agroforestry systems (AFSs) are agricultural land systems that combining perennial elements with crops, can provide important benefits to people (e.g. timber and non-timber products) and the environment (e.g. hosting biodiversity). Using a semi-quantitative methodology (i.e. weight of evidence), we assessed the role of the three main types of AFSs (intercropping, multistrata and silvopastoral and protective systems) in restoring key ecosystem services in TDFs. We found that each type of AFSs contributed differently to soil quality restoration, productivity, biodiversity, carbon sequestration, and culture preservation. Yet, AFSs can also deliver few disservices, such as yield reductions. Despite the identified knowledge gaps, such as the carbon sequestration capacity, our findings indicate that AFSs can contribute to restore TDFs by providing valuable ecosystem services to halt degradation and sustain people's livelihood.
Wetland Condition Change Index using remote sensing images and Google Earth Engine			Wetlands and floodplains areas are crucial for biodiversity and ecosystem services, such as regulating hydrological regimes and controlling flood risks. Despite their importance, these environments have been significantly degraded by human activities. Brazil, Australia, and other tropical areas are key regions for global wetland conservation, yet they face severe threats. Australia’s wetlands, covering 4.4% of the country, face degradation, particularly in the Northern Territory. Considering this background, the present study introduces the Wetland Condition Change Index (WCCI) to assess wetland condition changes, focusing on the Adelaide River floodplain in Northern Australia. The WCCI, using Landsat images processed in Google Earth Engine, integrates indicators for soil, water, vegetation, and impervious surfaces. Trends were determined using Sen’s slope, and the results were validated with field observations and accuracy metrics. The Adelaide River Catchment was adopted as a study case, motivated by the lack of updated information. Results indicate that urban and agricultural developments contribute to negative trends, while natural areas show stable or positive trends. The WCCI reveals minimal changes in the Adelaide River floodplain’s wetlands, with some regions impacted by intensive livestock activity and new agricultural developments. However, anomalies in certain areas suggest natural environmental changes needing further investigation. The WCCI proved effective in assessing wetland conditions and can be applied to other tropical regions, including Brazil, enhancing understanding of wetland dynamics and aiding in conservation and management efforts. © Author(s) 2024. CC BY 4.0 License.
Wetlands Cool Land Surface Temperature in Tropical Regions but Warm in Boreal Regions			Wetlands play a critical role in global hydrological and biogeochemical cycles. Regulating the regional climate is one of the most important ecosystem services of natural wetlands. However, the impact of wetlands on local temperature on the global scale and the attribution is still unclear. This study utilizes the satellite-based products (land surface temperature (LST), albedo, and evapotranspiration (ET)) to evaluate the difference in LST between wetlands and their adjacent landcover types and the possible drivers. Here we show that on average for the whole year, wetlands have a cooling effect in tropical regions, but have a warming effect in boreal regions. The impacts of wetlands on LST show great seasonality in the boreal regions; i.e., the wetlands have a warming effect in winter but a cooling effect in summer. The difference in albedo and ET between wetlands and the other landcover types only interprets 30% of temporal variation of the difference in LST. Due to the large water storage in wetlands, the ground heat flux (G) may interpret the rest of the impact, absorbing energy in summer and releasing energy in winter in wetlands, which has often been neglected in previous studies. Our results indicate that it is critical to comprehensively consider the effects of wetland restoration in different regions to realize potential climatic benefits in the future.
What do we need to assess the sustainability of the tidal salt marsh carbon sink?			Tidal salt marshes provide a range of ecosystem services. The most recently recognized is their provision of highly effective sinks for atmospheric carbon dioxide, a characteristic they share with mangroves swamps which largely replace salt marshes in the intertidal zones of tropical regions. Efforts are emerging to use salt marsh preservation or restoration in carbon offset programs, similar to the REDD initiative for tropical forests, but a number of issues first must be addressed to determine if a site meets the requirements of these programs. As intertidal systems, both salt marshes and mangrove swamps are threatened by increasing rates of sea level rise, and it will be essential to determine their sustainability, thus meeting the requirement of permanence of the carbon sink. In many areas the vegetation responsible for marsh soil accretion may not survive increased flooding periods, resulting in submergence of the marsh in its present location or inability to restore a marsh at its previous elevation. However, the marsh and its carbon sink, may survive if allowed to migrate inland. Thus assessment of permanence requires a determination if inland migration will be hindered by barriers such as high slopes or development, i.e., if the ecosystem is in a coastal squeeze. Presently, the only technology that can provide elevation models at the required vertical accuracy is Lidar, which also is extremely valuable for assessing vulnerability of coastal communities to flooding. Yet, Lidar data is not available for all coastlines, even those in the developed world. To effectively plan for the future of our coastlines requires Lidar coverage on all sensitive coastlines and its free availability for impact assessments. © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
What is the evidence for the contribution of forests to poverty alleviation? A systematic map protocol			Background: Forests provide an essential resource that support the livelihoods of an estimated 20% of the global population. Forests are thought to serve in three primary roles to support livelihoods: subsistence, safety nets, and pathways to prosperity. While we have a working understanding of how poor people depend on forests in individual sites and countries, much of this evidence is dispersed and not easily accessible. Thus, while the importance of forest ecosystems and resources to contribute to poverty alleviation has been increasingly emphasized in international policies, conservation and development initiatives and investments-the strength of evidence to support how forests can affect poverty outcomes is still unclear. This study takes a systematic mapping approach to scope, identify and describe studies that measure the effect of forest-based activities on poverty outcomes at local and regional scales. This effort builds upon an existing systematic map on linkages between conservation and human well-being in order to make this process more efficient. We will conduct a refined and updated search strategy pertinent to forests-poverty linkages to glean additional evidence from studies outside the scope of the original map. Results of this study can be used for informing conservation and development policy and practices in global forest ecosystems and highlight evidence gaps where future primary studies and systematic reviews can add value.Methods: We build upon the search strategy outlined in McKinnon et al. (Environ Evid 1-25, 2016) and expand our search to cover a total of 7 bibliographic databases, 15 organizational websites, 8 existing systematic reviews and maps, and evidence gap maps, and solicit key informants. All searches will be conducted in English and encompass all nations. Search results will be screened at title, abstract, and full text levels, recording both the number of excluded articles and reasons for exclusion. Full text assessment will be conducted on all included article and extracted data will be reported in a narrative review that will summarize trends in the evidence, report any knowledge gaps and gluts, and provide insight for policy, practice and future research. The data from this systematic map will be made available as well, through an open access, searchable data portal and visualization tool.
What makes forests resilient? A remote sensing method to detect and monitor forest adaptation to climate change			Tropical forests are celebrated for their biodiversity and crucial role in providing ecosystem services, including climate change mitigation. Understanding their response to climate change is vital. Plants adapt to changing environments through a complex interplay of morphological, physiological, biochemical, and regenerative attributes, known as functional traits. Adaptations to a warmer climate often involve trade-offs between growth rate and resource conservation. This project employs advanced remote sensing and ground data to monitor forest responses to climate stress. It posits that vegetation responses to environmental changes occur through shifts in whole functional strategies due to the coordination among traits. These strategies are influenced by various environmental factors, leading to the emergence of different trait combinations in response to the same environmental conditions. The project aims to explore the resilience of forests to climate change and to provide a tool for tracking this resilience through functional traits theory and remote sensing. The project involves four work packages. Work Package 1 focuses on project management and training activities. Work Package 2 aims to characterize key functional strategies and identify environmental drivers. Work Package 3 aims to recognize functional strategies using spectral data from drones and satellites. Work Package 4 investigates shifts in functional strategies of tropical forests over the last decades. The research output will include open-access datasets, code, scientific publications, and dissemination through conferences and science communication channels. By shedding light on how tropical forests respond to climate change, this project contributes valuable insights for forest conservation and sustainable ecosystem management in a changing world.
What policies improve forest cover? A systematic review of research from Mesoamerica			Despite many studies of the drivers of deforestation, few syntheses have been conducted of the effect of public policies on forest cover. This is problematic because policy is the primary tool that society can use to change outcomes, yet we lack information on the conditions which lead to successful policies. To address this deficiency, we conduct a meta-analysis of case studies of the impact of public policy on deforestation and reforestation in Central America and Mexico, drawing on a set of 159 studies. This region has recently experienced high rates of forest cover change and is well studied, providing a strong sampling frame. For each study, we record the reported change in forest cover, along with the scale and location of the study, the types of policy evaluated, and other relevant information. Some policy types are strongly associated with positive or negative forest impacts, though important gaps remain in our understanding. Nearly all studies of payment for ecosystem services indicate an association between payments and improvements in forest cover (88% of cases), however this evidence derives from only two countries (Mexico and Costa Rica), both of which. have more clearly defined property rights and stronger governmental institutions than other countries in the region, raising questions about generalizability. Community-based management is associated with positive impacts on forest cover in 81% of cases, whereas protected areas are associated with positive impacts in 66% of cases. Studies of social and agricultural policies were rarer and more likely to be associated with negative outcomes. Agricultural subsidies were associated with negative forest outcomes in 86% of cases, raising the possibility that reducing agricultural subsidies could be an effective strategy for improving forest cover. Most studies do not adequately identify either causal effects or the mechanisms associated with policy change, and few studies examine interactions between policy types. The results of this review imply that, while some policies are more likely to make positive contributions than others, policymakers should remain cautious about the body of evidence supporting the effectiveness of policies for reducing deforestation.
What Role Should Government Regulation Play in Ecological Restoration? Ongoing Debate in Sao Paulo State, Brazil			Around the world, there is growing desire and momentum for ecological restoration to happen faster, with better quality, and in more extensive areas. The question we ask is how can laws and governmental regulations best contribute to effective, successful, and broad-scale restoration? In the state of Sao Paulo, Brazil, there is a legal instrument (SMA 08-2008) whose aim is to increase the effectiveness of tropical forest restoration projects in particular. It establishes, among other things, requirements regarding the minimum number of native tree species to be reached within a given period of time in restoration projects and the precise proportion of functional groups or threatened species to be included when reforestation with native species is used as a restoration technique. There are, however, two differing perspectives among Brazilian restoration ecologists on the appropriateness of such detailed legal rules. For some, the rules help increase the chances that mandatory projects of ecological restoration will succeed. For the other group, there is no single way to achieve effective ecosystem restoration, and the existing science and know-how are far from sufficient to establish standardized technical and methodological norms or to justify that such norms be imposed. Both points of view are discussed here, aiming to help those developing new legislation and improving existing laws about ecological restoration. The precedents established in Sao Paulo, and at the federal level in Brazil, and the ongoing debate about those laws are worth considering and possibly applying elsewhere.
What works in tropical forest conservation, and what does not: Effectiveness of four strategies in terms of environmental, social, and economic outcomes			Tropical forests and their biodiversity are disappearing, despite decades of conservation efforts. Are we now in a position to understand whether some conservation strategies work better while others consistently fail in protecting tropical forests? We searched the literature to evaluate four mainstream strategies (forest certification and reduced impact logging, payments for ecosystem services, protected areas, community forest management) in terms of 35 environmental, social, and economic metrics. We evaluated whether applying the strategy improved, left unchanged, or worsened the conservation metrics and we created an interactive platform to view the data. We concluded that (a) the scientific literature on the effectiveness of conservation strategies in tropical forests is still vastly inadequate, due to poor design, lack of scope, and too few examples; (b) the effects of conservation on biodiversity and the economic outcomes of conservation are particularly understudied; and (c) all strategies fail at least some of the times, but all of them succeed at least some times. Our recommendation is that each new instance of implementing a given strategy should consider in detail, at the very least, the negative evidence on the given strategy, in order to avoid repeating the same mistakes. We introduce an interactive, dynamic platform to host various types of conservation effectiveness evidence.
When and where to actively restore ecosystems?			Given the extent of land use and land cover change by humans on a global scale, conservation efforts have increasingly focused on restoring degraded ecosystems to provide ecosystem services and biodiversity. Many examples in the tropics and elsewhere, however, show that some ecosystems recover rapidly without human intervention which begs the question of in which cases and to what extent humans should actively work to facilitate ecosystem recovery. We recommend that all land managers consider a suite of ecological and human factors before selecting a restoration approach. Land managers should first consider what the likely outcome of a passive restoration (natural regeneration) approach would be based on the natural ecosystem resilience, past land-use history, and the surrounding landscape matrix. They should also identify the specific goals of the project and assess the resources available. Conducting these analyses prior to selecting restoration approaches should result in a more efficient use of restoration resources both within and among projects and should maximize the success of restoration efforts. (C) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Which forests could be protected by corporate zero deforestation commitments? A spatial assessment			The production of palm oil, soy, beef and timber are key drivers of global forest loss. For this reason, over 470 companies involved in the production, processing or distribution of these commodities have issued commitments to eliminate or reduce deforestation from their supply chains. However, the effectiveness of these commitments is uncertain since there is considerable variation in ambition and scope and there are no globally agreed definitions of what constitutes a forest. Many commitments identify high conservation value forests (HCVFs), high carbon stock forests (HCSFs) and forests on tropical peatland as priority areas for conservation. This allows for mapping of the global extent of forest areas classified as such, to achieve an assessment of the area that may be at reduced risk of development if companies comply with their zero deforestation commitments. Depending on the criteria used, the results indicate that between 34% and 74% of global forests qualify as either HCVF, HCSF or forests on tropical peatland. However, we found that the total extent of these forest areas varies widely depending on the choice of forest map. Within forests which were not designated as HCVF, HCSF or forests on tropical peatland, there is substantial overlap with areas that are highly suitable for agricultural development. Since these areas are unlikely to be protected by zero-deforestation commitments, they may be subject to increased pressure resulting from leakage of areas designated as HCVF, HCSF and tropical peatland forests. Considerable uncertainties around future outcomes remain, since only a proportion of the global market is currently covered by corporate commitments. Further work is needed to map the synergies between corporate commitments and government policies on land use. In addition, standardized criteria for delineating forests covered by the commitments are recommended.
Who Cares about Forests and Why? Individual Values Attributed to Forests in a Post-Frontier Region in Amazonia			Understanding the multiple ways people value forests is important, as individual values regarding nature have been shown to partly determine willingness to participate in conservation initiatives. As individual values are influenced by past experiences, the way people value forests may be related to the ecosystem services they use and receive. We here aim to investigate if people value forests because of material and non-material benefits forest provide (material and non-material values), and if these values are defined by previous experiences associated with using forest resources and having frequent contact with forests. By interviewing 363 residents across 20 landscapes varying in forest cover in a postfrontier region in Amazonia, we evaluated: (1) if the use of forest resourcesespecially bushmeat, important for sustenance and cash income in virtually all tropical forestsis associated with attributing higher material value to forests; (2) whether the contact with forest (estimated by local forest cover and visits to forests) is associated with attributing higher non-material value to forests. As expected, respondents from households where hunting occurs and bushmeat consumption is more frequent attributed higher material value to forests, and those living in more deforested landscapes and that visited forests less often attributed lower non-material value to forests. The importance of bushmeat in shaping the way people value forests suggests that encouraging the sustainable use of this product will encourage forest conservation. Results also point to a potential dangerous reinforcing cycle: low forest cover and the loss of contact with forests may Erode forest values and facilitate further deforestation. Engaging rural communities in forest conservation initiatives is challenging yet urgent in degraded landscapes, although harnessing appreciation for bushmeat could offer a starting point. © 2016 Carignano Torres et al.This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
Whole-island carbon stocks in the tropical Pacific: Implications for mangrove conservation and upland restoration			Management of forest carbon (C) stocks is an increasingly prominent land-use issue. Knowledge of carbon storage in tropical forests is improving, but regional variations are still poorly understood, and this constrains forest management and conservation efforts associated with carbon valuation mechanisms (e.g., carbon markets). This deficiency is especially pronounced in tropical islands and low-lying coastal areas where climate change impacts are expected to be among the most severe. This study presents the first field estimate of island-wide carbon storage in ecosystems of Oceania, with special attention to the regional role of coastal mangroves, which occur on islands and coastal zones throughout the tropics. On two island groups of Micronesia (Yap and Palau), we sampled all above- and belowground C pools, including soil and vegetation, in 24 sites distributed evenly among the three major vegetation structural types: mangroves, upland forests, and open savannas (generally on degraded lands formerly forested). Total C stocks were estimated to be 3.9 and 15.2Tg C on Yap and Palau, respectively. Mangroves contained by far the largest per-hectare C pools (830-1218Mg Cha-1), with deep organic-rich soils alone storing more C (631-754Mg Cha-1) than all pools combined in upland systems. Despite coveringjust 12-13% of land area, mangroves accounted for 24-34% of total island C stocks. Savannas (156-203Mg Cha-1) contained significantly lower C stocks than upland forests (375-437Mg Cha-1), suggesting that reforesting savannas where appropriate has high potential for carbon-based funding to aid restoration objectives. For mangroves, these results demonstrate the key role of these systems within the broader context of C storage in island and coastal landscapes. Sustainable management of mangrove forests and their large C stocks is of high importance at the regional scale, and climate change mitigation programs such as REDD+ could play a large role in avoiding deforestation of mangroves where this is a management objective. © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
WHY BATS MATTERS: A CRITICAL ASSESSMENT OF BAT-MEDIATED ECOLOGICAL PROCESSES IN THE NEOTROPICS			New World bats play a significant role in ecosystem functioning and are imperative for maintaining environmental services. Nevertheless, human-caused environmental changes are jeopardizing bat communities, which results in the loss of functional roles provided by them. It is important, therefore, to assess ecological processes performed by bats in the Neotropics to define priorities in further research for better conservation planning. In this systematic review, I identify general trends, advances, bias, and knowledge gaps in bat-mediated ecological processes across Neotropical ecosystems. I have conducted an extensive search on Google Scholar, Scopus, Web of Science, and Bat Eco-Interactions Database resulting in 538 references, of which 185 papers were included in the review. The papers were published in 76 peer-reviewed journals, with the highest peak between 2006-2010. From the six biomes recorded, Moist broadleaf tropical forest was the most researched, contrary to Montane biomes (>2000 m), where few studies have been conducted. Seed dispersal was the process with more studies (44%), followed by pollination (38%), nutrient cycling (10%), and arthropod suppression (8%). Seed dispersal and pollination displayed large bias on specific bat-plant systems (Artibeus-Ficus, Sturnira-Solanum, Carollia-Piper, Pachycereeae tribe-Leptonycteris) and ecoregions (Ithsmian-Atlantic moist forest, Cerrado, Tehuacan Valley matorral), thus being important to explore other bat and plant species as well as other ecosystems. Arthropod suppression and nutrient cycling were largely overlooked despite constituting essential functions in ecosystem resilience; particularly, more research is needed to know cascading effects on plant fitness in different agroforestry systems, but also is key the understanding of how bats can be pivotal mobile links in terrestrial ecosystems and cave environments. I highlight the importance to consider bats with multiple roles and functional trait-based approach to gain a comprehensive understanding of their functionality. Even though functional studies have increased in the last two decades, several aspects of bat roles are still obscured, and is necessary to keep evaluating their ecological and economic importance to provide useful information for major decision-makings in Neotropical ecosystems ' conservation. Bat extirpations are likely to affect their ecological roles, therefore, mitigating major threats of bats are urgently needed to sustain ecosystem integrity in the Neotropics.
Wild meat consumption in tropical forests spares a significant carbon footprint from the livestock production sector			Whether sustainable or not, wild meat consumption is a reality for millions of tropical forest dwellers. Yet estimates of spared greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from consuming wild meat, rather than protein from the livestock sector, have not been quantified. We show that a mean per capita wild meat consumption of 41.7 kg yr−1 for a population of ~ 150,000 residents at 49 Amazonian and Afrotropical forest sites can spare ~ 71 MtCO2-eq annually under a bovine beef substitution scenario, but only ~ 3 MtCO2-eq yr−1 if this demand is replaced by poultry. Wild meat offtake by these communities could generate US$3M or US$185K in carbon credit revenues under an optimistic scenario (full compliance with the Paris Agreement by 2030; based on a carbon price of US$50/tCO2-eq) and US$1M or US$77K under a conservative scenario (conservative carbon price of US$20.81/tCO2-eq), representing considerable incentives for forest conservation and potential revenues for local communities. However, the wild animal protein consumption of ~ 43% of all consumers in our sample was below the annual minimum per capita rate required to prevent human malnutrition. We argue that managing wild meat consumption can serve the interests of climate change mitigation efforts in REDD + accords through avoided GHG emissions from the livestock sector, but this requires wildlife management that can be defined as verifiably sustainable. © 2021, The Author(s).
Wildfires and carbon budget of certain seasonally dry forests in India			Globally, the increasing fire events in addition to climate change due to the emission of carbon dioxide (CO2) as well as other greenhouse gases exerts huge pressure on natural resources and their management. This phenomenon is more severe in the tropical region due to increasing population, urbanization, industrialization, existing pressures, and limiting conditions. In the present study, carbon (C) stock, carbon sequestration (C-seq), CO2 mitigation potential, C budget, and C flux of the seasonally dry forest ecosystem of Chhattisgarh under the influence of wildfire in the protected area and its proximity were evaluated. Four sites namely, high fire zone (HFZ), medium fire zone (MFZ), low fire zone (LFZ), and non-fire zone (NFZ) were selected and marked based on fire return intervals (frequency) and extent of damage. The present work is a novel approach that assesses the impact of different fire frequencies on C dynamics of fire-affected zones. The stratified sampling technique was used within a permanent plot of 1 hectare. Forest stands on each site were analyzed using 10 randomly placed quadrats (each 10 x 10 m in size) and data were collected from each site. Across the sites higher tree density was observed at NFZ and the lowest at HFZ.Total tree biomass ranged between 116.0 and 358.4 t ha(-1) across the fire regimes. Total vegetation C stock ranged between 59.1 and 169.5 t ha-1 in different sites. The C mitigation and C-seq potential ranged between 186.2 and 575.3 t ha(-1), and 7.1 and 15.9 t ha(-1), respectively being highest in NFZ and lowest in HFZ. The species such as Anogeissus latifolia, Buchanania lanzan, Shorea robusta, Lannea coromandelica, Lagerstroemia parviflora, Ougeinia oojeinensis, Terminalia chebula, Terminalia tomentosa are the major contributor in biomass, C stock, C mitigation, and Cseq potential in different fire regimes. Thus, our findings would be highly useful in the restoration process of fire-affected zones through the plantation of selective plant species. Therefore, the aforementioned species could be effectively utilized while going for an afforestation/reforestation program, and will be helpful in climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies under different fire zones.
Wildlife conservation and reduced emissions from deforestation in a case study of Nantu Wildlife Reserve, Sulawesi: 2. An institutional framework for REDD implementation			Climate change threatens ecosystems and human society, with tropical deforestation contributing a fifth of anthropogenic carbon emissions. The proposed REDD mechanism will provide compensation for tropical forest nations to reduce deforestation, and potentially also co-benefits for rural communities and biodiversity. The success of REDD implementation will be partially determined by domestic institutional conditions. These have not yet been well articulated, so we develop a systematic approach to assessing institutional capability for REDD implementation at both the local and national levels, based upon the definition of REDD as a payment for ecosystem services (PES). We demonstrate the utility of this framework using the case study of Indonesia and a protected area within it (Nantu). We find that many of the institutional requirements for REDD cannot currently be met on the national level. Yet at the local level, the existence of an ongoing conservation project has strengthened the institutional framework within which REDD could operate, leading to a more positive outlook. We suggest that our analytical framework could be helpful in highlighting the institutional issues that could impede the implementation of REDD across scales and thus be a useful tool in improving the viability of this crucial strategy. (C) 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Will passive protection save Congo forests?			Central Africa's tropical forests are among the world's largest carbon reserves. Historically, they have experienced low rates of deforestation. Pressures to clear land are increasing due to development of infrastructure and livelihoods, foreign investment in agriculture, and shifting land use management, particularly in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). The DRC contains the greatest area of intact African forests. These store approximately 22 billion tons of carbon in aboveground live biomass, yet only 10% are protected. Can the status quo of passive protection - forest management that is low or nonexistent - ensure the preservation of this forest and its carbon? We have developed the SimCongo model to simulate changes in land cover and land use based on theorized policy scenarios from 2010 to 2050. Three scenarios were examined: the first (Historical Trends) assumes passive forest protection; the next (Conservation) posits active protection of forests and activation of the national REDD+ action plan, and the last (Agricultural Development) assumes increased agricultural activities in forested land with concomitant increased deforestation. SimCongo is a cellular automata model based on Bayesian statistical methods tailored for the DRC, built with the Dinamica-EGO platform. The model is parameterized and validated with deforestation observations from the past and runs the scenarios from 2010 through 2050 with a yearly time step. We estimate the Historical Trends trajectory will result in average emissions of 139 million t CO2 year-1 by the 2040s, a 15% increase over current emissions. The Conservation scenario would result in 58% less clearing than Historical Trends and would conserve carbon-dense forest and woodland savanna areas. The Agricultural Development scenario leads to emissions of 212 million t CO2 year-1 by the 2040s. These scenarios are heuristic examples of policy's influence on forest conservation and carbon storage. Our results suggest that 1) passive protection of the DRC's forest and woodland savanna is insufficient to reduce deforestation; and 2): enactment of a REDD+ plan or similar conservation measure is needed to actively protect Congo forests, their unique ecology, and their important role in the global carbon cycle. © 2015 Galford et al. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
Will rising atmospheric CO2 affect leaf litter quality and in situ decomposition rates in native plant communities?			Though field data for naturally senesced leaf litter are rare, it is commonly assumed that rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations will reduce leaf litter quality and decomposition rates in terrestrial ecosystems and that this will lead to decreased rates of nutrient cycling and increased carbon sequestration in native ecosystems. We generally found that the quality of naturally senesced leaf litter (i.e. concentrations of C, N and lignin; C:N, lignin:N) of a variety of native plant species produced in alpine, temperate and tropical communities maintained at elevated CO2 (600-680 mu l(-1)) was not significantly different from that produced in similar communities maintained at current ambient CO2 concentrations (340-355 mu l l(-1)). When this litter was allowed to decompose in situ in a humid tropical forest in Panama (Cecropia peltata, Elettaria cardamomum, and Ficus benjamina, 130 days exposure) and in a lowland temperate calcareous grassland in Switzerland (Carex flacca and a graminoid species mixture; 261 days exposure), decomposition rates of litter produced under ambient and elevated CO2 did not differ significantly. The one exception to this pattern occurred in the high alpine sedge, Carex curvula, growing in the Swiss Alps. Decomposition of litter produced in situ under elevated CO2 was significantly slower than that of litter produced under ambient CO2 (14% vs. 21% of the initial litter mass had decomposed over a 61-day exposure period, respectively). Overall, our results indicate that relatively little or no change in leaf litter quality can be expected in plant communities growing under soil fertilities common in many native ecosystems as atmospheric CO2 concentrations continue to rise. Even in situations where small reductions in litter quality do occur, these may not necessarily lead to significantly slower rates of decomposition. Hence in many native species in situ litter decomposition rates, and the time course of decomposition, may remain relatively unaffected by rising CO2.
Woody plants diversity and the associated provisioning ecosystem services across three contrasting forest management regimes in Southwest Ethiopia			Woody plants are a source of provisioning ecosystem services. Coffee management impacts forest composition, structure, and diversity. We studied the effect of coffee management intensification on woody plants and their associated provisioning ecosystem services under three contrasting forest management regimes in southwest Ethiopia. The study employed mixed approaches (vegetation assessment and ethnoecological study) to collect the data. Woody plants were collected from 189 plots and perceived local ecosystem services were identified by 136 individuals through an ethnoecological approach. The total number of woody plants recorded in the natural forest, coffee forest, and coffee agroforest was 971, 945, and 521 respectively. Species richness in natural forest, coffee forest, and coffee agroforest were 57, 54, and 53 respectively. The local people perceived 17 different provisioning ecosystem services collected from the three forest types. The result showed that there is a positive relationship between the diversity and use value of woody plants across the three forest management regimes. Coffee management intensification simplifies the stand structure, woody plant composition, and ecosystem services of the forest. Plant use value increases in coffee agroforests. Coffee agroforests can serve as repositories of diversity and ecosystem services in southwest Ethiopia.
Woody species richness drives synergistic recovery of socio-ecological multifunctionality along early tropical dry forest regeneration			Secondary tropical forests offer critical ecosystem services such as regulation of climate, soil and water resources, which are frequently traded off against the provision of forest products for human use or repeated clearing for agriculture. While some evidence also suggests potential synergies between regulating and material contributions of regenerating forests to people, the ecological mechanisms of multiple synergies remain poorly understood. We assess tradeoffs and synergies by testing for cascading effects of tropical dry forest age and vegetation drivers on key ecosystem properties that underpin multiple regulating, material and non-material contributions to people. To do so we first compiled published evidence to propose a conceptual framework of the causal dependence among variables. Then, we tested which direct or indirect effects of this a priori conceptual model are supported by structural equation models of measured data from a chronosequence of secondary tropical dry forest plots. We tested whether individual density, taxonomic or functional diversity, community-weighted mean in wood specific gravity, or composition of the woody vegetation best explained synergies or tradeoffs among multiple key ecosystem properties. We show a synergistic, positive effect of observed woody species richness on all four key ecosystem properties, including total basal area, litter layer carbon stocks, soil penetration resistance and availability and versatility of socioeconomically useful plants. A similar synergistic effect of linear age-dependent changes in species composition suggests that the simultaneous recovery of multiple functions is not only driven by absolute woody species accrual, but also by temporal woody species turnover as secondary succession proceeds. However, local farmers reported uses of only a small fraction of available plant biodiversity that has previously been documented in the literature to be socioeconomically useful. In synthesis, we found that observed woody species richness and successional turnover along tropical dry forest regeneration are synergistic drivers of biodiversity, ecosystem functioning and the availability and versatility of currently underutilized plant products in Western Mexico. Such observed synergy between a range of key regulating, material and non-material contributions to people highlights untapped socioecological potential for multifunctional tropical forest restoration through sustainable use.
World of forestry			The United Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF-8) was held from April 20 to May 1 2009 at United Nations headquarters in New York, US. Substantial time was devoted to forests and climate change, in particular the relationship between measures for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD) and sustainable forest management. The developing countries favored the establishment of a global forest fund, while donor countries would prefer a facilitative process to enhance access to current funding and create enabling conditions for investment. The intergovernmental regional organizations represented the world's three largest tropical forest regions at a meeting in Montreal, Canada, from 8 to 10 July 2009. Sustainable forest management is a key objective of all three of these regional organizations. The participants exchanged knowledge, strategies and experiences. The meeting was held in the context of the implementation of the Bonn mandate on South-South Cooperation.
Yield increases mediated by pollination and carbon payments can offset restoration costs in coffee landscapes			Ecological restoration is vital for reversing biodiversity loss and climate change but faces cost -related implementation challenges, hampering global restoration efforts. Identifying when restoration within agricultural landscapes provides financial benefits-either by increasing crop yields or providing carbon credits-is imperative. Here, we developed restoration scenarios and estimated their financial outcomes to understand conditions where coffee yield and carbon -credit -derived restoration benefits compensate restoration costs in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest hotspot. We found that costs can be balanced by yield increases when farms already have >10% forest cover and restoration targets are below 25% forest cover. Additionally, a CO(2 )value of USD 20/ton would make restoration more attractive. This study demonstrates conditions where ecological restoration can be an economically viable approach for landscape management, concurrently promoting biodiversity conservation and climate mitigation. These insights hold significant strategic value for the scaling up of restoration initiatives to meet ambitious restoration commitments.
Zeolites and Aggregate-Stabilizing Microbes for Reducing the Degradation and Carbon Emissions in Tropical Peatlands			In tropical regions, controversy about peatland and its use continues to arise when confronted with a trade-off between sustainable use and carbon emission, partly responsible for global climatic changes. Peatland areas offer considerable potential to produce food, feed, industrial, and energy crops. In Indonesia the peat dilemma has been intensified by the growing interest in oil palm cultivation during the last two decades. Therefore, a suitable technology needs to be provided, namely one that is technically applicable, economically feasible, and environmentally sustainable. A new technology, the so-called zeo-bio-technology is proposed and discussed in this research review. The technology entails a combination of a high exchange capacity mineral, i.e. Bayah zeolites (Pandeglang, Banten), and effective aggregate-stabilizing microbes, i.e. exo-polysaccharides-producing bacteria. These could be employed to reduce organic matter decomposition, enhance carbon sequestration, and improve aggregate formation and water holding capacity of peat. The zeolite mineral is known to have an excellent molecular sieve property which enables it to hold organic carbon compounds, ammonia, and water leading to its potential use for carbon sequestration. Moreover, the bacterium producing exopolysaccharides promotes a more stable aggregate formation and improves water holding capacity of peat. These improved characteristics will then lead to peat formation which is less susceptible to fire and further degrading processes. © The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021.
Zero-fire: Not possible nor desirable in the Cerrado of Brazil			Fire has been a natural force modulating the vegetation of the Brazilian Cerrado since long before the first humans arrived in this region about 12 thousand years BP. Cerrado plants are, therefore, adapted to fire and some of them depend on fire to maintain their reproduction and survival. However, after the use of fire as a tool to destroy vast extents of forests in the last centuries, Brazilians in general formed a very negative opinion about the use of fire and burning native vegetation was prohibited in the country. Although this decision was effective in protecting tropical forests, the zero-fire policy has been quite negative in the Cerrado. Fire suppression in Cerrado reserves has caused a dramatic loss of biodiversity at landscape level (homogenizing the vegetation structure), at species level (leading non-tree species to local extinction) and likely at population level (sexual reproduction impaired). Furthermore, fuel accumulation over several years without fire increases the risks of catastrophic firestorms that will inevitably occur. Such negative consequences of fire suppression in the Cerrado have not been noticed even among ecologists, including myself in early career and until recently. The biased tree-and-carbon perspective of environmental campaigns and ecological studies have reinforced the misunderstanding of fire effects in Cerrado vegetation. Both neglect that the absolute majority of Cerrado plant species, as well as associated fauna and ecosystem services, depend upon open vegetation-structures which are mostly maintained by fire. © 2020 Elsevier GmbH
